                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      FISCAL STIMULUS UNDER SOVEREIGN RISK

                                          Javier Bianchi
                                         Pablo Ottonello
                                         Ignacio Presno

                                      Working Paper 26307
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26307


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019




We would like to thank Neele Balke, Hiuxin Bi, Satyajit Chatterjee, Axelle Ferriere, Jesús
Fernández-Villaverde, Sylvain Leduc, Franck Portier, Oreste Tristani, Juan Sánchez, Martín
Uribe, and Vivian Yue for excellent discussions, as well as participants at the 2018 AEA
Meetings, ADEMU Workshop, Bank of Canada-IGIER Bocconi Conference, Barcelona GSE
Summer Forum, CEBRA, IM-TCN-ND Workshop, ITAM-PIER Conference, 2015 Ridge
December Forum, Federal Reserve Board, FRB San Francisco CPBS Conference, FRB St. Louis
STLAR Conference, Iowa State University, Rochester Mini-Conference, 2016 SED meetings,
XX IEF Workshop, Atlanta Workshop on International Economics, and Yale University. María
Aristizabal-Ramirez and Dawson Miller provided excellent research assistance. A previous
version of this paper circulated with the title "Fiscal Policy, Sovereign Risk, and
Unemployment." Disclaimer: The views expressed herein do not necessarily reflect those of the
Board of Governors, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Javier Bianchi, Pablo Ottonello, and Ignacio Presno. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fiscal Stimulus under Sovereign Risk
Javier Bianchi, Pablo Ottonello, and Ignacio Presno
NBER Working Paper No. 26307
September 2019, Revised May 2020
JEL No. E62,F34,F41,F44,H50

                                          ABSTRACT

The excess procyclicality of fiscal policy is commonly viewed as a central malaise in emerging
economies. We document that procyclicality is more pervasive in countries with higher sovereign
risk and provide a model of optimal fiscal policy with nominal rigidities and endogenous
sovereign default that can account for this empirical pattern. Financing a fiscal stimulus is costly
for risky countries and can render countercyclical policies undesirable, even in the presence of
large Keynesian stabilization gains. We also show that imposing austerity can backfire by
exacerbating the exposure to default, but a well-designed "fiscal forward guidance" can help
reduce the excess procyclicality.

Javier Bianchi                                   Ignacio Presno
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis              Board of Governors of Federal Reserve System
90 Hennepin Avenue                               20th Street and Constitution Avenue, N.W.
Minneapolis, MN 55401                            Washington, DC 20551
javieribianchi@gmail.com                         ignacio.presno@frb.gov

Pablo Ottonello
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
ottonellopablo@gmail.com
1          Introduction
There is a long-standing view that fiscal policy should play a stabilizing role in business cycles,
especially when there are constraints on monetary policy. The textbook Keynesian argument is
that by spending more in a recession, the government can prop up aggregate demand and help
to mitigate the rise in unemployment. Yet few governments follow this prescription (e.g. Kamin-
sky, Reinhart and V´  egh, 2004). As shown in Figure 1, the 2011-2012 Eurozone crisis provides
an emblematic example in this regard. In the face of a severe recession and mounting unem-
ployment, governments in Southern Europe reduced spending significantly. This contraction in
spending occurred despite their inability to use monetary policy, which left fiscal policy as the
only instrument available for macroeconomic stabilization.

           (A) Unemployment rate           (B) Government spending               (C) Sovereign spreads
                                         110                                25
      20
                                         105
                                                                            20
      15                                 100

                                         95                                 15
      10
                                         90
                                                                            10

       5                                 85
                                                                             5
                                         80
       0
                                         75                                  0

       2008     2010    2012    2014      2008     2010       2012   2014    2008     2010    2012     2014


    Figure 1: Unemployment, Fiscal Policy, and Sovereign Spreads during the Eurozone Crisis
    Notes : Unemployment rate and sovereign spreads expressed in percentage point deviations from their 2008.q1
    values. Government spending is set to 2008.q1=100. "Average" denotes the simple average of Greece, Ireland,
    Italy, Portugal, and Spain. Data source: Eurostat.


    In this paper, we provide a framework aimed at better understanding the use of fiscal stabi-
lization policy in the presence of sovereign risk. Our framework embodies a conundrum at the
heart of the austerity-stimulus debate: Should the government conduct a stimulus to mitigate a
recession at the expense of higher sovereign spreads, or practice austerity to reduce the probabil-
ity of a debt crisis, even if this means a more severe recession? To the best of our knowledge, our
paper is the first to formally model this conundrum, and to show that the observed procyclicality
can be reconciled with an optimal fiscal policy in this context.
    The paper begins by presenting empirical evidence that sovereign default risk is a key predictor
of the cyclicality of fiscal policy. Using data for a sample of approximately 100 countries, we
document that countercyclical fiscal policies are rare in countries with high sovereign risk, as
measured by either sovereign credit ratings or the frequency of default. Half of the countries


                                                          1
with low sovereign risk have a countercyclical government spending policy, compared with only
one-fifth of countries with high risk. Moreover, in countries with high sovereign default risk, the
correlation between government spending and GDP is about 40% higher than countries with low
sovereign risk. These differences are not driven by income per capita or other macroeconomic or
institutional factors identified in previous literature as relevant drivers of fiscal procyclicality.
    We build a theoretical framework to study the role of sovereign risk in determining optimal
fiscal policy over the business cycle. We consider a small open economy in which the government
borrows externally. We first construct a benchmark environment under which Keynesian policies
would be optimal, absent the risk of sovereign default. To this end, we incorporate two key
elements that have been identified in theory as providing important scope for fiscal stabilization.
First, we consider nominal rigidities, in the form of downward nominal wage rigidity, and a fixed
exchange rate regime. As in the classic Mundell-Fleming argument, an increase in government
spending entails only limited crowding-out effects and is effective for reducing involuntary un-
employment. Second, we consider households that are hand-to-mouth and face an uninsurable
idiosyncratic risk of unemployment. The environment features potentially large fiscal multipli-
ers and substantial welfare gains from fiscal stabilization policy. Such gains emerge from the
stimulus effect on output and from the reduction in inequality.
   A calibrated version of this model for the Spanish economy shows that when the government
can commit to repaying the debt, fiscal policy is essentially Keynesian: During recessions, the
government increases spending that is financed by external borrowing and stabilizes involuntary
unemployment. In this setting, optimal government spending has a strongly negative correlation
with economic activity, and unemployment volatility is an order of magnitude smaller than that
observed in the data.
    Incorporating default risk drastically changes the desirability of a Keynesian fiscal stimulus.
We study the role of default risk by relaxing the assumption that the government can commit to
repaying external debt, as in Eaton and Gersovitz (1981). A debt-financed stimulus raises the
probability of a sovereign default in the future and therefore increases sovereign spreads. As a
result, fiscal policy now faces a trade-off between the Keynesian benefits of fiscal stimulus and the
costs of higher sovereign spreads, which is at the heart of the popular austerity-versus-stimulus
debate. Quantitatively, despite the large Keynesian benefits from fiscal stimulus, default risk
can overturn the cyclicality of optimal fiscal policy. In the economy calibrated to match debt
and spread levels in the data, we find that optimal policy is strongly procyclical, with a 0.7
correlation with output (vs. -0.8 for the economy without default risk). Moreover, the volatility
in unemployment increases by an order of magnitude relative to the economy without default
risk and is also close to the one observed in the data.
   Although the optimal fiscal policy is overall procyclical, the model displays strong state
dependence, by which the response of government spending is non-monotonic with respect to the

                                                 2
level of sovereign debt. When the stock of debt is relatively low, government spending expands
in recessions because the Keynesian benefits outweigh concerns about sovereign risk. Similarly,
when the stock of debt is very high, it is optimal for the government to default and redirect
resources toward spending rather than repaying debt. It is for intermediate values of debt that
the optimal response is characterized by austerity: the government reduces spending to mitigate
the rise in borrowing costs and reduce the probability of a debt crisis. An important implication
of this state dependence is that recessions turn out to be more severe when preceded by high levels
of debt. The model prediction of state dependency is consistent with the dynamics of fiscal policy
in Spain in the run-up to the debt crisis as well as with an event-time study of recession episodes
in other risky economies. State dependency also helps to rationalize the evidence provided by
Romer and Romer (2019) that countries with more "fiscal space" suffer less severe recessions.
    We also use the model to study the desirability of austerity programs and fiscal rules. A
common premise is that austerity programs that are enforced, for example, by the IMF can
help correct distorted incentives and ensure debt sustainability. We argue, however, that the
balance between austerity and default incentives is delicate. Cutting spending during a recession
tends to be optimal for the government, but imposing a sudden austerity program can backfire
by causing the government to default. These unintended consequences may emerge because
fiscal constraints, externally imposed, can make debt repayment less attractive and push the
government to default, even under circumstances in which the government would find it optimal
to repay absent any constraints.
    On the other hand, we show that an austerity program that constrains future spending
can be beneficial, even if it is uncontingent. By promising less spending in the future, the
government, in effect, promises lower debt accumulation and reduces future incentives to default.
The result is that current borrowing costs are reduced for the government, which facilitates an
expansionary fiscal policy during a recession. We refer to this policy as "fiscal forward guidance".
Different from the use of forward guidance in standard New Keynesian models, the mechanism
we highlight operates through sovereign spreads rather than through intertemporal substitution.
Importantly, we establish that the desirability of fiscal forward guidance does not hinge on a
state-contingent fiscal adjustment. Even a non-state contingent policy commitment can improve
upon the discretionary, yet flexible regime.


Related Literature. Our paper is related to several strands of the literature. First, the
paper relates to the New Keynesian literature that studies the role of government spending as
a macroeconomic stabilization tool. In this literature, nominal rigidities create a scope for fiscal
policy to manage aggregate demand. This role becomes especially important in the presence of
constraints on monetary policy, which arise in particular from a fixed exchange rate or a zero
lower bound. Some recent influential examples in both open and closed economies include Gali

                                                 3
and Monacelli (2008), Eggertsson (2011), Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2011), Werning
(2011), Woodford (2011), Nakamura and Steinsson (2014), Michaillat and Saez (2018), and
Farhi and Werning (2017).1 We contribute to this literature by incorporating sovereign risk, a
central argument in fiscal policy policy discussions. We characterize how sovereign risk shapes
the optimal conduct of fiscal policy, and show that accounting for sovereign risk is crucial for
understanding the observed procyclicality of fiscal policy and how fiscal space affects the the
severity of recessions.
    Second, our model of sovereign risk follows the literature on sovereign default in the tradition
of Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), Aguiar and Gopinath (2006), and Arellano (2008). Cuadra,
Sanchez and Sapriza (2010) expands the canonical model to incorporate government spending
and distortionary taxation. In their setup, the production side is entirely neoclassical and the
consumption of the public good follows the same procyclical pattern as the private consumption
good. Other contributions in a similar vein are Arellano and Bai (2017), Aguiar and Amador
(2011), and Balke and Ravn (2016).2 These studies abstract from the Keynesian channel, and
hence cannot address the main trade-off we address in this paper, which we show gives rise to
state-dependent fiscal policy effects that vary across countries and over time depending on the
level of debt.
     An earlier paper that considers nominal rigidities in a sovereign default model is Na, Schmitt-
Groh´ e, Uribe and Yue (2018). They study an optimal exchange rate policy and show that
the model can account for the "twin Ds" phenonomenon (i.e., the joint occurrence of large
devaluations and sovereign defaults). The focus of our paper, in contrast, is on the optimal fiscal
policy in the context of a fixed exchange rate. Our contribution is to provide the first analysis of
the trade-off between fiscal stimulus and sovereign risk, and show how this shapes the conduct
of fiscal policy over the business cycle.
    Our results on the macroeconomic and welfare effects of fiscal rules are related to an ac-
tive ongoing literature. In our setup, the future path of government spending affects investors'
expectations of future deficit and alters current bond prices. From a normative point of view,
the potential benefits from rules arise because of the debt-dilution effects generated by long-term
debt, as emphasized by Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2015), Hatchondo, Martinez and Sosa-Padilla
   1
     Related to this literature, a vast body of work empirically studies the effect of changes in government spending
on the economy. See Ramey (2019) for a recent survey.
   2
     In Balke and Ravn (2016), there is unemployment due to search and matching frictions, but government
spending affects employment through wealth effects on search efforts, not through aggregate demand, as in our
setup. A common element we share with their work is that our model also features household heterogeneity and
an insurance channel from fiscal policy.




                                                         4
(2016), Aguiar, Amador, Hopenhayn and Werning, 2019, Hatchondo, Roch and Martinez (2019).3
We advance this literature by providing two results. First, we show that non-state contingent
rules can be desirable. Second, rules that impose too aggressive spending cuts during recessions
can backfire by raising incentives to default and worsening spreads.
    Our paper is also to a literature that studies how increases in sovereign spreads can translate
into higher borrowing costs for the private sector and negatively affect economic activity, an idea
linked to the seminal work on expansionary fiscal contractions by Giavazzi and Pagano (1990).
Important examples include Mendoza and Yue (2009), Broner, Erce, Martin and Ventura (2014),
Uhlig (2010), Drautzburg and Uhlig (2015) Corsetti, Kuester, Meier and Muller (2013, 2014),
Bocola (2016), and Gourinchas, Philippon and Vayanos (2017). Our framework includes both the
costs of endogenous sovereign default risk and the potential Keynesian benefits of fiscal stimulus,
and we characterize, both theoretically and quantitatively, the policy trade-off that emerges in
this setup.
    Finally, our paper is related to the literature that studies the difference in the cyclicality of
fiscal policy between emerging and advanced economies. Several studies have documented how
fiscal policies are more procyclical in emerging economies than in developed economies (see, for
example, Gavin and Perotti, 1997; Kaminsky et al., 2004; Talvi and Vegh, 2005; Ilzetzki and
V´egh, 2008). Narratively speaking, these papers mainly attribute these differences to tighter
borrowing for emerging markets. In this paper, we provide additional evidence in line with the
popular narrative: first, by documenting that sovereign risk, specifically, is a key predictor of
the cyclicality of fiscal policy; second, by providing evidence of state dependence, namely, that
a given country is likely to cut spending more when debt is higher. In addition, we complement
this literature by providing a coherent theoretical and quantitative framework to study optimal
fiscal policy and demonstrate that sovereign risk play a key role in explaining fiscal procyclicality.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents empirical facts documenting the rela-
tionship between sovereign risk and fiscal policy. Section 3 presents the model of optimal fiscal
policy in the presence of default risk and nominal rigidities. Section 4 presents the main policy
trade-off. Section 5 presents the quantitative analysis of the optimal fiscal policy. Section 6
studies fiscal austerity programs. Section 7 concludes.
   3
    In a similar vein, Hatchondo, Martinez and Roch (2017) compare the welfare performance of debt and
spread rules using an endowment economy model with long-term debt, while Anzoategui (2018) evaluates the
macroeconomic effects in a production economy, as we do, but using empirically estimated rules. A different
mechanism studied by Gon¸   calves and Guimaraes (2015) allows the government to choose spending in all future
states of nature, and through this channel reduce future temptation to default. In Lorenzoni and Werning (2019),
instead, sufficiently responsive fiscal rules are shown to reduce the exposure to multiplicity. Halac and Yared
(2017) and Dovis and Kirpalani (2020) study reputation mechanisms under which the government cannot commit
to enforcing fiscal rules.




                                                       5
2       Empirical Facts
We provide descriptive evidence documenting that countries with higher sovereign default risk
tend to have a more procyclical government spending policy. This relationship is not driven by
income differences or other macroeconomic and institutional factors identified in the previous
literature as important drivers of fiscal procyclicality.


2.1     Data
We measure the cyclicality of government spending and sovereign default risk for a sample of
around 100 countries for the period 1990-2016. We use data from World Development Indicators
(WDI), a dataset compiled from officially recognized international sources of data on government
spending. 4 The measure of spending is the variable "General government final consumption
expenditure". We use GDP as the measure for economic activity. Table 1 presents summary
statistics of the cyclical behavior of government spending around the world. We compute second
moments using the cyclical component of per capita variables in constant local currency, de-
trending variables with the HP filter and a smoothing parameter of 100. The first two columns
of Table 1 show that government spending tends to display large and persistent business cycle
fluctuations. Most countries display a larger volatility in government spending than in economic
activity. The third column of Table 1 shows summary statistics for our variable of interest, the
correlation between government spending and output. In most countries, government spend-
ing is procyclical, with a median correlation of 0.28 between government spending and output.
The cyclicality of government spending displays fairly large dispersion across countries, ranging
from -0.3 in the 5th percentile to 0.78 in the 95th percentile, which we exploit in our empirical
analysis.
    To measure the degree of sovereign default risk faced by countries, we use data on credit
ratings from Standard & Poor's. Eighty percent of the countries in our sample (98 countries)
have received a sovereign credit rating at some point during the period of study. Appendix Table
A.2 shows that the cyclical patterns of government spending for the subsample with available
credit ratings are similar to those of the full sample. To measure the degree of sovereign risk
in a country, we focus on the lowest credit rating that a sovereign ever received in the period
of analysis. With this variable, we want to measure how close a country was to experiencing
a sovereign default. We later show similar results for a measure of default risk based on the
occurrence of default episodes or the number of default episodes that the country experienced.
    4
     The original dataset contains information on government spending and GDP during the period 1990-2016 for
167 countries. We dropped countries that were missing more than half of the values on government expenditure
for the period 1990-2016 or countries with discontinuous data, leading to a sample of 122 countries, of which 98
have data available on credit ratings. The countries included in the sample are detailed in Appendix Table A.1.


                                                       6
                Table 1: Cyclicality of Government Spending: Summary Statistics
                                               G /Y         corr(Gt , Gt-1 ) corr(G, Y )
                     Mean                        2.04            0.48             0.26
                     Median                      1.23            0.53            0.28
                     Standard deviation          2.21            0.23             0.33
                     95th percentile             5.84            0.78             0.78
                     5th percentile              0.52            0.07            -0.30

 Notes : This table shows summary statistics of government spending for 122 countries around the world with
 data available from the WDI for the period 1990-2016. The variables G /Y , corr(Gt , Gt-1 ), and corr(G, Y )
 denote, respectively, the ratio of the standard deviation of government spending to the standard deviation out-
 put, the first-order autocorrelation of government spending, and the correlation between government spending
 and output. We compute moments using the cyclical component of per capita variables in constant local cur-
 rency, detrending variables with the HP filter and a smoothing parameter of 100. The countries included are
 detailed in Appendix Table A.1. For details on the data see Section 2.


    Panel (A) of Figure 2 shows the distribution of our measure of sovereign credit risk across
countries. This distribution is characterized by a large mass of countries (62% of the sample) in a
middle region of credit ratings, having received ratings no higher than A but always maintaining
ratings of at least B, and a smaller mass of countries either in a low default risk region, always
receiving a rating above A (20% of the countries), or in a high default risk region, having received
a rating below B (16% percent of the countries).


2.2    Empirical Findings
Panel (B) of Figure 2 shows a positive relationship between the procyclicality of government
spending and sovereign default risk, using the data described in the previous subsection. Coun-
tries with higher credit ratings tend to be more countercyclical. For instance, countries that
received ratings below CCC display an average correlation of more than 0.6 between government
spending and GDP, whereas countries that were always rated AAA tend to display countercyclical
government spending, with an average correlation of -0.1.
   To measure the relationship between procyclicality and sovereign risk, we estimate the re-
gression

                       fiscal procyclicalityi =  +  sovereign riski +  Xi + i ,                               (1)

where fiscal procyclicalityi is the correlation between government spending and output from
country i, sovereign riski is a vector measuring the sovereign risk of country i, Xi is a vector of
country-level controls (discussed in detail later) and i is a random error term. In our baseline
specification, we include in the vector sovereign riski two dummy variables: medium risk, defined


                                                        7
                    (A) Distribution of credit ratings                  (B) Credit ratings and fiscal procyclicality
                    0.3                                                     0.8


                   0.25
                                                                            0.6

                    0.2
       Frequency



                                                                            0.4
                   0.15
                                                                            0.2
                    0.1

                                                                              0
                   0.05


                     0                                                      -0.2
                          SD   CC CCC    B   BB   BBB    A   AA   AAA          SD   CC   CCC   B    BB    BBB   A   AA   AAA
                                        Minimum Rating                                         Minimum Rating


                           Figure 2: Distribution of Credit Ratings and Fiscal Procyclicality
 Notes : Panel (A) shows the distribution across countries of our baseline measure of default risk, defined as the
 minimum credit rating experienced by the country in the period of analysis. Data source: Standard & Poor's.
 Panel (B) shows the average cyclicality of government spending in the countries within a given category
 of default risk, measured by the correlation between the cyclical component of real per capita government
 spending and GDP (detrended using the HP filter, and a smoothing parameter of 100). Data source: WDI.


as a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if a country ever had a rating below A but above
B, and high risk, defined as a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if a country ever had
a rating below B. The omitted group includes countries with low default risk, measured by the
fact that they always received sovereign ratings above or equal to A. Our coefficients of interest,
medium and high , associated respectively with the variables medium risk and high risk, measure
how much larger the correlation is between government spending and output for countries with
medium and high default risk relative to those with low default risk.
    Table 2 shows the results from estimating regression (1) with different sets of controls Xi . The
first column shows the relationship with no controls, which indicates that countries with high
and medium default risk tend to have, respectively, 0.46 and 0.3 higher procyclicality than coun-
tries with low default risk. To understand this result, Appendix Tables A.3-A.5, which include
detailed data by country, show that the average correlations between government spending and
GDP for high- and medium-risk countries, are, respectively, 0.41 and 0.3, whereas low-risk coun-
tries are acyclical on average. Moreover, countercyclical fiscal policies are rarely observed in high-
and medium-risk countries (the 25th percentile depicts an average positive correlation between
government spending and GDP), whereas half of low-risk countries depict countercyclical poli-
cies, with prominent examples being the United States (-0.28 correlation between government
spending and GDP), France (-0.6), and Sweden (-0.23).
   Although low-income countries tend to have higher default risk (see Appendix Table A.7),
Table 2 shows that the relationship between fiscal procyclicality and default risk is not driven
by the well-documented relationship between per capita income levels and fiscal procyclicality


                                                                        8
(also observed for our sample, as shown in Appendix Table A.6). In particular, columns (1)-(3)
of Table 2 show that the relationship between sovereign default risk and fiscal procyclicality is
similar without controls than when we include log(GDP) per capita in PPP as a control variable,
or when we control for dummies measuring whether the country is rich, emerging or poor.5
    The last column of Table 2 shows that the relationship between sovereign default and fiscal
procyclicality is not driven by other macroeconomic and institutional controls that have been
identified in the literature as important drivers of fiscal procyclicality (see, for example, Woo,
2009; C´ espedes and Velasco, 2014; Guerguil, Mandon and Tapsoba, 2017). In particular, in
this specification we include the following variables in the vector of controls Xi : rule of law,
measured by the average ranking from the WDI for the period 1990-2016; education inequality,
measured by the standard deviation of the percentage of population enrolled by school level
(data source: Barro and Lee, 1996); fiscal rule measured by the number of years with a fiscal rule
from the International Monetary Fund; average fuel production and average trade openness as
a percentage of GDP (source: WDI), and output volatility, measured as the standard deviation
of output for the period 1990-2016 (source: WDI).6 Appendix Table A.8 shows the estimated
coefficients associated with these additional variables.
   Finally, Appendix Tables A.9 and A.10 show that the relationship between fiscal procyclicality
and sovereign default is robust to using other measures of sovereign default risk. Table A.9 uses
a dummy variable if the country ever defaulted during the period 1990­2014. The estimated
coefficient is positive and statistically significant, and indicates that countries that defaulted
during the period are characterized by a correlation between government spending and output
that is around 0.2 percentage points larger than those countries that did not default during the
period. Table A.10 shows that similar results are obtained if we use the number of default events
experienced by each country.
    It is worthwhile to highlight that the evidence presented in this section is descriptive and
not aimed at being causal. This descriptive evidence uncovers a strong relationship between
fiscal procyclicality and sovereign default risk that can guide theories that include both of these
elements. In the next section, we present a model of optimal fiscal policy that generates a
higher procyclicality of government spending for countries subject to default risk, in line with
the empirical patterns we documented.


   5
     We define the dummy variables of poor, emerging, and rich countries with the thresholds defined in Uribe
and Schmitt-Groh´   e (2017). According to their classification, a country is poor if the geometric average of its GDP
per capita in PPP during the period 1990-2009 is less than $3,000 USD, emerging if it is between $3,000 USD
and $25,000 USD, and rich if it above $25,000 USD. Other income controls, such as a polynomial of income, lead
to similar results.
   6
     Cat~ao and Sutton (2002) document that more volatile countries are more prone to sovereign default. Control-
ling for the volatility of output is aimed at analyzing the relationship between fiscal procyclicality and default risk
beyond that induced by an additional volatility in economic activity driven by procyclical government spending.


                                                          9
                         Table 2: Fiscal Procyclicality and Sovereign Risk

                                                   (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)
                      High Risk                  0.46        0.45     0.43       0.56
                                                 (0.11)      (0.12)   (0.16)     (0.14)
                      Medium Risk                0.30        0.29      0.26      0.31
                                                 (0.08)      (0.10)    (0.14)    (0.10)
                      log(GDP )                               -0.01
                                                             (0.04)
                      Rich                                              -0.13     -0.15
                                                                       (0.16)    (0.16)
                      Emerging                                          -0.11     -0.09
                                                                       (0.09)    (0.13)

                      Additional Controls          No         No        No         Yes
                      Observations                 98         98         98        59
                      R2                          0.19        0.19      0.21      0.52

 Notes : Results from estimating the model

                fiscal procyclicalityi =  + medium medium riski + high high riski +  Xi + i ,

 where fiscal procyclicalityi denotes the correlation between government spending and output from country i,
 medium riski is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if country i ever had a rating below A but above
 B, high riski is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if country i ever had a rating below B, Xi is a
 vector of country-level controls, and i is a random error term. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.
 Column (1) estimates the empirical model without controls. Column (2) includes as controls the log of the
 average GDP per capita in PPP. Column (3) includes as controls dummies measuring whether the country
 is rich or emerging, using the thresholds defined in Uribe and Schmitt-Groh´   e (2017). Column (4) includes
 the following additional controls in the vector Xi : rule of law, measured by the average ranking from the
 WDI for the period 1990-2016; education inequality, measured by the standard deviation of the percentage of
 population enrolled by school level (data source: Barro and Lee, 1996); fiscal rule, measured by the number
 of years with a fiscal rule (source: IMF); average fuel production and average trade openness, as a percentage
 of GDP (source: WDI); and output volatility, measured as the standard deviation of output for the period
 1990-2016 (source: WDI).



3    Model
We study fiscal policy in a small open economy model with nominal rigidities and sovereign
default risk. Households are endowed with one indivisible unit of labor and a stochastic stream
of tradable goods. Firms have access to a technology to produce nontradable goods using labor.
The government spends toward a nontradable public good, which is financed with a fixed income
tax rate and external borrowing, in the form of non-state-contingent bonds. The government

                                                        10
is benevolent and lacks commitment to repay. On the nominal side, wages are downwardly
rigid, which gives rise to the possibility of involuntary unemployment and income inequality.
Monetary policy follows a fixed exchange rate regime, or equivalently, the economy is a member
of a currency union.


3.1     Households
There is a unit continuum of households indexed by j. Households' preferences over private and
public consumption are given by
                                              
                                         E0                           N
                                                     t U (cjt ) + v (gt ) ,                                    (2)
                                              t=0

                                                                     N
where cjt denotes private consumption of household j in period t, gt   denotes public spending in
nontradable goods,   (0, 1) is the subjective discount factor, and Et denotes the expectation
operator conditional on the information set available at time t.7 We assume constant relative
risk aversion utility functions for private and public consumption with the same risk aversion
                              1-                  1-
coefficient U (c) = (1 - g ) c
                             1-
                                 and v (g ) = g g
                                                1-
                                                     , with  > 0, g  (0, 1), and that the consump-
tion good is a composite of tradable (c ) and nontradable (cN ) goods, with a constant elasticity
                                           T
                                                                            1                 1 
of substitution (CES) aggregation technology c = C (cT , cN ) = [ (cT )1-  + (1 -  )(cN )1-  ] -1
where   (0, 1) and  > 0 is the elasticity of substitution between tradable and nontradable
goods.
    Households are endowed with one indivisible unit of labor. Because of the presence of down-
ward wage rigidity and rationing (to be described below), each household's actual hours worked
is given by hjt  {0, 1}, which is taken as given by the individual household. Each period
                                            T
households receive a tradable endowment yt     and profits from the ownership of firms producing
nontradable goods N                          T
                      t . We assume that yt is stochastic and follows a stationary first-order
Markov process. In addition, households face a tax Tt (hjt ) (transfer if negative). This tax is
contingent on their idiosyncratic employment status hjt , reflecting the availability of unemploy-
ment insurance. As is standard in the sovereign debt literature, we assume that households do
not have direct access to financial markets, and we focus on a government that centralizes the
choices of borrowing and repayment.8 Households' sequential budget constraint, expressed in
domestic currency, is therefore given by

                       PtT cT      N N      T T   N
                            jt + Pt cjt = Pt yt + t + Wt hjt - Tt (hjt )  Yt (hjt ),                           (3)
   7
     We abstract from government spending in tradables because this represents a small share of total public
spending and because only spending in non-tradables have a macroeconoomic stabilization role.
   8
     This assumption is due to tractability and is not critical for our analysis. This structure can also be decen-
tralized with taxes on borrowing (see Na et al., 2018).


                                                          11
where PtT , PtN denotes the price of tradables and nontradables in units of domestic currency, Wt
denotes the wage in domestic currency, and Yt (hjt ) denotes the household's disposable income,
which depends on aggregate variables and the idiosyncratic employment status hjt . The left-hand
side of equation (3) includes total consumption expenditures, and the right-hand side includes
all sources of revenues net of taxes from the government.
    The households' problem consists of choosing cT            N
                                                       t and ct to maximize (2) given       the sequence
of state-contingent prices {PtT , PtN , Wt }                    T                N 
                                            t=0 , endowments {yt }t=0 , profits {t }t=0 ,   idiosyncratic
employment status {hjt }                              
                          t=0 , and taxes {Tt (hjt )}t=0 . The optimality conditions of     this problem
yield the equilibrium price of nontradable goods as a function of the ratio between         tradable and
nontradable consumption:
                                                                1

                                       PtN         1-     cT
                                                           jt
                                                                

                                               =                                                      (4)
                                       PtT                 N
                                                          cjt

for all j  [0, 1]. That is, the relative price of nontradables is equal to the marginal rate
of substitution between tradables and nontradables for all households. Because of homothetic
preferences, the relative consumption of tradables to nontradables consumption depends only on
the relative price between these two goods.


3.2    Firms
Firms are competitive and have access to a decreasing returns to scale technology to produce
nontradable goods with labor:
                                        N
                                       yt = F hd t ,

       N
where yt  denotes output of nontradable goods in period t, hdt denotes labor input hired by firms,
and F (h) = (hd ) . Firms' profits each period are then given by

                                        N     N N       d
                                        t = Pt yt - Wt ht .                                           (5)

The optimal choice of labor hdt equates the value of the marginal product of labor and the wage
rate, all expressed in domestic currency:

                                             PtN F hd
                                                    t = Wt .



3.3    Government
The government determines public spending, external borrowing, and default decisions, subject
to a predetermined tax scheme. In terms of monetary policy, we assume that the government

                                                   12
follows a fixed exchange rate policy et = e
                                          ¯. Alternatively, one can think of the economy as being
                          9
part of a currency union.


External borrowing and budget constraint. In terms of borrowing, the government has
access to long-term bonds with a deterministic decay rate (Hatchondo and Martinez, 2009, Chat-
terjee and Eyigungor, 2012). In particular, a bond issued in period t promises to pay  (1 -  )j -1
units of the tradable good in period t + j , for all j  1. Hence, debt dynamics is given by

                                              bt+1 = (1 -  )bt + it ,                                            (6)

where bt is the stock of bonds due at the beginning of period t, and it is the stock of new bonds
issued in period t. The government trades these long-term bonds with competitive international
lenders, further explained below.
   Debt contracts cannot be enforced, and each period, the government may decide to default.
The government's default entails two costs. The first cost is that the government is excluded
from financial markets for a stochastic number of periods. Denote by t a variable that takes
the value of 1 if the government can issue bonds in period t, and zero otherwise. Its evolution is
given by
                                t = (1 - t )t-1 + t (1 - t-1 ),                               (7)

where t = 0(1) if the government repays (defaults) in period t, and t  {0, 1} is a random
variable that takes the value of 1 in period t when the government reenters financial market,
which occurs with probability .10 The second cost is a utility loss for households  (y T ), which
we assume to be increasing in tradable income. This utility loss can be seen as capturing various
default costs related to reputation, sanctions, or misallocation of resources.11
       The government's sequential budget constraint during each period in which it has access to
   9
     It would also be straightforward to extend our analysis to allow for an arbitrary exchange rate policy, imple-
mented, for example, with a Taylor rule for nominal interest rates. As long as the exchange rate policy is not
able to fully eliminate the slack in the labor market, we expect our results to be similar. Notice that we abstract
here from considering fiscal policies that can mimic a nominal depreciation in the spirit of the equivalence results
of Correia, Nicolini and Teles (2008). Our calibration of the nominal rigidities will, in effect, target an increase
in unemployment, and so implicitly we capture that these policies are used to a limited extent.
  10
      Equation (7) indicates that if at time t - 1, the government could issue bonds (t-1 = 1), the government
loses access to credit markets when it defaults at time t. If instead, the government was in financial autarky
(t-1 = 0), then the government recovers access to financial markets if the realization of the stochastic variable
t takes the value of 1.
  11
     An alternative assumption used in the literature is the cost of default in terms of output. Under the assumption
that the utility function is log over the composite consumption, and output losses from default are proportional
to the composite consumption in default, the losses from default would be identical for the output cost and utility
cost specifications. If the fraction of output losses in the tradable and nontradable sectors are the same, the cost
in terms of consumption is indeed proportional.




                                                         13
debt markets is given by

                               PtN gt
                                    N
                                      =               T (hjt ) dj + qt et it - et bt ,                     (8)
                                            j [0,1]


where et is the nominal exchange rate and qt is the price of the bond in units of foreign currency.
In equilibrium the bond price will depend on the current shock, as well as on the government debt
choice. The budget constraint (8) indicates that tax revenues and new debt issuance have to fi-
nance public spending and the repayment of outstanding debt obligations. When the government
is in financial autarky, its budget constraint collapses to

                                        PtN gt
                                             N
                                               =                  T (hjt ) dj.                             (9)
                                                        j [0,1]


Taxes. We assume that the government has a limited ability to raise tax revenues. The tax
scheme has three components: taxes, transfers, and unemployment insurance. Tax revenues are
a fixed proportion   (0, 1) of households' total income. This assumption is consistent with
empirical evidence available for developed economies on the acyclicality of tax rates and delivers
procyclical tax revenues as observed in the data.12 The government provides lump-sum transfers
Tt  T . In our quantitative analysis, we rule out lump-sum taxes by setting T = 0.
    Finally, in the unemployment insurance scheme the government taxes each employed house-
hold with te units of domestic currency in period t and transfers tu units of domestic currency
to each unemployed household. Absent labor disutility and moral hazard associated with un-
employment insurance, an optimal insurance mechanism would equalize the disposable income
for employed and unemployed households. Effectively, this would lead to a representative-agent
economy with complete markets for idiosyncratic risk. To preserve meaningful heterogeneity, we
assume an imperfect insurance scheme. For simplicity, we assume that this scheme is such that
the disposable income of employed and unemployed households is proportional to each other,

                                          Yt (0) = Yt (1) for all t,                                      (10)

with   [0, 1]. A value of  = 1 represents the case with complete insurance. We require that
unemployment insurance is self-financed, which implies that

                                        tu (1 - ht ) = te ht for all t,                                   (11)

where ht  j [0,1] hjt dj denote aggregate hours worked. Given that we are allowing for lump-sum
transfers, the assumption that unemployment insurance is self-financed is relevant only insofar
  12
    See Gavin and Perotti (1997) for evidence on procyclicality of tax revenues and Vegh and Vuletin (2015) for
evidence on the cyclicality of tax rates.


                                                          14
as it prevents the government from levying taxes on net with the insurance. Equations (10) and
(11) define the path of state-contingent taxes {te , tu }t=0 for any period t under the insurance
scheme.
    The assumed tax scheme implies that the government budget constraint in periods in which
it has access to debt markets can be expressed as

                           N
                      PtN gt          T
                             =  (PtT yt + N
                                          t + Wt ht ) + qt et it - et bt - Tt .


Similarly, while excluded from credit markets, the government budget constraint is

                              PtN gt
                                   N
                                     =  (PtT yt
                                              T
                                                + N
                                                  t + Wt ht ) + Tt .



3.4    Foreign Lenders
Sovereign bonds are traded with atomistic, risk-neutral foreign lenders. In addition to investing
through the defaultable bonds, lenders have access to a one-period riskless security paying a net
interest rate r. By a no-arbitrage condition, equilibrium bond prices are then given by

                                    1
                            qt =       Et [(1 - t+1 )( + (1 -  )qt+1 )].                      (12)
                                   1+r

Equation (12) indicates that, in equilibrium, an investor has to be indifferent between selling
a government bond in period t at price qt and keeping the bond until next period bearing the
risk of default. In case of repayment next period, the payoff is given by the coupon  plus the
market value qt+1 of the non-maturing fraction of the bonds. In case of default, the price qt+1 is
equal to zero since we assume no recovery of defaulted bonds. Equation (12) will play a critical
role when we turn to the optimal fiscal policy. If lenders anticipate a fiscal policy in the future
that will make default more likely, they will demand lower bond prices, or equivalently higher
bond returns, to compensate for a higher default risk. Similarly, if the government wants to run
a debt-financed stimulus, this will increase the future default probability and reduce the current
bond price today. In turn, if a default in the future is relatively more likely (e.g., because the
economy is in a recession), the government will find it more costly to finance an expansionary
fiscal policy.


3.5    Wage Rigidity and Competitive Equilibrium
In equilibrium, the market for nontradable goods clears:

                                         cN    N       d
                                          t + gt = F (ht ),                                   (13)


                                                 15
where cN               N
         t  j [0,1] cjt dj . We assume that the law of one price for tradable goods holds, that
is, PtT = PtT, et , where PtT, denotes the price of the tradable good in foreign currency, assumed
to be constant and normalized to one. Using the households' budget constraint (3) and the
definition of the firms' profits and market clearing condition (13), the resource constraint of the
economy can be rewritten as
                                    cT    T
                                     t = yt + (1 - t )[qt it - bt ],                           (14)

where cT
       t               cT
                j [0,1] jt
                             dj .
   For the labor markets, we assume there exists a minimum wage in nominal terms, W , such
that 13
                                         Wt  W .                                      (15)

The existence of a minimum wage gives rise to a non-Walrasian labor market. We follow the
notion of equilibrium in models with rationing (e.g., Barro and Grossman, 1971; Dr`eze, 1975;
Benassy, 1975; Schmitt-Groh´e and Uribe, 2016) to determine the labor market allocations and
prices. We assume that aggregate hours worked are the minimum between labor demand and
labor supply,
                                       ht = min(1, hdt ).                                (16)

If ht < 1, it has to be that Wt = W . If Wt > W , the aggregate amount of hours worked equals
the aggregate endowment of labor. These conditions can be summarized as


                                            Wt - W (1 - ht ) = 0.                                            (17)

When wage rigidity is binding, we assume that there is a random allocation of hours across
households every period. This means that every household has a probability ht of being employed
every period. This lottery is realized at the beginning of each period after the aggregate shock
is realized.
       A competitive equilibrium, for a given set of government policies, is then defined as follows.

Definition 1 (Competitive Equilibrium). Given initial debt b0 and 0 , and sequences of exoge-
nous processes {yt     T
                         , t }                            N                       
                              t=0 , government policies {gt , bt+1 , t , Tt , et }t=0 , and credit market access
{t }                                                                         T    N              d 
    t=0 , a competitive equilibrium is a sequence of allocations {(cjt , cjt , hjt )j [0,1] , ht }t=0 and prices
{PtN , PtT , Wt , qt }t=0 such that:


                                                                                         d 
   1. Consumption {(cT     N
                     jt , cjt )j [0,1] }t=0 solves the households' problem, employment {ht }t=0 solves

  13
    This assumption is similar to that in Schmitt-Groh´  e and Uribe (2016). In their case, W depends on the
previous period wage. To simplify numerical computations, we take W as an exogenous (constant) value. Different
from another strand of models with nominal rigidities, under this framework there is no price setting, which keeps
the model closer to a Walrasian setting and eliminates monopolistic rents. Moreover, there is only rationing on
one side of the market (in this case, when market clearing wages are below the minimum).

                                                       16
       firm's problem.

   2. Government policies satisfy the government budget constraint and the law of motion for t
      satisfies equation (7).

   3. The bond pricing equation (12) holds.

   4. The market for nontradable goods clears (13).

   5. The law of one price for tradable goods holds.

   6. The labor market allocations and wages satisfy conditions (15)-(17).


3.6     Optimal Fiscal Policy
We now study Markov equilibria in which the government chooses policies sequentially and
without commitment. We consider a benevolent and utilitarian government, which chooses fiscal
policies to maximize households' welfare, subject to implementability conditions. As mentioned
above, we focus on a fixed exchange rate regime, which leaves fiscal policy as the central instru-
ment for macroeconomic stabilization.14


Welfare criterion. The objective of the government is to maximize the average expected
lifetime utility of households:
                         
                    E0          t [Ut ((cT              N                  N                T
                                         j )j [0,1] , (cj )j [0,1] ) + v (gt ) - (1 - t ) (yt )],
                         t=0


where Ut ((cT              N                        T    T
            j )j [0,1] , (cj )j [0,1] )  j [0,1] u(cj , cj ) dj is the social period utility from private con-
sumption. Notice that here we are using u(·) to denote u(cT , cN ) = U (c(cT , cN )). The following
result establishes how, in our environment, the social period utility from private consumption
admits an aggregation result, in the sense that Ut (.) can be expressed as a function of only
aggregate variables.
Lemma 1. The social period utility from private consumption can be expressed as

                            Ut ((cT               N                  T    N
                                  jt )j [0,1] , (cjt )j [0,1] ) = u(ct , ct )    (ht ) ,
                                                                   Utility of    Inequality
                                                                   aggregate      concerns
                                                                 consumption


                 h+(1-h)1-
where (h)       (h+(1-h))1-
                            .
  14
   As established in Na et al. (2018), under the optimal exchange rate policy, the government would undo the
nominal rigidity and allocations would coincide with the flexible wages (see also Bianchi and Mondragon, 2018).

                                                            17
Lemma 1 indicates that the expression for welfare that would prevail in a representative-agent
economy is modified to allow for inequality concerns, which can be summarized entirely in the
term (.). This result is useful because it implies that welfare can be evaluated based on a
minimum but critical departure from a representative agent economy. For a given aggregate con-
sumption bundle {cT    N
                  t , ct }, welfare is decreasing in the unemployment rate and in the dispersion
of consumption between unemployed and employed agents, governed by the degree of unemploy-
                                                                
ment insurance. These results follow since h   (.)
                                                 t
                                                    > 0 and  (
                                                             
                                                               .)
                                                                  > 0. Furthermore, a reduction
in the unemployment rate leads to higher welfare, the bigger this dispersion in consumption is
    
  (.)
ht 
      < 0.


Government problem. Every period in which the government enters with access to financial
markets, it evaluates the lifetime utility of households if debt contracts are honored against
the lifetime utility of households if they are repudiated. Given the current states, (y T , b), the
government problem with access to financial markets can be formulated in recursive form as
follows:
                         V (y T , b) = max {(1 - )V R (y T , b) + V D (y T )},                 (18)
                                                {0,1}

where V R (y T , b) and V D (y T ) denote, respectively, the value of repayment and the value of de-
fault. The value of repayment consists of maximizing the utility flow, adjusted by inequality,
plus the expected continuation value. The constraints are given by the resource constraint, the
government budget constraint, and the wage rigidity that characterizes the labor market.15

       V R (y T , b) =            max       {u(cT , F (h) - g N )(h) + v (g N ) +  EV (y T , b )                     (19)
                         g N ,b   ,T 0,h1

                                            subject to

                                  cT + b = y T + q (y T , b )[b - (1 -  )b] + b

           P N (y T , h, g N )g N + T = q (y T , b )[b - (1 -  )b] +  PtT yt
                                                                           T
                                                                             + P N (y T , h, g N )F (h)

            P N (y T , h, g N )F (h)  w,

We have used in this formulation that in any equilibrium with allocations (cT         N
                                                                            t , ht , gt ), the relative
                                                                                                                     1
                                                                             N                     1-       cT       
price of nontradable to tradable goods can be expressed as P                     (cT         N
                                                                                          , as
                                                                                   t , ht , gt )    
                                                                                                              t
                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                        F (ht )-gt
obtained by combining households' optimality condition (4) and market clearing condition (13).
In addition, we denote by w  W /e the wage rigidity parameter in terms of tradable goods and
by q (y T , b ) the bond price schedule, taken as given by the government.
  15
    It can be shown that the complementary slackness condition (17) does not bind, and so we omit it from the
constraints.




                                                             18
    The value of default, in turn, is given by

V d (y T ) =      max        {u(cT , F (h) - g N )(h) + v (g N ) -  (y T ) +  E (1 - )V d (y T ) + V (y T , 0) }
               g N ,h1,T T

                                                                                                                        (20)
                                                       subject to

                             P N (y T , h, g N )gt
                                                 N
                                                   + T =  PtT yt
                                                               T
                                                                 + P N (y T , h, g N )F (h)

                              P N (y T , h, g N )F (h)  w.

Notice that in the problem under default, once the lump-sum transfers are set, this determines
the level of spending and employment via the government budget constraint and the labor market
conditions.


Equilibrium under optimal government policies. Let {c           ^T (y T , b), g
                                                                              ^N (y T , b), ^(y T , b), ^
                                                                                                        b(y T , b),
^ (y T , b), (y T , b)} be the optimal policy rules associated with the government problem. A
h
Markov-perfect equilibrium is then defined as follows.

Definition 2 (Markov-perfect Equilibrium). A Markov-perfect equilibrium is defined by value
functions {V (y T , b), V r (y T , b), V d (y T )}, policy functions {c
                                                                      ^T (y T , b), g             ^(y T , b), ^
                                                                                    ^N (y T , b), T                       ^ (y T , b),
                                                                                                              b(y T , b), h
(y T , b)} , and a bond price schedule q (y T , b) such that:

    1. Given the bond price schedule, policy functions solve problems (18), (19), and (20).

    2. The bond price schedule satisfies

                                         1
                       q (y T , b ) =       E[(1 - ^(y T , ^
                                                           b(y T , b )))( + (1 -  )q (y T , ^
                                                                                            b(y T , b ))].
                                        1+r


4      Fiscal Policy Trade-Offs
In this section, we articulate the trade-off between stimulus and austerity that the government
faces. We show how an increase in spending can to help reduce unemployment and expand
output in a recession, in line with the Keynesian channel, and how these benefits have to be
balanced with sovereign default risk concerns. This result will provide theoretical guidance to
interpret the empirical findings of Section 2 when we turn to the quantitative simulations.


4.1      Stimulus versus Austerity: An Analytical Decomposition
We begin by examining the first-order condition with respect to g N in the government problem
(19). Using µ and  to denote, respectively, the Lagrange multipliers associated with the wage

                                                             19
rigidity constraint and the government budget constraint, we obtain

                                                    P N          P N N
           v (g N ) - uN (cT , cN )(h) + µF (h)         -  p N
                                                               +     (g - F (h) )                = 0,        (21)
                                                    g N          g N
                     Samuelson
                                               Stimulus                    Austerity


where uN (cT , cN )  u(cT     N    N
                         t , ct )/c and all variables correspond to time t. At the optimum, the
government equates the marginal benefits from spending to the marginal costs. We will next
analyze the three terms in this condition that we label "Samuelson", "stimulus" and "austerity".
    Let us first focus on a frictionless version of the model (i.e., there are no financing frictions
for the government and no nominal rigidities). In this case, the net marginal benefits are given
by the first term in (21): the government would equate the marginal benefits of higher govern-
                      N
ment spending, v (gt    ), to the marginal costs of less private consumption, uN (cT       N
                                                                                      t , ct ), or put
differently, the government equates the marginal rate of substitution between private and public
consumption to the marginal rate of transformation, which is equal to one in the model. This is
the classic Samuelson rule for the efficient provision of public goods (Samuelson, 1954). Assum-
ing that the utility from tradables and nontradables is separable, and given the assumption of
homothetic preferences, this would imply that government spending would be a constant frac-
tion of nontradable output. The logic behind this principle is that movements in output get
translated into absolute movements in government spending while keeping constant the share of
public consumption.
    In the presence of nominal rigidities, a second term in (21) emerges because private con-
sumption is not completely crowded out by public consumption when there is slack in the labor
market. In this case, an increase in one unit of government spending in nontradables leads to a
rise in the price of non-tradables. Because public and private consumption goods are imperfect
substitutes, the increase in spending generates an excess demand for non-tradable goods, given
everything else constant. In equilibrium, the price of non-tradable rises, increasing the value
of the marginal product of labor by ( PtN /gt   N
                                                  )F (h), and, in turn, relaxing the wage rigidity
constraint (that has a marginal utility benefit µt ). It is important to highlight that the stimulus
effect would not emerge if spending were directed towards tradable goods.16 Essentially, through
an aggregate demand amplification, the increase in government spending generates an increase
in nontradable output, and hence private consumption does not fall one to one with government
spending.
   The limited insurance against unemployment at the idiosyncratic level also plays a role in
shaping the stimulus term, which is captured by the (h) factor in the Samuelson term. When
spending rises, employed households end up paying higher taxes than unemployed agents, and
  16
    It should also be clear that under the optimal exchange rate policy, the stimulus term would not arise because
the government would undo the nominal rigidity by depreciating the exchange rate.


                                                          20
this implies that crowding out effect on nontradable consumption falls disproportionately more
for these households. On the other hand, the increase in g N applies to all households equally.
Because (h) is increasing in h, this means that a a higher unemployment entails a lower cost from
the crowding out in nontradable consumption. Effectively, when some unemployed households
become employed as a result of the stimulus, this reduces the gap in inequality across households,
and this calls for a more expansionary fiscal policy.
   To shed light on the benefits from the stimulus term, we can turn to the first-order condition
with respect to ht , to obtain an expression for the Lagrange multipliers on the wage rigidity
constraint µ. Assuming h < 1, we have

              P N
        -µ        F (h) + pN F (h)       = uN (cT , cN )(h)F (h) + U (cT , cN , g N ) (h)
              h
                                                      more cN             less consumption inequality
                  Value of stimulus
                                               P N                                      P N N
                                         +         F (h) + pN F (h)  -                     g  .         (22)
                                               h                                        h
                                                 effect on tax revenues           price effect on g N


Equation (22) shows that whenever there is slack in the labor market, the shadow benefit from
relaxing the wage rigidity constraint arises from the higher amount of output available for con-
sumption and the reduction in inequality. These two objects are captured by the first two terms
on the right-hand side of (22). In addition, two additional terms interact with the government
budget constraints: an adjustment in the tax base because tax revenues are proportional to
output, and a price effect that occurs because the increase in employment modifies the relative
price at which the government makes purchases. These are, respectively, the third and fourth
terms on the right-hand side of (22).
    Let us now focus on the austerity term on equation (21). When the government faces financing
frictions, there are additional costs from spending that go beyond the potential crowding-out
effects of private consumption. The last term in equation (21) indicates the marginal utility cost
of how an increase in spending tightens the government budget constraint. If the government
spends one additional unit, it directly tightens the budget constraint by pN , which is the cost for
the government to provide the extra unit of public goods. In addition, two general equilibrium
effects arise from the increase in pN that results from the increase in spending. First, the increase
in the price raises the inframarginal units of spending, and this tightens the budget constraint
     PtN
          N
by gN    gt . At the same time, an offsetting general equilibrium effect occurs because the increase
      t
in g N also raises the amount of tax revenues (due to revenues representing a fraction of total
income). The overall marginal utility cost of tightening the government budget constraint is
given by the product of the sum of these three terms and  , the Lagrange multiplier on the
government budget constraint.


                                                 21
   We argue next that the austerity term depends critically on the degree of default risk. We
have the following Euler equation for borrowing

                            qt
            (t + t ) qt +        i   =  Et [(t+1 + t+1 )(1 - t+1 )( + qt+1 (1 -  ))],          (23)
                            bt+1

where t denotes the Lagrange multiplier with respect to the resource constraint of tradables
in period t. This condition says that the marginal benefit from borrowing today is equated to
the marginal cost of repaying the debt tomorrow. Borrowing one unit of resources today helps
to relax today's government budget constraint and increase the amount of tradable resources,
which has an overall marginal utility benefit of t + t . By the same token, repaying the debt
tomorrow has the opposite effects, as captured by the term t+1 + t+1 on the right-hand side.
Importantly, the overall trade-off is guided by how the bond price changes in response to higher
        qt
debt ( b t+1
             ), which, in turn, depends on how much the government raises the degree of default
risk by increasing the amount of debt. Notice that while a lower bond price reflects that the
government will pay in fewer states of nature tomorrow, it still faces higer default costs, which
represent a deadweight loss for the economy. If the bond price falls sharply when the government
borrows more, this means that for the given expected marginal utility costs from repayment and
for a given t , there is a larger shadow cost from tightening the government budget constraint
today, t . In turn, as indicated by equation (21) a higher  makes the austerity term bigger.
Put it simply, if the bond price falls significantly, the government obtains fewer resources for the
same amount of debt issuances, making stimulus less desirable.


4.2    Simple Analytical Example
Under some simplifying conditions, we can provide a sharp characterization of fiscal policy that
sheds further light on the different dimension of fiscal policy discussed above. In particular,
under lump-sum taxes and a linear production function, we show in the next proposition that the
government finds it optimal to adjust spending to implement an allocation with full employment
at all times.

Proposition 1 (Benefits of Fiscal Stimulus). If there is a linear production function ( = 1)
and the government has access to lump-sum taxes (T = -), then full employment is optimal:
ht = 1 for all t.

    This proposition highlights the effectiveness of fiscal policy to stabilize the economy. With
a linear production function, for a given level of tradable consumption, the value of the fiscal
           yt
multiplier   N is one, meaning that whenever there is unemployment, an increase in spending
            gt
does not lead to a crowding out of private consumption. To see this, notice that when the


                                                22
economy features unemployment, given the firms' first-order condition for labor demand, it must
be that pN = w. Using market clearing conditions and households' optimization, we arrive at
                                                              1
                                          1-          cT      
                                                                  = w.
                                                    h - gN

For a given cT , an increase in spending needs to be accommodated by a one-to-one increase
in nontradable output. The linearity of the production function is key for this result. When
the production function features decreasing returns, firms require a higher price to increase
production, and hence this leads to a fall in private consumption of nontradables, which implies
a fiscal multiplier below one.
    From a normative standpoint, this implies that, as stated in Proposition 1, thanks to the
unit multiplier, the government eliminates any unemployment as long as it is able to raise funds
frictionlessly. In effect, fiscal stimulus is a free lunch in this case, and the government spends until
there is no slack in labor markets. It is worth noting that the result holds even if there is no value
from public spending (i.e., if government spending is wasteful). Because the reduction in the
fraction of unemployed households reduce inequality and improve aggregate welfare, increasing
spending until implementing full employment is optimal, even if v (g N ) = 0.
     A natural question that follows is, how should the government adjust spending through the
business cycle to ensure that the economy is at full employment. The next corollary shows that
if tradable consumption comoves positively with the endowment of tradables (as would typically
be the case in incomplete market models), the government follows a countercyclical fiscal policy.

Corollary 1 (Countercyclical Fiscal Policy). Under the assumptions of Proposition 1, given
states {b, y T } and {~  ~T } such that cT (b, y T ) > cT (~
                      b, y                                    ~T ), it follows that g N (~
                                                           b, y                             ~T ) > g N (b, y T ).
                                                                                         b, y

   The intuition for this corollary is that a low tradable endowment generates a contraction in
aggregate demand and requires a higher amount of spending to reduce the slack in the labor
market.


4.3     Counterfactual Experiment
To shed light on how the government chooses the actual optimal level of spending, we conduct
a perturbation exercise in which we allow the government to choose a level of spending that is
different from the optimal one. The idea is to trace how output and sovereign spreads would
differ if the government were to choose a different level of spending.
   Let us describe the experiment in more detail. We study how a change in spending today,
taking as given all future policies and value functions as defined in the Markov equilibrium, affects
current allocations and prices. To balance the changes in spending, we assume the government

                                                       23
adjusts the debt level and transfers to satisfy the budget constraint. Formally, in terms of the
government problem (19), rather than maximizing with respect to the entire set of allocations, we
fix an arbitrary level of government spending and solve optimally for the remaining allocations
conditional on that level of spending. Our model simulations will be based on the optimal level
of spending chosen by the government, but it is instructive to consider alternative values of
spending to understand the optimal choice.17
    The results of this experiment are shown in Figure 3, using the parameter values of the
calibrated economy that we will describe in Section 5. As initial values for the states, we assume
that tradable endowment income is at its unconditional mean and current debt is 10% above its
average (results are qualitatively similar for other states). In each panel, the solid dot indicates
the level of the variable of interest at the optimal level of government spending, which, as panel
(a) shows, achieves the maximum welfare (i.e., at the optimum, the utility value coincides with
V (b, y T )). The blue lines trace the values of all variables if the government were to choose the
alternative value of spending, which delivers strictly lower utility values.

                  (a) Welfare                                 (b) Unemployment                                    (c) cN
 -14.65                                                                                           0.75
                                                       20




                                                                                                   0.7
                                                   %




  -14.7                                                10




 -14.75                                                 0                                         0.65
           0.19      0.2             0.21   0.22            0.19     0.2            0.21   0.22          0.19     0.2         0.21    0.22
                               gN                                           gN                                           gN
                    (d) pN                                         (e) Spreads                                  (f) Borrowing
 4.1                                                   6                                           1.3




   4

                                                                                                   1.2
                                                   %




                                                       3

 3.9




 3.8                                                   0                                           1.1
          0.19      0.2             0.21    0.22            0.19     0.2            0.21   0.22          0.19      0.2         0.21    0.22
                           g   N
                                                                            g   N
                                                                                                                         gN



                   Figure 3: Welfare, Prices and Allocations with Alternative Spending.
   Notes : In this figure, the blue lines indicate the current repayment levels in the default model of utility,
   unemployment, nontradable consumption, relative price of nontradables, spreads, and debt, as a function
   of current government spending, given that current tradable income is set to its unconditional mean and
   current debt is 10% above its average level. From next period on, allocations and value functions are given by
   the Markov equilibrium. Dots indicate the equilibrium levels associated with optimal government spending.
  17
    Another way to see this exercise, which is potentially useful for interpreting empirical findings, is that this
constitutes a pure "fiscal shock."


                                                                           24
    As Figure 3 shows, an increase in government spending stimulates economic activity. The
increase in spending raises the price of nontradables (panel b) and lowers unemployment (panel
a). Essentially, the increase in demand for nontradable goods raises the relative price and leads
firms to produce more in equilibrium. This is part of the standard channel from fiscal policy in
open economies and is consistent with a large empirical literature.18 One can also see that since
nontradable consumption increases together with government consumption (panel c), the fiscal
multiplier is larger than one. Relative to Proposition 1, the fiscal multiplier is bigger than one
because spending is debt financed (panel h) rather than tax financed, in line with the results
from Farhi and Werning (2017).
   An important observation from panel (e) of Figure 3 is that the increase in government
spending leads to an increase in spreads. Such increase reflects the higher risk of future de-
fault associated with higher debt levels. This increase in spreads is a key factor deterring the
government from providing sufficient stimulus to attain full employment.


Takeaway. Overall, we have shown in this section how the presence of nominal rigidities and
sovereign risk create an austerity-stimulus trade-off for the government. When there is slack in
the labor market, spending helps to stimulate the economy. Investors, however, anticipate that
the increase in spending and borrowing makes the government more prone to default. As a result,
they are only willing to purchase government bonds at lower prices, and this makes stimulus less
desirable. In the quantitative section that follows, we will show how the level of debt and income
shocks are key to shaping the conduct of fiscal policy over the business cycle.



5      Quantitative Analysis

5.1     Calibration
To characterize the aggregate dynamics under the optimal fiscal policy, we calibrate the model to
match key moments of the Spanish economy and use a year as the model period. We calibrate the
model to Spain because, as mentioned in the introduction, the recent Eurozone crisis provides
a prototypical example of the main mechanisms featured in our model: a sharp increase in
unemployment and sovereign default risk, and a currency peg that leaves fiscal policy as the
only instrument for macroeconomic stabilization. The model is solved numerically using value
function iteration. For details on the solution method, see Appendix C.2.
  18
    See for example Monacelli and Perotti (2010), Ilzetzki, Mendoza and V´ egh (2013), Miyamoto, Nguyen and
Sheremirov (2019)). We also note that the core mechanisms is similar to the closed economy counterpart, which
typical focus on a zero lower bound.




                                                     25
Functional Forms. As mentioned in Section 3, we assume constant relative risk aversion util-
ity functions for private and public consumption, a CES aggregator for tradable and nontradable
goods, and an isoelastic production function. These functional forms imply four relatively stan-
dard parameters on preferences and technology {, g , , }. For the cost of default, we assume
the following functional form:

                                     T            0   y      T
                                   (yt ) = max{0,   +   log(yt )},                                            (24)

       y
with      > 0, which has been used in related literature to match the bond spread dynamics
observed in the data (see Bianchi, Hatchondo and Martinez, 2016; Chatterjee and Eyigungor,
2012, for related functional forms on default costs).
                               T
       The tradable endowment yt follows a log-normal AR(1) process,

                                           T            T
                                      log yt +1 =  log yt + y t+1 ,


with || < 1 with y
                 t+1  i.i.d. N (0, 1).



Parameter Values. All selected parameter values used in the baseline calibration are shown
in Table 3. We choose a subset of parameters according to predetermined values and then choose
the rest of the parameters to match key moments in the data. Data used for moments targeted
in the calibration are detailed in Appendix C.3.
    In the group of predetermined parameters, we set the coefficient of relative risk aversion to
 = 2 and the elasticity of substitution between tradable and nontradable goods to  = 0.5, which
is in the range of values considered in the literature;19 the share of tradables in the consumption
aggregator to  = 0.3, which implies a ratio of tradable output to total output of around 20%, in
line with the data for Spain in the period of analysis; and the labor share from the nontradable
sector to  = 0.75, following the estimate in Uribe (1997). For the unemployment insurance, we
set the ratio of the consumption of unemployed households to that of employed households to
 = 0.7, which is in line with the average expenditure on nondurable goods and services during
unemployment estimated by Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016) for the United States.
In Spain, the monthly benefit amount is 70% of the monthly base over the first six months and
50% thereafter until the unemployment spell reaches two years, as indicated by the Servicio
P´ublico de Empleo Estatal. Finally, we estimate the parameters  and  for the stochastic
             T
process of yt  using Spanish national accounts data for agriculture and manufacturing sectors,
  19
     This parameterization implies that the intertemporal elasticity of substitution equals the intertemporal elas-
ticity of substitution, and hence the marginal utility of tradables and nontradables is separable. Another useful
implication is that the amount of public spending, according to the Samuelson rule, does not depend on debt nor
on y T .



                                                        26
log-quadratically detrended. This estimation yields  = 0.78 and y = 0.029.
    For the parameters related to the debt market, we set the international risk-free rate r equal
to 2%, which is roughly the average annual gross yield on German 5-year government bonds; the
maturity parameter  = 0.184, to generate an average bond duration of five years, in line with
the OECD data for Spain over the period 2000-2010;20 and the reentry probability  = 0.18,
to generate an average autarky spell of six years, which is close to the average resumption of
financial access reported by Gelos, Sahay and Sandleris (2011) over the period 1980-2000 for 150
developing countries.

                                            Table 3: Calibration

 Parameter           Value        Description                                             Target statistic/Source
 Predetermined parameters
                   2              Coefficient of risk aversion                            Standard business cycle literature
                  0.5             Intratemporal elasticity of subst.                      Standard business cycle literature
                  0.3             Share of tradables                                      Share of tradable GDP (20%)
                  0.75            Labor share in nontradable sector                       Uribe and Schmitt-Groh´ e (2017)
 r                0.02            Risk-free rate                                          Average German 5-year bond return
                 0.184            Coupon decaying rate                                    Average bond duration (5 years)
                  0.18            Reentry probability                                     Average autarky spell (5.5 years)
                  0.7             Relative consumption unemployed                         Chodorow-Reich and Karabarbounis (2016)
                 0.777            AR(1) coefficient of ytT                                Spanish tradable GDP process
 y               0.029            Standard deviation of t                                 Spanish tradable GDP process
 Calibrated parameters
                 0.907            Discount factor                                         External debt/GDP (22.8%)
  0              0.3277           Utility loss from default (intercept)                   Average bond spread (1.05%)
  y
                  2.42            Utility loss from default (slope)                       Volatility of bond spreads (1.4%)
 g                0.02            Weight of gov. good in utility                          Average govt. spending/GDP (18.1%)
                  0.19            Income tax rate                                         Volatility of govt. spending/GDP (2)
 w               3.068            Minimum wage                                            Unemployment increase crisis (2.5%)



  20
       The Macaulay duration of a bond with price q and our coupon structure is given by
                                                                       t
                                                              1-               1 + ib
                                         D=           t                    =          ,
                                                t=1
                                                          q   1 + ib            + ib

                                                                          1- t  
where the constant per-period yield ib is determined by q =       t=1  ( 1+ib ) . The debt level in the model is
computed as the present value of future payment obligations discounted at the risk-free rate r. Given our coupon
structure, we thus have that the debt level is given by 1-(1-)/(1+r) bt .




                                                               27
    The six remaining parameters are calibrated to match six moments from the data.21 Tar-
geted moments are detailed in Table 3 and are informative of the default risk in the economy,
unemployment, and government spending, which are the key components of the trade-off faced
by fiscal policy. The first three moments speak to the amount of default risk in the economy.
These moments are the average Spanish public external debt-to-GDP ratio of 22.8%, and the
average and volatility of Spanish bond spreads of 1.05% and 1.4%, respectively. Although all
parameters affect all moments in our calibration, these three moments are mostly governed by
                                                                         0       y
the discount factor  and the parameters on the default cost function       and     . The second
group of moments is linked to government spending and taxes. We target the mean Spanish
government spending over GDP of 18%, and the ratio of the volatility of government spending
to the volatility of output of 2. These moments are mostly influenced by the weight of the gov-
ernment good in the utility function, g , and the income tax rate,  . Finally, we calibrate w to
be consistent with the surge in unemployment during the episode of high sovereign spreads. In
the data, the increase in unemployment in Spain in 2011 relative to 2009-2010 was about 2.5%.
Accordingly, we set w so that the average increase in unemployment in the two years before a
default is 2.5%. This yields w = 3.068. Appendix Table C.1 shows that our calibrated model
approximates the targeted moments fairly well.22


5.2     Fiscal Policies over the Business Cycle
In this section we study how default risk shapes optimal fiscal policy over the business cycle.
To do so, we first consider an economy in which we shut down default risk, and then show how
incorporating default risk changes the nature of the optimal fiscal policy response. We calibrate
the two economies to match the same data targets, with the exception of spreads, which are, of
  21
      The parameters and moments reported in this subsection correspond to those that result from calibrating
the model with optimal fiscal policy with default risk. To compute the business cycle statistics, we run 10,000
Monte Carlo simulations of the model with 10,000 periods each and construct 1,000 subsamples of 32 periods of
financial access. The number of periods for each subsample is chosen to roughly match the number of years in our
sample period 1980-2012. To avoid dependence on initial conditions, we disregard the first 1,000 periods from each
simulation. Also, in our model the borrower regains access to credit with no liabilities after defaulting, whereas
in the data countries typically do so, carrying a positive amount of debt settled at a restructuring stage. We
therefore impose that our candidate subsamples cannot be preceded by reentry episodes for less than four years.
To analyze the economy with no default risk (in the next subsection) we re-calibrate the discount factor and the
tax rate so that this economy is comparable with the data in terms of external debt and government spending.
Also, given the high persistence in the debt dynamics, we run longer simulations for 140,000 periods. After
disregarding the initial 100,000 periods, we construct 100,000 subsamples, allowing for 2, 000 periods between
consecutive subsample time intervals.
   22
      An exception is the volatility of spreads, which the model falls short in replicating that observed in the data.
As discussed in Aguiar, Chatterjee, Cole and Stangebye (2016), this is a common challenge faced by the canonical
sovereign debt model.




                                                         28
course, zero for the risk-free economy.23


Countercyclical fiscal policy with no default risk. Table 4 reports key business cycle
moments of the economy with risk-free debt and compares them with their data counterparts.24
The main result is that in the absence of default risk, optimal fiscal policy is countercyclical,
with a correlation of -0.81 between government spending and GDP. This result stems from
the countercyclicality of the benefits of fiscal stabilization stressed in Section 4. This model
prediction is in sharp contrast to the procyclical behavior of government spending observed for
Spain (0.46 in our sample) and, more generally, contrasts with the behavior we documented
for economies with medium and high default risk. However, it is qualitatively consistent with
the countercyclicality of economies with the highest credit ratings, as shown in Figure 2. Table
4 also shows that, thanks to the effective stabilization role of fiscal policy, the fluctuations of
unemployment are small: one order of magnitude smaller that those observed in the data for
Spain.
    The key takeaway from these simulations is that when the government can finance spending
with external risk-free borrowing, there are large gains from stabilization that lead to strong
countercyclical fiscal policies. These policies are inconsistent with the data for Spain and for
economies with sovereign risk, which tend to display a positive correlation between government
spending and economic activity.25 We show next that default risk can provide an explanation
for the observed empirical patterns.


Procyclical fiscal policy with default risk. The last column of Table 4 shows the business
cycle statistics for our baseline economy with default risk. The main result is that government
spending is procyclical, with a correlation of 0.72 with output. This table shows that the
resulting fluctuations in unemployment are also more aligned with the data.26
   The sharp contrast between the conduct of fiscal policy in the risk-free economy and the
economy with default risk can be clearly seen in Figure 4. This figure displays the optimal policy
function for government spending for the two economies. As the figure shows, optimal government
spending with risk-free debt, depicted by the solid red line, is monotonically decreasing with
  23
     Essentially, we choose the same parameter values as in our baseline economy (detailed in Table 3), except for
the discount factor and utility of government spending, which we set to match the same average debt-to-GDP
and government-spending-to-GDP ratios as in our baseline economy, and the parameters governing the default
costs, which are set to large enough values to ensure that the economy never defaults for the targeted debt levels.
  24
     Time series for public and private consumption and GDP are log-quadratic detrended.
  25
     As we will explain below, even though the uncondtional correlation is low, there is an important state
dependence both in the data and the in the model.
  26
     In the economy with perfect insurance against idiosyncratic risk, the unemployment rate is 0.5 percentage
points higher, as government spending is slightly lower and more procyclical given the absence of inequality
concerns motive in the design of optimal policy.



                                                        29
                        Table 4: Business Cycle Statistics: Data and Models

                                                                            Model
                   Statistic                                Data     Risk-free   Default
                   Averages (in percent)
                    mean(spreads)                           1.05        0.00           1.09
                    mean(debt/y )                           22.8        22.4           22.6
                    mean(pN g N /y )                        18.1        18.6           18.2

                   Correlations with GDP
                    corr(GDP,g N )                       0.46         -0.81           0.72
                    corr(GDP, c)                         0.98          1.00           0.98
                    corr(GDP,spreads)                   -0.38          0.00          -0.95
                    corr(GDP,unemployment)              -0.34         -0.97          -0.44

                   Volatilities (in percent)
                     (GDP)                                  3.5          1.2            4.3
                     (pN g N )/ (GDP)                       2.0          1.6            2.0
                     (c)/ (GDP)                             1.1          1.1            1.1
                     (spreads)                              1.4          0.0            0.7
                     (unemployment)                         4.1          0.6            5.6

          Notes: This table reports business cycle statistics for the data and the models with risk-free
          and risky debt. Bond spreads are computed as the differential between the annual sovereign
          bond return and the annual risk-free rate. The variables GDP and y denote total output
          at constant and current prices, respectively.



income. In contrast, optimal government spending with defaultable debt, depicted by the dashed
blue line, features lower spending for small levels of income the government chooses to repay.27
    To understand the optimal procyclicality in the economy with risky debt, Figure 5 shows two
key objects we discuss in the context of the optimal policy tradeoffs in Section 4. Panel (a) shows
the fiscal multiplier, defined as the increase in output from a marginal increase in government
spending, as a function of tradable endowment. As the figure shows, the fiscal multiplier is
positive when income is low and becomes zero once the economy is at full employment.28 Panel
(b) shows the increase in spreads that result from the increase in external debt to finance one unit
of government spending. A key property illustrated in the figure is that the marginal financial
cost is larger when income is low. Overall, this figure shows that although in bad times the fiscal
multipliers are larger, the fact that the financial cost is also larger implies that the government
chooses to cut spending and follow a procyclical fiscal policy.
  27
     Notice also that the amount of spending increases to the left of the default threshold. The reason is that
when the government repays and is close to the default threshold, it runs a fiscal surplus.
  28
     For empirical evidence on the asymmetry of the fiscal multiplier, see Born, D'Ascanio, M¨uller and Pfeifer,
2019.


                                                       30
                                 0.25




                            gN
                                  0.2




                                                                           defaultable debt
                                                                           risk-free debt
                                 0.15
                                          0.9    0.95         1           1.05    1.1
                                                                  T
                                                              y

                         Figure 4: Government Spending as a Function of y T
              Notes : This figure shows the optimal government spending in the risky and risk-
              free debt models, as a function of y T . Debt is set to its average level. The solid red
              lines correspond to the risk-free debt model and the dashed blue lines to the risky
              model. The dotted vertical lines in black correspond to the default threshold.




                (a) Fiscal Multiplier                                      (b) Increase in Borrowing Costs
3                                                                  1



2



1                                                                 0.5



0



-1                                                                 0
 0.95           1         1.05          1.1       1.15             0.95          1            1.05   1.1       1.15
                           yT                                                                  yT



                Figure 5: Fiscal Multipliers and Borrowing Costs as Function of y T .

        Notes : This figure shows the fiscal multiplier (left panel) and a measure of the marginal variation
        in borrowing costs when increasing debt (right panel), as a function of y T . Fiscal multipliers
        are computed using the steady-state relative price pN . Current debt is set to 10% above its
                                                                                 q
        average level. The marginal increase in borrowing costs is given by b       (b - (1 -  )b).




                                                         31
    It is important to highlight that departing from the optimal fiscal policy under default risk
can entail large welfare costs. To show this, we replace the optimal countercyclical spending with
a benchmark Samuelson rule that specifies a constant g N over the business cycle and evaluate
the welfare costs from following this rule as opposed to the optimal one. Our results show that
the average welfare cost is 3.5% of permanent consumption.29 Moreover, the welfare costs are
significantly larger for states with high debt and relatively low levels of income. This is because
in these states the sovereign default risk of the economy is higher, and by following a constant
spending rule the economy becomes over exposed to the risk of a default. Welfare costs are also
larger for lower y T in low-debt states, where the government spends more than prescribed by the
Samuelson rule so as to reduce unemployment and stabilize the economy. In contrast to Lucas
(1977), macroeconomic stabilization entails significant welfare consequences.
   Overall, the quantitative analysis of the model shows that default risk can account for the
procyclicality observed in the data in economies with sovereign default risk. This is in spite of
the fact that we constructed an economy with large fiscal multipliers that create an important
scope for fiscal stabilization.30


5.3      The Debt Dependence of Optimal Fiscal Policy
In this section we show that default risk considerations lead to an important state dependency
in the optimal fiscal policy. In particular, the government's optimal response to shocks depends
crucially on the country's level of debt. To illustrate this debt state dependence, we consider
a one-standard-deviation drop in tradable endowment and simulate the model forward under
the expected path of income, starting from two initial levels of debt, one that is 25% below
the steady-state level ("low debt") and another that is 25% above the steady-state level ("high
debt").31
   Figure 6 shows the results of this exercise. The figure reports the differences in macroeconomic
variables and spreads under the negative shock compared to the economy without the shock.
The dotted black line corresponds to the economy that starts with low debt. In this case, the
  29
     This calculation is obtained by first computing conditional welfare gains (i.e., the increase in private and
public consumption across all states of nature that leave the household indifferent between living in the economy
with a Samuelson rule and switching to the economy with the optimal policy). The unconditional welfare gain
of moving from the Samuelson policy to the optimal policy is computed as the expected conditional gain under
the ergo dic distribution of the state in the former economy. For more details on the computation of the welfare
gains, see Appendix C.2.
  30
     In fact, fiscal multipliers in our model are above 2 in a large region of the state space, and this is in the upper
tail of empirical estimates in the literature of open economy multipliers (see, for example, Chodorow-Reich, 2019;
Nakamura and Steinsson, 2014; House, Proebsting and Tesar, 2019).
  31
      For this quantitative exercise, we simulate from t = 2 onward 10, 000 tradable income paths. Naturally,
along some paths, default occurs during some periods. To compute the impulse responses, we consider all the
simulations in each period and calculate the cross-sectional median of the variables.



                                                          32
                          (a) y T                                           (b) Government Spending g N
        0                                                    0.01


                                                                 0


  -0.02                                                     -0.01


                                                            -0.02


  -0.04                                                     -0.03
            1         5              10                15            1            5                 10                15


                 (c) Borrowing bt+1                                                   (d) Spreads
0.06                                                                1




   0

                                                             %
                                                                 0.5




-0.06                                                               0

        1         5                 10                 15               1         5                  10                15

                          (e) cT                                                 (f) Unemployment
        0                                                        10                                       low debt
                                                                                                          high debt
                                                             %




  -0.04                                                           5




  -0.08                                                           0
            1         5               10                15            1           5                 10                15



                Figure 6: Impulse Responses to y T for Different Initial Debt Levels.
    Notes: This figure shows the responses of tradable endowment, unemployment, government spending,
    debt, spreads, and tradable consumption when y T drops one standard deviation from its 21 unconditional
    mean in period 1. The vertical axis units are deviations from the unshocked path. Solid red lines
    correspond to initial debt set to 75% of the steady-state level; dashed blue lines correspond to initial debt
    equal the to steady-state level. The vertical axis units are median deviations from the unshocked paths.




                                                         33
government chooses an expansionary path for government spending and borrowing (panels (b)
and (c) respectively). Facing low default risk, the government resorts to a fiscal stimulus that
virtually prevents any increase in unemployment (panel (f)).
    In sharp contrast, the solid red line in Figure 6 shows that when initial debt levels are high,
the government chooses to contract government spending and reduce debt levels. Because the
negative shock triggers an increase in sovereign risk, the government finds it too costly to engage
in an expansionary fiscal policy. The increase in spreads that would result from the increase in
borrowing makes the stimulus too costly. This scenario is characterized by a large increase in
unemployment (around 8 percentage points) resulting from the contraction in both public and
private consumption.
   The state dependency of our model is also useful in interpreting the recent dynamics of
government spending observed in Spain, our calibrated economy, in the run-up to the debt crisis.

              (a) Government Spending g N                                           (b) Real GDP
 0.06                                                        0.06
                                                  data
                                                  model

 0.02                                                        0.02




 -0.02                                                       -0.02



 -0.06                                                       -0.06
     2007        2008        2009        2010         2011       2007       2008         2009       2010     2011


                     (c) Debt/GDP                                                    (d) Spread
      27                                                             6



      23                                                             4
  %




                                                                %




                                                                     2
      19


                                                                     0
      15
       2007       2008       2009       2010        2011             2007    2008        2009      2010    2011



                               Figure 7: Data and Model: Spain 2007-2011.
      Notes: This figure shows the observed evolution in government spending, real GDP, debt/GDP, and
      spreads in the data (dashed blue lines) and their counterparts in the model (solid red lines). To compute
      the model dynamics, we feed in the fitted path for tradable income y T and set an initial external debt
      level of 17% of GDP, which generates roughly the observed debt-GDP ratio in 2008.


   Figure 7 shows the evolution in the data and the model of government spending, real GDP,
debt/GDP, and bond spreads for Spain over the period 2007-2011, both in the model and the
data. For the model-implied dynamics, we feed the observed path of tradable income and set an

                                                           34
initial external debt level of 17% of GDP, which generates roughly the observed debt-GDP ratio
in 2008. In line with our data, the government responded to the Great Recession with a fairly
aggressive fiscal stimulus (panel (a)). At that time, borrowing costs remained quite modest and
government spending kept rising (see panel (d) and Figure 1). It is worth noting that in 2012
there was a new slump in economic activity, but the situation then was quite different. Facing
mounting spreads, the Spanish government decided to cut spending sharply .32


Supportive empirical evidence The state dependency of the optimal fiscal policy predicted
by the model is consistent with the empirical work by Romer and Romer (2019), which shows
that countries use fiscal policy tools more aggressively during recessions when these episodes are
preceded by relatively low debt-to-GDP ratios. By the same token, countries that have higher
"fiscal space"are able to better mitigate the effects of recessionary shocks.
    We provide additional empirical support for the state dependency predicted by our model, by
conducting an event-time study to document how the behavior of government spending during
recession episodes depends on initial external debt levels. We construct this event time study in
three steps. First, we identify a set of recession episodes, defined as periods of annual contraction
of GDP per capita. We focus on recession episodes to reflect the fact that in our model, state
dependence emerges in response to contractionary shocks. For each of these recessions, we
date an output peak, trough, and recovery point, which capture the dates associated with the
maximum level of economic activity before the recession, the minimum level of economic activity
following the recession, and the moment at which output recovers its trend.33 In this exercise,
we use data from 1980 to 2017 for a sample of emerging-market economies (as measured by those
included in JPMorgan's EMBI), which are risky economies integrated with international capital
markets frequently studied in the literature of debt crises. Appendix Table C.2 details the 105
  32
     We stop the exercise in 2011 because in 2012 Spain, as well as other Euro economies, received financial
support from the ESM and the ECB (e.g., following Draghi's "whatever it takes" speech), which are not part
of the model. If we extend the baseline model through 2012 the model would predict that the Spanish economy
would have defaulted in 2012, which we do not see as an implausible scenario in the absence of any external
support. If we do incorporate an exogenous unexpected financial support in the model similar to that observed
in the data, our model would predict fiscal austerity for 2012, which is aligned with the pattern of government
spending observed in the data. These results are available upon request.
  33
     We identify the peak, trough, and recovery point in each recession episode following the algorithm in Calvo,
Coricelli and Ottonello (2014). This consists of defining the output peak, trough, and recovery point of each
recession episode using the cyclical component of output per capita. In particular, given a recession episode, the
output peak is defined as the period displaying the maximum cyclical component of output per capita in the
window with a positive cyclical component of output per capita preceding the recession event. If no observation
with a positive cyclical component of output exists between the trough of a previous recession episode and
beginning of the recession event, the output peak is simply defined as the period that displays the maximum
cyclical component of output per capita between the trough of the previous recession episode and the beginning
of the recession event. The recovery point is defined as the period, after a recession event, in which output per
capita recovers its trend level. The output trough is defined as the period between output peak and recovery
point that displays the minimum level of the cyclical component of output per capita.



                                                       35
               (A) High-debt episodes                                (B) Low-debt episodes
                                                 105                                                   105


       110                                                   110


                                                 100                                                   100

                                                             105



                                                 95                                                    95
       100                                                   100




                                                 90          95                                        90




        Peak               Trough            Recovery         Peak              Trough             Recovery



      Figure 8: Fiscal Policy during Recession Episodes with Different Initial Debt Level
 Notes : This figure shows the dynamics of government spending and GDP, in real, per capita terms, in an event-
 time study of recession episodes, defined as annual contractions of GDP. Data source: WDI. Peak, trough,
 and recovery denote the dates associated with the maximum level of economic activity before the recession,
 minimum level of economic activity following the recession, and the moment at which output recovers its
 trend (for details see footnote (33)). Appendix Table C.2 lists the set of countries and recession episodes
 included in the sample. High- and low-debt episodes denote, respectively, those that exhibit an external net
 foreign asset position below and above the median of all recession episodes.


recession episodes identified in our sample, as well as the dates of their peaks, troughs, and
recovery points. The second step in our event-time study is to classify episodes based on their
initial level of indebtedness. We do so, based on the economy's net-foreign asset position (source
Lane and Milesi-Ferreti (2007)), demeaned at the country level, that each country exhibits at
the peak of each recession episode; we demean the net-foreign asset position at the country level
to ensure that the comparison does not simply reflect permanent differences across countries in
their average borrowing positions. Based on this initial measure, we define as low-debt episodes
those with an initial net-foreign asset position above the median (in the cross-section of episodes)
and as high-debt episodes those with an initial net-foreign asset position above the median. The
last step in the event-time study is to trace the average dynamics of government spending and
GDP during the peak, trough, and recovery for each group of episodes.
   Figure 8 shows the results of our event-time study, comparing the dynamics of government
spending and GDP for high- and low-debt recession episodes. Consistent with our model, episodes
with a high initial debt levels are characterized by larger contractions of government spending
and economic activity. Through the lens of our model, this is because recession episodes with
a high initial level of indebtedness have associated high default risk; the government reduces its
government spending as a way of avoiding the cost of a debt crisis and default, which in turn
amplifies the contraction in economic activity.


                                                        36
6      Fiscal Programs
In this section, we explore the effects of fiscal programs that are either self-imposed, via a fiscal
rule for example, or alternatively dictated by a third party. Specifically, we take as given that
some for of commitment to spending is feasible and ask: how should a fiscal program be de-
signed? Our analysis uncovers three key results. First, fiscal programs can have starkly different
implications depending on the timing of when are spending cuts implemented. Second, a non-
state contingent commitment can improve welfare upon a flexible discretionary regime. Third,
if the commitment can be made state-contingent, it is optimal to cut spending in intermediate
income states.34


6.1     Current Spending Cuts
The first fiscal program we consider is an exogenous simple cut in current government spending.
Namely, if the government wishes to remain in good credit standing, it has to follow an exoge-
nously imposed amount of spending. The government can still choose to default, in which case
it can freely choose the amount of transfers and spending. We assume that the intervention lasts
for only one period. In the following period, the equilibrium reverts to the Markov equilibrium,
in which the government optimally chooses all policies.
   Our main result regarding this experiment is that imposing current spending at least weakly
deteriorates the incentives to repay. Proposition 2 formalizes this result.

Proposition 2. Consider an initial level of debt b and a shock y T . If the government finds it
optimal to default under no fiscal program, it also finds it optimal to default when there is an
imposed cut on current government spending. Moreover, there exists a spending cut such that
the government defaults with an imposed spending cut but not without it.

The proof of this proposition follows from the fact that restricting current government choices
in good credit standing reduces the value of repaying for the government and therefore makes
default more attractive. An important implication is that imposing a spending cut can trigger a
default, even under circumstances in which the government would find it optimal to repay absent
any constraints.
   When is forced austerity more likely to backfire? To address this question, we examine the
spending cut that would push the government to default. Specifically, we compute what would
  34
     Several countries including Germany and Spain have amended the Constitution to improve the enforceability
of fiscal rules. See Hatchondo, Martinez and Roch (2017) for further background evidence. Regarding fiscal
programs dicated by third parties, Greece is a prominent recent example. In exchange for a fiscal consolidation
in the form of the privatization of government assets, public-sector wage cuts, pension cuts, and higher taxes, the
Greek government received several bailout loans from 2010 onward (see Gourinchas, Martin and Messer, 2018).


                                                        37
be the amount of current government spending as a fraction of the Samuelson level that would
make the government indifferent between repaying and defaulting. The left panel of Figure 9
shows that when income is low, a low level of austerity is sufficient to precipitate default. For
high income, the government does not find default very attractive, and would therefore choose
to remain in good credit standing even with substantial cuts imposed on spending. Similarly, as
shown in the right panel, the lower the current debt, the less sensitive the repayment decision is
to imposed spending cuts.
    These findings shed light on the design of fiscal rules we will be exploring in the next section.
If the government is close to default, imposing austerity (beyond the optimal amount chosen by
the government) can be harmful. Importantly, both the government and investors are ultimately
worse off. On the other hand, if the government is relatively further away from defaulting, even
a moderate spending cut would not trigger default. Moreover, the spending cut reduces debt
accumulation and future incentives to default. In this case, investors who hold government bonds
would benefit ex post as the market value of the outstanding government debt rises.
                                                                                        Difference relative to Samuelson gN (%)
   Difference relative to Samuelson gN (%)




                                               0                                                                                   -50


                                              -20                                                                                  -60


                                              -40                                                                                  -70


                                              -60                                                                                  -80


                                              -80                                                                                  -90


                                             -100                                                                                 -100
                                               0.875           1               1.125                                                 -0.5   0   0.5    1   1.5
                                                               T
                                                              y                                                                                 debt

                                                       Figure 9: Effects of Austerity on the Incentives to Default.
   Notes: This figure shows the percentage difference relative to the Samuelson level of current public
   spending that would make the government indifferent between repaying its debt and defaulting, as a
   function of current y T , given current debt equal to the average level (left panel), and as a function of
   debt, given y T set to its unconditional mean (right panel). From next period on, allocations are assumed
   to take the equilibrium levels.




6.2                                           Fiscal Forward Guidance
We now investigate an alternative form of fiscal consolidation based on future spending cuts. We
refer to this policy as "fiscal forward guidance." Two questions we address. First, can spending
cuts imposed in the future improve welfare? And second, how should the spending cuts be
designed?


                                                                                       38
                                   0.1


                                  0.08


                                  0.06




                              %
                                  0.04


                                  0.02
                                                                 non-state-contingent cuts
                                                                 state-contingent cuts
                                    0
                                         0   1      2        3        4          5           6
                                                 size of spending cut (%)


                   Figure 10: Welfare Gains as Function of Size of Spending Cut.
Notes: This figure shows the welfare gains for non-state-contingent (dashed blue line) and state-contingent (solid
red line) spending cuts next period, as a function of the size of the spending cut. State-contingent spending cuts
are implemented if total income y  y T + pN y N lies within the range [y, y ], where y and y are set to 22% below
and 3% above average total income, respectively. Welfare gains are expressed as (percentage) increases in current
total consumption under the optimal policy regime to be indifferent to the corresponding austerity measure. The
current state features debt equal to 20% above its mean and tradable income given by its unconditional mean.



                                                                                          N
   The experiment we consider imposes cuts on next-period government spending (gt         +1 ). In
period t, the government continues to choose all available policies, while in the next period, the
government chooses borrowing and repayment subject to the restriction that the spending cut is
implemented. We also assume that lump-sum transfers remain fixed at their optimal levels and
that in the period after the consolidation (t + 2), the economy reverts to the Markov equilibrium.
   We consider two forms of fiscal forward guidance depending on whether future cuts are
predetermined or allowed to be contingent on the state of nature tomorrow. Different from the
current spending cuts analyzed above, we will show that a reduction in next-period spending
can generate positive effects on the economy. Less spending in the future implies less debt
accumulation, which reduces incentives to default in the future and allows the government to
borrow more cheaply today--and, in turn, render stimulus less costly.
    The non-state-contingent austerity program specifies a fixed percentage cut in spending rel-
ative to the optimal level, regardless of the state of nature tomorrow. On the other hand, the
state-contingent austerity program allows for the possibility that spending cuts are contingent
on the level of economic activity. In particular, we consider a spending cut that is active only
when total income y , given by y T + pN y N , is within a subset of future income values. Both the
size of the constant spending cut within the subset and the subset itself are selected to maximize
welfare.
    The advantage of the state-contingent austerity program that spending cuts can be targeted


                                                        39
to the "right" state tomorrow. As it turns out, we find that it is optimal to promise a spending
cut only for intermediate values of next-period income (see Appendix Figure C.3). If income is
sufficiently low, a spending cut can push the government to default tomorrow (for the reasons
explained above), which would increase rather than decrease sovereign spreads today. It is also
not optimal to promise a spending cut if income is excessively high tomorrow. The reason is
that when income is very high, the interest rate at which the government borrows is closer to the
risk-free rate and becomes fairly insensitive to lower debt accumulation. As a result, promising
a cut in these states will generate a distortion in the allocation of resources across private and
public consumption, with modest gains in terms of lower spreads today.
    For each case, we look for the optimal spending cut given the initial conditions considered. We
focus on an initial value of debt of 20% above the mean and an income equal to its unconditional
mean.35 For the non-state-contingent case, the optimal cut is 3%. For the state-contingent cut,
the optimal cut reaches 4%. Under a state-contingent cut, the promised cut is larger because it
is implemented only in states in which it is beneficial. Moreover, in line with the mechanisms
highlighted above, the income states in which it is optimal to promise the spending cut are
between 22% below the unconditional mean of output and 3% above the unconditional mean of
total income.

                              Table 5: Current and Future Fiscal Austerity

                                    Current                  Promised                       Promised
       Variable                   spending cut          non-state-contingent            state-contingent
                                                           spending cut                   spending cut
       pN (%)                       -0.527                     0.111                          0.121
       debt (%)                     -6.014                     0.796                          0.787
       cT (%)                       -1.433                     0.304                          0.333
       unemp (%)                     1.405                    -0.298                        -0.326
       g N (%)                      -3.000                     0.636                          0.696
       spreads (%)                  -0.178                    -0.103                        -0.137
       welfare gain (%)             -0.056                     0.075                          0.088

       Notes: Initial response of key variables and welfare gains for different austerity measures. These
       measures are a promised spending cut next period in all states (column 1) and a current spending cut
       (column 2), both of 3%. Column 3 corresponds to a promised spending cut of 4% next period only if
       total income y  y T + pN y N lies within the range [y, y ], where y and y are set to 22% below and 3%
       above average total income, respectively. Welfare gains are expressed as the (percentage) increases
       in current total consumption that would leave households indifferent between remaining under the
       baseline policy and switching to the alternative. Variations in pN , debt, cT , and g N are reported
       as percentages relative to optimal baseline levels without any austerity measure. The current state
       features debt equal to 20% above its mean and tradable income y T given by its unconditional mean.


      Figure 10 shows the welfare gains of implementing these austerity programs for a range of
 35
      Appendix Figure C.2 shows how welfare gains vary with the current state for non-state-contingent cuts.


                                                        40
spending cuts. (For the state-contingent cut, we keep the interval for total income at [-0.22%, 0.03%]
from its mean level.) Welfare gains are measured as the percentage increase in current private
consumption that households are willing to give up to implement the austerity program. The
dashed blue line shows the welfare gain from non-state-contingent cuts, and the solid red line
shows the gain for state-contingent cuts. The maximum welfare gains are, respectively, 0.075%
and 0.088% for the non-state-contingent and state-contingent programs. Notice that although
both programs require commitment to execute the spending cut, these results show that even
a 1-year-ahead commitment can be very effective in providing more scope for stimulus. To the
extent that fiscal budgets, once approved, are difficult to change, this assumption does not seem
very strong.
    To shed light on the sources of these welfare gains, in Table 5 we show the impact of these
future austerity programs on today's key macro variables. The table shows that the non-state-
contingent spending cut allows the government to borrow more cheaply and facilitates stimulus,
which in turn helps to reduce unemployment. In particular, spreads drop by 0.1% despite the
increase in borrowing, and unemployment is reduced by almost 0.3 percentage points relative to
the no-austerity plan. Notably, relative to the baseline economy, the risk of observing a default
in the next period actually rises by 0.1% with the austerity program, but then it drops 1.41% in
the following period. Under a state-contingent austerity plan, the government engages in even
more stimulus, further reducing unemployment and achieving higher welfare gains.
    To sum up, we find that in the midst of a recession with high sovereign default risk, there
is a significant role for an austerity program that involves future spending cuts. An important
qualification is that the program cannot be too aggressive, as it risks increasing default incentives
and worsening borrowing conditions today. Hence the program needs to be carefully designed,
given the projections of expected economic activity. In particular, the more protracted the
recession, the more delayed the spending cuts should be. Moreover, the desirability of fiscal
forward guidance can vary with the initial conditions. The general lesson is that the more
sensitive the borrowing costs are, the higher the potential benefits from fiscal forward guidance.



7     Conclusion
We examine how sovereign risk matters for the conduct of fiscal policy. Empirically, we show that
high sovereign risk is associated with more procyclical fiscal policies. We develop a theoretical
framework that integrates Keynesian features and sovereign risk concerns that are consistent
with this pattern. In line with the findings of Romer and Romer (2019), we also show that an
economy with high government debt, is more likely to experience severe recessions.
    Our framework articulates the fundamental conundrum faced by fiscal policy in a severe


                                                 41
downturn: Should a government increase spending to ease the recession at the expense of higher
spreads, or should it cut spending to reduce exposure to a debt crisis, even if that deepens the
recession? Our quantitative findings show that for relatively high levels of debt, austerity tends
to be optimal, even in the presence of large fiscal multipliers. At the same time, our framework
also shows how imposed austerity programs can backfire by increasing a country's incentives to
default. We instead argue that programs of fiscal forward guidance--an alternative that combines
current stimulus with future fiscal austerity--can be desirable during recessions. These findings
are especially relevant going forward, as the global economy emerges with record-high sovereign
debt levels from the Covid-19 crisis.




                                               42
References
Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath, "Defaultable debt, interest rates and the current account,"
 Journal of International Economics, 2006, 69(1), 64­83.

   and Manuel Amador, "Growth in the shadow of expropriation," Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2011, 126(2), 651­697.

  , , Hugo Hopenhayn, and Iv´      an Werning, "Take the short route: Equilibrium default
  and debt maturity," Econometrica, 2019, 87 (2), 423­462.

  , Satyajit Chatterjee, Harold Cole, and Zachary Stangebye, "Quantitative models of
  sovereign debt crises," in J. Taylor and H. Uhlig, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 2,
  Amsterdam Elsevier, 2016, pp. 1697­1755.

Anzoategui, Diego, "Sovereign Debt and the Effects of Fiscal Austerity," 2018. Mimeo, Rutgers
 University.

Arellano, Cristina, "Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Economies," American
 Economic Review, 2008, 98(3), 690­712.

   and Yan Bai, "Fiscal Austerity During Debt Crises," Economic Theory, 2017, 64 (4), 657­
  673.

Balke, Neele Lisabet and Morten O Ravn, "Time-consistent fiscal policy in a debt crisis,"
 2016. Mimeo, UCL.

Barro, Robert J and Herschel I Grossman, "A general disequilibrium model of income and
 employment," American Economic Review, 1971, 61 (1), 82­93.

   and Jong Wha Lee, "International measures of schooling years and schooling quality,"
  American Economic Review, 1996, 86 (2), 218­223.

Benassy, Jean-Pascal, "Neo-Keynesian disequilibrium theory in a monetary economy," Review
 of Economic Studies, 1975, 42 (4), 503­523.

Bianchi, Javier and Jorge Mondragon, "Monetary Independence and Rollover Crises," 2018.
  NBER Working Paper No. 25340.

  , Juan Carlos Hatchondo, and Leonardo Martinez, "International reserves and rollover
  risk," 2016. NBER Working Paper 18628.

Bocola, Luigi, "The pass-through of sovereign risk," Journal of Political Economy, 2016, 124
 (4), 879­926.


                                             43
Born, Benjamin, Francesco D'Ascanio, Gernot M¨    uller, and Johannes Pfeifer, "Gov-
 ernment spending, downward nominal wage rigidity, and exchange rate dynamics," 2019.
 manuscript, University of Cologne.

Broner, Fernando, Aitor Erce, Alberto Martin, and Jaume Ventura, "Sovereign debt
 markets in turbulent times: Creditor discrimination and crowding-out effects," Journal of
 Monetary Economics, 2014, 61, 114­142.

Calvo, Guillermo A., F Coricelli, and Pablo Ottonello, "Labor Market, Financial Crises
 and Inflation: Jobless and Wageless Recoveries," 2014. NBER Working Paper 18480.

Cat~
   ao, Luis and Bennett Sutton, "Sovereign defaults: the role of volatility," 2002, 2. IMF
 Working Paper 02/149.

C´
 espedes, Luis Felipe and Andr´    es Velasco, "Was this time different?: Fiscal policy in
 commodity republics," Journal of Development Economics, 2014, 106, 92­106.

Chatterjee, S. and B. Eyigungor, "Maturity, indebtedness, and default risk," American
 Economic Review, 2012, 102(6), 2674­2699.

Chatterjee, Satyajit and Burcu Eyigungor, "A seniority arrangement for sovereign debt,"
 American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (12), 3740­65.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, "Geographic cross-sectional fiscal spending multipliers: What have
 we learned?," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2019, 11 (2), 1­34.

   and Loukas Karabarbounis, "The cyclicality of the opportunity cost of employment,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 2016, 124 (6), 1563­1618.

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, "When is the govern-
 ment spending multiplier large?," Journal of Political Economy, 2011, 119 (1), 78­121.

Correia, Isabel, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles, "Optimal fiscal and monetary
 policy: Equivalence results," Journal of Political Economy, 2008, 116 (1), 141­170.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Keith Kuester, Andre Meier, and Gernot J. Muller, "Sovereign
 risk, fiscal policy, and macroeconomic stability," Economic Journal, 2013, 123 (566), F99­
 F132.

  , , , and , "Sovereign risk and belief-driven fluctuations in the euro area," Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 2014, 61, 53­73.

Cuadra, Gabriel, Juan M Sanchez, and Horacio Sapriza, "Fiscal policy and default risk
 in emerging markets," Review of Economic Dynamics, 2010, 13 (2), 452­469.


                                            44
Dovis, Alessandro and Rishabh Kirpalani, "Fiscal rules, bailouts, and reputation in federal
 governments," 2020. Forthcoming, American Economic Review.

Drautzburg, Thorsten and Harald Uhlig, "Fiscal stimulus and distortionary taxation,"
 Review of Economic Dynamics, 2015, 18 (4), 894­920.

Dr`
  eze, Jacques H, "Existence of an exchange equilibrium under price rigidities," International
 Economic Review, 1975, 16 (2), 301­320.

Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz, "Debt with potential repudiation: theoretical and
 empirical analysis," Review of Economic Studies, 1981, 48(2), 289­309.

Eggertsson, Gauti B, "What fiscal policy is effective at zero interest rates?," in "NBER
 Macroeconomics Annual 2010," Vol. 25, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011, pp. 59­
 112.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Ivan Werning, "Fiscal multipliers: Liquidity traps and currency
  unions," in J. Taylor and H. Uhlig, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Amsterdam: Elsevier,
  2017, pp. 2417­2492.

Gali, Jordi and Tommaso Monacelli, "Optimal monetary and fiscal policy in a currency
 union," Journal of International Economics, 2008, 76 (1), 116­132.

Gavin, Michael and Roberto Perotti, "Fiscal policy in latin america," in NBER Macroeco-
 nomics Annual, 1997, 12, 11­61. ed. by B. S. Bernanke and J. J. Rotemberg.

Gelos, R. Gaston, Ratna Sahay, and Guido Sandleris, "Sovereign borrowing by developing
 countries: what determines market access?," Journal of International Economics, 2011, 83(2),
 243­254.

Giavazzi, Francesco and Marco Pagano, "Can Severe Fiscal Contractions be Expansionary?
 Tales of two Small European Countries," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1990, 5, 75­111.

Gon¸
   calves, Carlos Eduardo and Bernardo Guimaraes, "Sovereign default risk and com-
 mitment for fiscal adjustment," Journal of International Economics, 2015, 95 (1), 68­82.

Gourinchas, Pierre Olivier, Philippe Martin, and Todd Messer, "The Economics of
 Sovereign Debt, Bailouts and the Eurozone Crisis," 2018. Mimeo, Berkeley.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Thomas Philippon, and Dimitri Vayanos, "The analytics
 of the Greek crisis," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2017, 31 (1), 1­81.

Guerguil, Martine, Pierre Mandon, and Ren´         e Tapsoba, "Flexible fiscal rules and coun-
 tercyclical fiscal policy," Journal of Macroeconomics, 2017, 52, 189­220.


                                             45
Halac, Marina and Pierre Yared, "Fiscal rules and discretion under self-enforcement," 2017.
 NBER Working Paper 23919.

Hatchondo, Juan Carlos and Leonardo Martinez, "Long-Duration Bonds and Sovereign
 Defaults," Journal of International Economics, 2009, 79(1), 117­125.

  ,   , and C´  esar Sosa-Padilla, "Debt Dilution and Sovereign Default Risk," Journal of
  Political Economy, 2016, 124(5), 1383­1422.

  , , and Francisco Roch, "Fiscal rules and the sovereign default premium," 2017, pp. 12­30.
  IMF Working Paper.

Hatchondo, Juan, Francisco Roch, and Leonardo Martinez, "Constrained efficient bor-
 rowing with sovereign default risk," 2019.

House, Christopher L, Christian Proebsting, and Linda L Tesar, "Austerity in the
 aftermath of the Great Recession," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2019.

Ilzetzki, Ethan and Carlos A V´    egh, "Procyclical fiscal policy in developing countries: Truth
  or fiction?," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2008. NBER Working
  Paper 14191.

  , Enrique G Mendoza, and Carlos A V´       egh, "How big (small?) are fiscal multipliers?,"
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 2013, 60 (2), 239­254.

Kaminsky, Graciela L, Carmen M Reinhart, and Carlos A V´            egh, "When it rains, it
 pours: Procyclical macropolicies and capital flows," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2004, 19,
 11­53. ed. by M. Gertler and K. Rogoff.

Lane, Phillip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferreti, "The External Wealth of Nations Mark
  II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970­2004," Journal of
  International Economics, 2007, 73, 223­250.

Lorenzoni, Guido and Ivan Werning, "Slow moving debt crises," American Economic Re-
  view, 2019, 109 (9), 3229­63.

Lucas, Robert, "Understanding business cycles," in "Carnegie-Rochester conference series on
 public policy," Vol. 5 North-Holland 1977, pp. 7­29.

Mendoza, Enrique G. and Vivian Z. Yue, "A General Equilibrium Model of Sovereign
 Default and Business Cycles," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 127(2), 889­946.

Michaillat, Pascal and Emmanuel Saez, "Optimal public expenditure with inefficient un-
 employment," The Review of Economic Studies, 2018, 86 (3), 1301­1331.


                                               46
Miyamoto, Wataru, Thuy Lan Nguyen, and Viacheslav Sheremirov, "The effects of
 government spending on real exchange rates: Evidence from military spending panel data,"
 Journal of International Economics, 2019, 116 (1), 144­157.

Monacelli, Tommaso and Roberto Perotti, "Fiscal policy, the real exchange rate and traded
 goods," Economic Journal, 2010, 120 (544), 437­461.

Na, Seunghoon, Stephanie Schmitt-Groh´     e, Mart´in Uribe, and Vivian Yue, "The twin
 ds: Optimal default and devaluation," American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (7), 1773­1819.

Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson, "Fiscal stimulus in a monetary union: Evidence from
 US regions," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (3), 753­792.

Ramey, Valerie A, "Ten years after the financial crisis: What have we learned from the
 renaissance in fiscal research?," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2019, 33 (2), 89­114.

Romer, Christina D and David H Romer, "Fiscal space and the aftermath of financial
 crises: how it matters and why," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming, 2019.

Samuelson, Paul A, "The pure theory of public expenditure," Review of Economics and Statis-
  tics, 1954, 36 (4), 387­389.

Schmitt-Groh´   e, Stephanie and Martin Uribe, "Downward nominal wage rigidity, currency
  pegs, and involuntary unemployment," Journal of Political Economy, 2016, 124 (5), 1466­1514.

Talvi, Ernesto and Carlos A Vegh, "Tax base variability and procyclical fiscal policy in
  developing countries," Journal of Development Economics, 2005, 78 (1), 156­190.

Uhlig, Harald, "Some fiscal calculus," American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (2), 30­34.

Uribe, Martin, "Exchange-rate-based inflation stabilization: The initial real effects of credible
 plans," Journal of Monetary Economics, 1997, 39 (2), 197­221.

  and Stephanie Schmitt-Groh´
                            e, Open Economy Macroeconomics, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
  University Press, 2017.

Vegh, Carlos A and Guillermo Vuletin, "How is tax policy conducted over the business
 cycle?," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2015, 7 (3), 327­70.

Werning, Ivan, "Managing a liquidity trap: Monetary and fiscal policy," 2011. NBER Working
 Paper 17344.

Woo, Jaejoon, "Why do more polarized countries run more procyclical fiscal policy?," Review
 of Economics and Statistics, 2009, 91 (4), 850­870.

Woodford, Michael, "Simple analytics of the government expenditure multiplier," American
 Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2011, 3 (1), 1­35.

                                               47
                    Appendices (for Online Publication)

A      Additional Tables and Figures from Empirical Analysis

                            Table A.1: Countries Included in the Sample
              Albania                    Gambia, The                   Nicaragua
              Algeria                    Germany                       Nigeria
              Argentina                  Greece                        Norway
              Armenia                    Guatemala                     Oman
              Australia                  Honduras                      Pakistan
              Austria                    Hong Kong SAR, China          Panama
              Azerbaijan                 Hungary                       Papua New Guinea
              Bahamas, The               Iceland                       Paraguay
              Bangladesh                 India                         Peru
              Belarus                    Indonesia                     Philippines
              Belgium                    Iran, Islamic Rep.            Poland
              Belize                     Ireland                       Portugal
              Benin                      Israel                        Romania
              Bhutan                     Italy                         Russian Federation
              Bolivia                    Japan                         Rwanda
              Botswana                   Jordan                        Saudi Arabia
              Brazil                     Kazakhstan                    Senegal
              Brunei Darussalam          Kenya                         Sierra Leone
              Bulgaria                   Korea, Rep.                   Singapore
              Burkina Faso               Kyrgyz Republic               South Africa
              Burundi                    Lao PDR                       Spain
              Cameroon                   Lebanon                       Sri Lanka
              Canada                     Lesotho                       Sudan
              Chile                      Liberia                       Swaziland
              China                      Luxembourg                    Sweden
              Colombia                   Macao SAR, China              Switzerland
              Congo, Dem. Rep.           Macedonia, FYR                Tajikistan
              Congo, Rep.                Madagascar                    Tanzania
              Costa Rica                 Malawi                        Thailand
              Cyprus                     Malaysia                      Togo
              Czech Republic             Mali                          Trinidad and Tobago
              Denmark                    Malta                         Tunisia
              Dominican Republic         Mauritania                    Turkey
              Ecuador                    Mauritius                     Uganda
              Egypt, Arab Rep.           Mexico                        Ukraine
              El Salvador                Morocco                       United Arab Emirates
              Equatorial Guinea          Mozambique                    United Kingdom
              Finland                    Namibia                       United States
              France                     Nepal                         Uruguay
              Gabon                      Netherlands                   Venezuela, RB
                                         New Zealand                   Vietnam


Notes : This table shows the set of countries used in Section 2 to document the cyclicality of government
spending. This set of countries includes those with available data on government spending and GDP from the
WDI for the period 1990-2016 and excludes countries that were missing more than half of the values for the
period 1990-2016 or countries with discontinuous data.


                                                    48
Table A.2: Cyclicality of Government Spending around the World:
Summary Statistics for Countries with Available Data on Credit Ratings.
                                             G /Y             corr(Gt , Gt-1 )       corr(G, Y )
               Mean                          1.78                  0.49                  0.26
               Median                        1.13                  0.54                  0.29
               Standard deviation            1.95                  0.24                  0.34
               95th percentile               5.24                  0.79                  0.81
               5th percentile                0.52                  0.05                 -0.34

Notes : This table shows summary statistics of government spending for the subset of countries in Table A.1
with credit ratings data available during the period 1990-2016, and used in the regression of Section 2. The
variables G /Y , corr(Gt , Gt-1 ), and corr(G, Y ) denote, respectively, the ratio of the standard deviation of
government spending to the standard deviation output, the first-order autocorrelation of government spending,
and the correlation between government spending and output. We compute moments using the cyclical
component of per capita variables in constant local currency, detrending variables with the HP filter and a
smoothing parameter of 100. For details on the data, see Section 2.




             Table A.3: Cyclicality of Government Spending for High-Risk Countries
        Country                         corr(Gt , Yt )        Country                      corr(Gt , Yt )
        Argentina                           0.78              Indonesia                        0.69
        Belize                              0.63              Lebanon                         -0.03
        Cameroon                            0.60              Mozambique                      -0.03
        Cyprus                              0.29              Pakistan                         0.53
        Dominican Republic                  0.66              Paraguay                         0.49
        Ecuador                             0.51              Russian Federation               0.72
        Egypt, Arab Rep.                   -0.30              Ukraine                          0.53
        Greece                              0.81              Venezuela                        0.55
        Mean                                0.46
        Median                              0.54
        Standard deviation                  0.32

Notes : This table shows the correlation between government spending and output for countries in our sample
with "high risk," defined as those that ever had a sovereign credit rating below B. We compute moments using
the cyclical component of per capita variables in constant local currency, detrending variables with the HP filter
and a smoothing parameter of 100. For details on the data, see Section 2.




                                                         49
           Table A.4: Cyclicality of Government Spending for Medium-Risk Countries
       Country                       corr(Yt , Gt )        Country                       corr(Yt , Gt )
       Albania                           0.06              Korea, Rep.                       0.17
       Azerbaijan                        0.57              Kyrgyz Republic                   0.95
       Bahamas, The                      0.35              Macedonia, FYR                    0.31
       Bangladesh                       -0.02              Madagascar                        0.39
       Belarus                           0.65              Malaysia                          0.34
       Benin                             0.02              Mali                              0.48
       Bolivia                           0.44              Malta                             0.25
       Brazil                            0.64              Mexico                            0.11
       Bulgaria                          0.25              Morocco                           0.08
       Burkina Faso                     -0.08              Nicaragua                         0.44
       Chile                             0.48              Nigeria                           0.84
       China                             0.10              Oman                             -0.22
       Colombia                          0.29              Panama                           -0.41
       Congo, Dem. Rep.                  0.37              Papua New Guinea                  0.29
       Congo, Rep.                       0.20              Peru                              0.63
       Costa Rica                        0.08              Philippines                       0.43
       Czech Republic                    0.56              Poland                           -0.34
       El Salvador                      -0.16              Portugal                          0.63
       Gabon                             0.45              Romania                           0.28
       Guatemala                         0.04              Rwanda                            0.85
       Honduras                         -0.03              Senegal                           0.69
       Hungary                           0.50              South Africa                      0.33
       Iceland                           0.60              Spain                             0.20
       India                             0.44              Sri Lanka                         0.30
       Ireland                           0.67              Thailand                          0.24
       Israel                           -0.12              Trinidad and Tobago               0.03
       Italy                             0.27              Tunisia                          -0.02
       Jordan                           -0.04              Turkey                            0.23
       Kazakhstan                        0.57              Uganda                            0.28
       Kenya                            -0.03              Uruguay                           0.81
                                                           Vietnam                           0.82
       Mean                              0.30
       Median                            0.29
       Standard deviation                0.30

Notes : This table shows the correlation between government spending and output for countries in our sample
with "medium risk," defined as those that ever had a sovereign credit rating below A but always had a credit
rating greater than or equal to B. We compute moments using the cyclical component of per capita variables in
constant local currency, detrending variables with the HP filter and a smoothing parameter of 100. For details
on the data, see Section 2.




                                                      50
              Table A.5: Cyclicality of Government Spending for Low-Risk Countries
       Country                              corr(Yt , Gt )       Country                    corr(Yt , Gt )
       Australia                                0.26             Japan                          0.02
       Austria                                  0.01             Luxembourg                     0.39
       Belgium                                  0.11             Netherlands                    0.13
       Botswana                                 0.07             New Zealand                    0.27
       Canada                                  -0.13             Norway                        -0.51
       Denmark                                 -0.30             Saudi Arabia                   0.43
       Finland                                  0.67             Singapore                     -0.36
       France                                  -0.60             Sweden                        -0.23
       Germany                                 -0.09             Switzerland                   -0.24
       Hong Kong SAR, China                    -0.01             United Kingdom                 0.37
                                                                 United States                 -0.28
       Mean                                     0.00
       Median                                   0.01
       Standard deviation                       0.33

Notes : This table shows the correlation between government spending and output for countries in our sample
with "low risk," defined as those that never had a sovereign credit rating below A. We compute moments using
the cyclical component of per capita variables in constant local currency, detrending variables with the HP filter
and a smoothing parameter of 100. For details on the data, see Section 2.




                              Table A.6: Fiscal Procyclicality and Income
                                                          (1)             (2)
                                 log(GDP )              -0.06
                                                        (0.02)

                                 Rich                                  -0.29
                                                                        (0.09)

                                 Emerging                                -0.04
                                                                        (0.07)

                                 Observations             122             122
                                 R2                      0.051           0.107

Notes : Results from estimating the model

                                fiscal procyclicalityi =  + income Incomei + i ,

where fiscal procyclicalityi is the correlation between government spending and output from country i, Incomei
is a measure of country's i income per capita, and i is a random error term. Standard errors are shown in
parentheses. Column (1) measures Incomei as the log of the average GDP per capita in PPP in constant 2005
dollars. Column (2) measures Incomei with dummies indicating whether the country is rich, emerging, or poor,
using the thresholds defined in Uribe and Schmitt-Groh´   e (2017). For details on the data, see Section 2.



                                                       51
                                            Table A.7: Income and Risk Level

                         High Risk                           Medium Risk                            Low Risk
      Rich                                  Iceland                                          Australia
                                            Ireland                                          Austria
                                            Italy                                            Belgium
                                            Oman                                             Canada
                                                                                             Denmark
                                                                                             Finland
                                                                                             France
                                                                                             Germany
                                                                                             Hong Kong SAR, China
                                                                                             Japan
                                                                                             Luxembourg
                                                                                             Netherlands
                                                                                             Norway
                                                                                             Saudi Arabia
                                                                                             Singapore
                                                                                             Sweden
                                                                                             Switzerland
                                                                                             United Kingdom
                                                                                             United States
      Emerging       Argentina              Albania                    Korea, Rep.           Botswana
                     Belize                 Azerbaijan                 Macedonia, FYR        New Zealand
                     Cyprus                 Bahamas, The               Malaysia
                     Dominican Republic     Belarus                    Malta
                     Ecuador                Bolivia                    Mexico
                     Egypt, Arab Rep.       Brazil                     Morocco
                     Greece                 Bulgaria                   Panama
                     Indonesia              Chile                      Peru
                     Lebanon                China                      Philippines
                     Pakistan               Colombia                   Poland
                     Paraguay               Congo, Rep.                Portugal
                     Russian Federation     Costa Rica                 Romania
                     Ukraine                Czech Republic             South Africa
                     Venezuela, RB          El Salvador                Spain
                                            Gabon                      Sri Lanka
                                            Guatemala                  Thailand
                                            Honduras                   Trinidad and Tobago
                                            Hungary                    Tunisia
                                            Israel                     Turkey
                                            Jordan                     Uruguay
                                            Kazakhstan
      Poor           Cameroon               Bangladesh
                     Mozambique             Benin
                                            Burkina Faso
                                            Congo, Dem. Rep.
                                            India
                                            Kenya
                                            Kyrgyz Republic
                                            Madagascar
                                            Mali
                                            Nicaragua
                                            Nigeria
                                            Papua New Guinea
                                            Rwanda
                                            Senegal
                                            Uganda
                                            Vietnam




Notes : This table shows the set of countries used in Section 2, classified according to their sovereign risk and
income level. Low Risk, Medium Risk, and High Risk denote, respectively, countries are that always had a
rating equal to A or above in the period 1990-2016, countries that ever had a rating below A but above or equal
to B, and countries that ever had a rating below B. Rich, Emerging, and Poor countries denote groups with
high, medium, and low income using the thresholds defined in Uribe and Schmitt-Groh´      e (2017). For details, see
Section 2.




                                                          52
                Table A.8: Fiscal Procyclicality, Income, and Institutional Factors
                                                                      (1)            (2)
                    Rich                                             -0.15          -0.23
                                                                    (0.16)         (0.17)

                    Emerging                                         -0.09          -0.02
                                                                    (0.13)         (0.13)

                    Fiscal Rule                                      0.01           0.00
                                                                    (0.01)         (0.01)

                    Rule of Law                                      0.08           -0.01
                                                                    (0.07)         (0.06)

                    Education Inequality                             0.01           -0.00
                                                                    (0.01)         (0.01)

                    Fuel Production                                  0.00           0.00
                                                                    (0.01)         (0.01)

                    Trade openness                                   -0.00          -0.00
                                                                    (0.00)         (0.00)

                    Output volatility                               9.50           7.19
                                                                    (1.94)         (2.56)

                    Variables of sovereign risk included              Yes            No
                    Observations                                      59             66
                    R2                                               0.521          0.341

Notes : Column (1) shows results from estimating the model fiscal procyclicalityi =  +  Xi + i , where
fiscal procyclicalityi is the correlation between government spending and output from country i, and Xi
contains the following variables: rule of law, measured by the average ranking from the WDI for the period
1990-2016; education inequality, measured by the standard deviation of the percentage of population enrolled by
school level (data source: Barro and Lee, 1996); fiscal rule measured by the number of years with a fiscal rule
(source: IMF); fuel production and trade openness, measured as a percentage of GDP, averaged over the period
of analysis (source: WDI), and output volatility, measured as the standard deviation of GDP for the period
1990-2016 (source: WDI). Column (2) shows the coefficients of the same variables estimated but in an empirical
model that also includes the sovereign risk variables, that is,
fiscal procyclicalityi =  + medium medium riski + high high riski +  Xi + i . For details on the data, see
Section 2.




                                                      53
    Table A.9: Fiscal Procyclicality and Sovereign Risk (measured by default occurrence)
                                               (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
              Default                        0.24            0.22            0.19            0.20
                                             (0.07)          (0.07)          (0.07)          (0.09)

              log(GDP )                                      -0.05
                                                             (0.02)

              Rich                                                          -0.24             -0.19
                                                                             (0.09)          (0.16)

              Emerging                                                        -0.05           0.00
                                                                             (0.07)          (0.13)

              Additional controls              No             No               No             Yes
              Observations                     122            122              122            66
              R2                              0.094          0.125            0.159          0.381

Notes : Results from estimating the model

                             fiscal procyclicalityi =  + default defaulti +  Xi + i

where fiscal procyclicalityi is the correlation between government spending and output from country i, defaulti
is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if country i ever defaulted during the period 1990-2014 (data
source: Uribe and Schmitt-Groh´   e, 2017), Xi is a vector of country-level controls, and i is a random error term.
Standard errors are shown in parentheses. Column (1) estimates the empirical model without controls. Column
(2) includes as controls the log of the average GDP per capita in PPP. Column (3) includes as controls dummies
measuring whether the country is rich or emerging, using the thresholds defined in Uribe and Schmitt-Groh´      e
(2017). Column (4) includes the following additional controls in the vector Xi : rule of law, measured by the
average ranking from the WDI for the period 1990-2016; education inequality, measured by the standard
deviation of the percentage of population enrolled by school level, (data source: Barro and Lee, 1996); fiscal rule
measured by the number of years with a fiscal rule (source: IMF); average fuel production and average trade
openness as a percentage of GDP (source: WDI), and output volatility, measured as the standard deviation of
output for the period 1990-2016 (source: WDI). For details on the data, see Section 2.




                                                        54
Table A.10: Fiscal Procyclicality and Sovereign Risk (measured by number of default episodes)
                                                  (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)
         Number of default episodes             0.24           0.22            0.19           0.20
                                                (0.07)         (0.07)          (0.07)         (0.09)

         log(GDP )                                             -0.05
                                                               (0.02)

         Rich                                                                 -0.24            -0.19
                                                                               (0.09)         (0.16)

         Emerging                                                               -0.05          0.00
                                                                               (0.07)         (0.13)

         Additional controls                      No             No              No             Yes
         Observations                             122            122             122            66
         R2                                      0.094          0.125           0.159          0.381

Notes : Results from estimating the model

                            fiscal procyclicalityi =  + default defaulti +  Xi + i

where fiscal procyclicalityi is the correlation between government spending and output from country i, defaulti
denotes the number of default episodes experienced by country i during the period 1990-2014 (data source Uribe
and Schmitt-Groh´ e, 2017), Xi is a vector of country-level controls, and i is a random error term. Standard
errors are shown in parentheses. Column (1) estimates the empirical model without controls. Column (2)
includes as controls the log of the average GDP per capita in PPP. Column (3) includes as controls dummies
measuring whether the country is rich or emerging, using the thresholds defined in Uribe and Schmitt-Groh´    e
(2017). Column (4) includes the following additional controls in the vector Xi : rule of law, measured by the
average ranking from the WDI for the period 1990-2016; education inequality, measured by the standard
deviation of the percentage of population enrolled by school level (Barro and Lee, 1996, data source:[); fiscal
rule, measured by the number of years with a fiscal rule (source: IMF); average fuel production and average
trade openness as a percentage of GDP (source: WDI), and output volatility, measured as the standard
Deviation of output for the period 1990-2016 (source: WDI). For details on the data, see Section 2.




                                                      55
B           Proofs
Proof of Lemma 1 First note that given that agents are hand-to-mouth, the social period util-
ity from private consumption is the weighted average of the utility of employed and unemployed
households, weighted by their shares in the population, ht and 1 - ht :
                                                              T,e N,e
                 Ut ((cT             N             N
                       j )i[0,1] , (cj )j [0,1] , g ) = ht u ct , ct  + (1 - ht )u cT,u  N,u
                                                                                    t , ct   ,          (B.1)

where cT,et   and cN,e
                    t     denote the consumption in tradable and nontradable goods of employed
households, and ct and cN,u
                      T,u
                                t   denote that of unemployed households. From the households'
optimality condition (4), we can express tradable consumption for any individual j as cN       T N
                                                                                         jt = cjt t ,
with t  N
            = 1-
               
                  N -
                 (pt ) . From the household's budget constraint, this implies that cT       N N
                                                                                    jt (1+ pt t ) =
Yt (hjt ). This means that the government unemployment insurance scheme implies a constant
                                                                                                 cT,u
ratio between the tradable consumption of the unemployed and employed workers ct      T,e = .
                                                                                      t
Under the assumed CRRA period utility function, we obtain the expression for welfare expressed
in the statement of Lemma 1.


Proof of Proposition 1 By contradiction, assume, contrary to the statement of the propo-
                                                  N
sition, that there exists an optimal allocation {gt , bt , Tt , h     
                                                                 t , t }t=0 (henceforth "initial allo-
cation") in which, for some period , h < 1. Given that the allocation features unemploy-
ment, the labor market slackness condition implies that wages are equal to the minimum wage
                           1
    N       1-    cT       
p       =        h -g N 
                         = w. Now consider an alternative allocation with period- employment
given by some h  ^  (h , 1), government spending given by g        ~N = g N  + (h  ~ - h ), lump-sum
transfers given by T ~ = T  - pN  (~ g - g N  ), and the rest of the variables in the initial allocation.
Because of the linear technology, period- nontradable consumption is identical under the alter-
native allocation than in the initial allocation (see equation (13)), implying that the social period
utility from private consumption is at least as good in the alternative allocation as it is in the
                                   ~ -g
initial allocation; that is, u(c , h   ~ )(h ~ )  u(c , h - g N  )(h ) (with equality under perfect
unemployment insurance,  = 1). Moreover, given that the utility from the public good is higher
under the alternative allocation than under the initial allocation (given that g   ~N > g N  and v (.) is
increasing), welfare is unequivocally higher under the alternative allocation than under the initial
allocation. Finally, we show that the alternative allocation is also feasible, contradicting that the
initial allocation is optimal. To see that the alternative allocation is feasible, real wages in this
                                                                                             1
                                                                             1-      cT      
alternative allocation are still equal to the minimum wage, that is,               ^  = w, implying
                                                                                   h -g ^N
that the optimal allocation satisfies the labor market slackness constraint. Given the proposed
lump sum taxes, the alternative allocation satisfies the government budget constraint with the
borrowing policy of the initial allocation b  . Finally, given that in the alternative allocation cT 
and b  are the same as in the initial allocation, the resource constraint is also satisfied.


                                                      56
Proof of Proposition 2
Proof. Denote by V R,Austerity (y T , b; g
                                         ¯N ) the value of repayment under a fiscal program program
that imposes g  ¯ . By definition, we have V R,Austerity (y T , b; 0) = V R (y T , b). Consider (b, y T ) such
                 N

that the government finds optimal to default under no fiscal program. We have V R (y T , b) <
V D (y T ). We have

   V R,Austerity (y T , b; g
                           ¯N ) =     max {u(cT , F (h) - g N )(h) + v (g N ) +  EV (y T , b )          (B.2)
                                    b ,T 0,h1

                                            subject to
                                          cT = y T + q (y T , b )[b - (1 -  )b] + b
           P N (y T , h, g N )¯                                                T
                              g N + b + T = q (y T , b )[b - (1 -  )b] +  PtT yt + P N (y T , h, g
                                                                                                 ¯N )F (h)
                   P N (y T , h, g
                                 ¯N )F (h)  w,

Comparing (B.2) with (19) in the main text, it follows that V R,Austerity (y T , b; g      ¯N )  V R (y T , b).
Since the value of default under the spending cut is unaffected, we can use that V R (y T , b) <
V D (y T ), to show that V R,Austerity (y T , b; g
                                                 ¯N ) < V D (y T ), which completes the first part of the
proof.
    Now consider (b, y T ) such that the government repays under no fiscal program. We have that
V R (y T , b) > V D (y T ). Consider a spending cut such that g   ¯N is arbitrarily close to zero. Using the
                                                                                      R,Austerity T
Inada condition for the utility of public spending, we have that limg         ¯N 0 V                     ¯N ) =
                                                                                                 (y , b; g
-. By continuity, it follows that there exists g          ¯N > 0 such that V R (y T , b) > V D (y T ) >
  R,Austerity T         N
V             (y , b; g
                      ¯ ), completing the proof.




                                                         57
C       Quantitative Analysis
C.1      Additional Tables and Figures from Quantitative Analysis

                          Table C.1: Targeted Moments in Calibration
    Parameter                Value           Target statistic                             Data           Model
    Risky Debt
                             0.907           External debt/GDP                            22.8%          22.6%
     0                       0.3277          Average bond spread                          1.05%          1.09%
     y
                              2.42           Volatility of bond spreads                   1.4%           0.7%
    g                         0.02           Average govt. spending/GDP                   18.1%          18.2%
                              0.19           Volatility of govt. spending/GDP             2.0            2.0
    w
    ¯                        3.068           Increase of unemployment                     2.5%           2.5%

    Risk-free Debt
                             0.98037         External debt/GDP                            22.8%          22.4%
    g                          0.12          Average govt. spending/GDP                   18.1%          18.6%




                 Figure C.1: Welfare Gains: Optimal Policy versus Samuelson Rule


                             5




                             4
                         %




                             3




                             2


                                       0.9      0.95          1       1.05        1.1
                                                           yT

    Notes : This figure shows the welfare gains in the default model of optimal policy relative to the Samuelson
    rule. The solid blue line represents the average conditional welfare gains as a function of y T . For each
    value of y T , we set the debt equal to the average level implied by the ergodic distribution for that y T .
    The horizontal dashed black line is the unconditional gain. Welfare gains are expressed in terms of a
    permanent increase in total consumption.




                                                         58
         Figure C.2: Welfare Gains from Promised Non-State-Contingent Spending Cuts
       0.2                                                       0.2

                                                                   0
         0
                                                                 -0.2
   %




       -0.2




                                                             %
                                                                 -0.4

                                                                 -0.6
       -0.4
                                                                 -0.8

       -0.6                                                       -1
          0.95        1         1.05      1.1        1.15      0             0.5            1             1.5
                               yT                                                  debt
   Note: This figure shows the welfare gains from promising non-state-contingent spending cuts next period
   of 3%, as a function of tradable income y T (left panel) and as function of debt (right panel). Debt is set
   to 20% above its average on the left panel and y T is equal to its unconditional mean on the right panel.
   Welfare gains are expressed as (percentage) increases in current total consumption under the optimal
   policy regime to be indifferent with the promised spending cut.


                 Figure C.3: Welfare Gains from Well-designed Promised Spending Cuts
       0.88                                                      0.9


       0.86                                                      0.8
   %




                                                             %




       0.84                                                      0.7


       0.82                                                      0.6


        0.8                                                      0.5
          -29             -25          -21            -17           -8       -4         0          4           8
                   y (% deviation from average y )                       y (% deviation from average y )
   Note: This figure shows the welfare gains from promising spending cuts of 4% for next period whenever
   total income y  y T + pN y N lies within the range [y, y ]. The left panel plots the welfare gains as function
   of y with y set to 3% above the average total income. The right panel plots the welfare gains as function of
   y with y set to 22% below the average total income. Welfare gains are expressed as (percentage) increases
   in current total consumption under the optimal policy regime to be indifferent with the promised spending
   cut. The current state features debt equal to 20% above its mean and tradable income y T given by its
   unconditional mean.


C.2       Solution Method
Model solution. The model is solved numerically using value function iteration with inter-
polation. Linear interpolation is used for the endowment and cubic spline interpolation for debt
levels. We consider an equidistant grid for tradable endowment of 21 points between 3 standard
deviations below and above the unconditional mean. We use 61 gridpoints for debt for the base-

                                                            59
  Table C.2: Sample of Recession Episodes for Event-time Study on Debt-State Dependency
   Country               Peak       Trough        Recovery       Country            Peak       Trough        Recovery
   Algeria               1980        1981           1983         Mexico             1981        1988           1991
   Algeria               1999        2000           2003         Mexico             1994        1995           1997
   Algeria               2005        2006           2007         Mexico             2000        2003           2005
   Algeria               2008        2009           2014         Mexico             2007        2009           2012
   Argentina             1980        1982           1983         Mexico             2012        2013           2014
   Argentina             1984        1985           1986         Morocco            1980        1981           1982
   Argentina             1987        1990           1992         Morocco            1982        1983           1986
   Argentina             1994        1995           1996         Morocco            1986        1987           1988
   Argentina             1998        2002           2006         Morocco            1991        1993           1994
   Argentina             2008        2009           2010         Morocco            1994        1995           1996
   Argentina             2011        2012           2013         Morocco            1996        1997           1998
   Brazil                1980        1983           1986         Morocco            1998        2000           2003
   Brazil                1987        1992           1994         Nigeria            1980        1987           1990
   Brazil                1995        1996           1997         Nigeria            1990        1995           1996
   Brazil                1997        2003           2007         Nigeria            1997        2002           2004
   Brazil                2008        2009           2010         Panama             1982        1983           1985
   Bulgaria              1996        1997           1998         Panama             1986        1989           1992
   Bulgaria              1998        1999           2004         Panama             1994        1996           1997
   Chile                 1981        1983           1989         Panama             2000        2003           2007
   Chile                 1998        2003           2006         Peru               1981        1983           1986
   Chile                 2008        2009           2012         Peru               1987        1992           1994
   Colombia              1980        1985           1990         Peru               1997        2001           2007
   Colombia              1990        1991           1992         Peru               2008        2009           2010
   Colombia              1992        1993           1994         Philippines        1982        1985           1989
   Colombia              1995        1996           1997         Philippines        1990        1993           1995
   Colombia              1997        1999           2006         Philippines        1997        2002           2004
   Colombia              2008        2010           2011         Philippines        2008        2009           2013
   Dominican Rep.        1981        1982           1983         Rusia              1997        1998           2003
   Dominican Rep.        1983        1985           1987         South Africa       1981        1993           1996
   Dominican Rep.        1987        1988           1989         South Africa       1997        2001           2005
   Dominican Rep.        1989        1991           1993         South Africa       2008        2009           2010
   Dominican Rep.        2000        2001           2002         Thailand           1996        1998           2004
   Dominican Rep.        2002        2004           2006         Thailand           2008        2009           2010
   Dominican Rep.        2008        2009           2010         Thailand           2010        2011           2012
   Ecuador               1981        1983           1986         Tunisia            1981        1982           1984
   Ecuador               1986        1987           1991         Tunisia            1985        1989           1992
   Ecuador               1991        1993           1997         Tunisia            1993        1995           1997
   Ecuador               1998        2000           2004         Tunisia            2001        2002           2006
   Ecuador               2008        2010           2011         Turkey             1987        1989           1990
   El Salvador           1980        1989           1993         Turkey             1990        1991           1993
   Indonesia             1981        1982           1983         Turkey             1993        1994           1996
   Indonesia             1997        1999           2007         Turkey             1998        2001           2005
   Ivory Coast           1980        1994           1996         Turkey             2007        2009           2011
   Ivory Coast           1998        2003           2009         Uruguay            1981        1984           1987
   Ivory Coast           2009        2011           2013         Uruguay            1989        1990           1992
   Korea                 1997        1998           2002         Uruguay            1994        1995           1996
   Korea                 2008        2009           2010         Uruguay            1998        2003           2008
   Lebanon               1988        1989           1991         Venezuela          1980        1985           1987
   Lebanon               1996        2006           2008         Venezuela          1988        1989           1991
   Malaysia              1984        1987           1993         Venezuela          1992        1999           2001
   Malaysia              1997        1998           2000         Venezuela          2001        2003           2006
   Malaysia              2000        2001           2006         Venezuela          2008        2010           2012
   Malaysia              2008        2009           2013

Notes: This table details the sample of recession episodes used in the event-time study presented in Section 5.3.
In this exercise, we use data from 1980 to 2017 for a sample of emerging-market economies, measured by those
included in JPMorgan's EMBI. Countries included in this sample are: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Chile, China, Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Hungary,
Indonesia, Ivory Coast, Korea, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Rusia, South Africa, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay, Venezuela. A recession
episode is defined as a period of annual contraction of GDP per capita. For each of these recessions, we date an
output peak, trough, and recovery point, following Calvo et al. (2014), which capture the dates associated with
the maximum level of economic activity before the recession, the minimum level of economic activity following
the recession, and the moment at which output recovers its trend (for details, see footnote 33).


                                                       60
line model and 101 for the risk-free debt economy. To compute expectations for continuation
values and prices, we use 15 and 11 quadrature points for the endowment realizations, respec-
tively. For each state, conditional on an arbitrary choice of debt, we employ a variant of Brent's
method algorithm included in the IMSL library to find the roots of the implementability condi-
tions in the government's problem. To maximize over debt, we then use the UVMIF routine that
relies on a quadratic interpolation method. We solve for the optimality conditions under four
alternative regimes: with and without a binding wage rigidity constraint, and with and without
zero lump-sum government transfers. We then compute welfare under the four regimes. Our
solution is given by the allocations that deliver the highest utility.


Welfare gains. For the conditional welfare gains in Subsection 5.2, even though the house-
holds' preferences are homothetic, the presence of additive default costs prevents us from applying
the standard formula for welfare gains. For that reason, we turn to value function iteration and
proceed as follows. We are interested in welfare gains expressed as a permanent increase in
private and public consumption that would leave the household indifferent between living in the
economy with a Samuelson rule and switching to the economy with the optimal policy. For a
given initial state and an arbitrary value for the welfare gain, we iterate on the value functions
for the Samuelson rule, keeping policy functions and default strategies fixed. Upon convergence,
we calculate the sup norm to the difference between the newly computed Samuelson value func-
tion and the value function under the optimal policy evaluated at the selected initial state. If
the norm is lower than 1e-5 in absolute value, we stop and report the welfare gain. If instead
it is positive and larger than 1e-5 , we reduce the value of the welfare gain and iterate again
on the value function. Otherwise, we increase the welfare gain and iterate again. We repeat
this procedure for all the initial states of interest. For unconditional welfare gains, we proceed
in a similar fashion integrating over all states by using an asymptotic distribution of (y T , b)
and  , constructed by taking the associated state from the 10, 000th period in each of 10, 000
simulations.


C.3     Data Used in the Calibration
The following data were used in the model's calibration for Spain:

  1. Tradable endowment process: estimated using data on the value added in the agricultural
     and manufacturing sector, at constant prices, log-quadratically detrended, period 1980-
     2011. Data source: National accounts in the National Statistics Office (INE).

  2. Ratio of tradable output to total output: average ratio of the value added in the agricultural
     and manufacturing sector over total value added, in current prices, period 1980-2011. Data
     source: INE.


                                                61
  3. Ratio of debt to GDP: total gross debt of the general government held by external creditors,
     period 1996-2015. Data source: OECD government.

  4. Bond spreads: difference between Spanish and German 5-year sovereign bond yields, period:
     2000-2015. Data source: Bank of Spain and Deutsche Bundesbank.

  5. Government spending: ratio of general government final consumption expenditure to GDP,
     in current prices, period 1996-2015. Data source: WDI.

  6. Unemployment: unemployment rate, period 1996-2015. Data source: INE.

   In addition, we calibrated the risk-free rate to match the average annual gross yield on 5-year
German government bonds over the period 2000-2015.




                                               62
