                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THREATS TO CENTRAL BANK INDEPENDENCE:
                   HIGH-FREQUENCY IDENTIFICATION WITH TWITTER

                                          Francesco Bianchi
                                             Thilo Kind
                                            Howard Kung

                                        Working Paper 26308
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26308


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2019




We thank Svetlana Bryzgalova, Simon Gilchrist, Marco Grotteria, Refet Gurkaynak, Cosmin Ilut,
Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, and seminar participants at different institutions for helpful comments
and suggestions. We thank Will Jennings from PredictIt for sharing data from the website. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Francesco Bianchi, Thilo Kind, and Howard Kung. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Threats to Central Bank Independence: High-Frequency Identification with Twitter
Francesco Bianchi, Thilo Kind, and Howard Kung
NBER Working Paper No. 26308
September 2019, Revised January 2020
JEL No. E52,E58,G1

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper presents market-based evidence that President Trump influences expectations about monetary
policy. We use tick-by-tick fed funds futures data and a collection of Trump tweets criticizing the
conduct of monetary policy and consistently advocating that the Fed lower interest rates. Identification
exploits a short time window around the precise timestamp for each tweet. The average effect on the
expected fed funds rate is negative and statistically significant, with an average cumulative effect of
around -10 bps and a peak of -18.5 bps at the longest horizon. We conclude that market participants
do not perceive the Fed as fully independent.


Francesco Bianchi                                  Howard Kung
Social Sciences Building, 201B                     London Business School
Department of Economics                            Regent's Park, Sussex Place
Duke University                                    London NW1 4SA
Box 90097                                          United Kingdom
Durham, NC 27708-0097                              hkung@london.edu
and CEPR
and also NBER
francesco.bianchi@duke.edu

Thilo Kind
London Business School
Regent's Park
Sussex Place
London
United Kingdom
tkind@london.edu
1         Introduction
A general consensus for the effective conduct of monetary policy that emerged over the past
few decades is to allow central banks to freely pursue objectives independently of political
influence. Narrative accounts over the past century suggest that establishing central bank
independence was pivotal for containing inflation by curbing political incentives for expan-
sionary monetary policy. Indeed, cross-country evidence finds that a monetary authority
with greater autonomy is associated with lower and more stable inflation.1 In the 1960s
and 1970s, the Johnson and Nixon administrations pressured the Federal Reserve chairman
to keep interest rates low, eschewing price stability. This extended period of expansionary
monetary policy contributed to the Great Inflation of the 1970s. To fight inflation, greater
independence was established in the late 1970s by defining a dual mandate of price stabil-
ity and maximum employment followed by the creation of an arms-length relationship that
insulated the Fed from interference by the executive branch. The enhanced autonomy for in-
strument setting allowed the Fed to aggressively target and stabilize inflation in the ensuing
three decades.
        The global financial crisis in 2008 significantly weakened public confidence in central
banks around the world.2 The unconventional policies implemented in the aftermath of the
financial crisis further increased scrutiny on central banks. The widespread public criticism
of central banks around the world threaten the autonomy established in the previous decades.
President Trump has been voracious in his frequent attacks on Fed policy. For instance, on
April 18, 2018, President Trump launched his first attack on Fed policy by tweeting, "Russia
and China are playing the Currency Devaluation game as the U.S. keeps raising interest
rates. Not acceptable!" Figure 1 illustrates the impact of the message on the expected
fed funds rate implied by futures prices in a 30-minute window. The futures contracts are
stratified based on the number of FOMC announcements occurring before the corresponding
expiration month. The change in expected rates is measured as percentage points of the
average absolute change in expected rates following an FOMC announcement (around 2.2
    1
    Some examples include Alesina and Summers (1993) and Grilli, Masciandaro, and Tabellini (1991).
    2
    Kohn (2013) discusses the erosion of confidence in the Fed in the aftermath of the financial crisis measured
by public polls.



                                                       1
bps). The expected fed funds rate decreases noticeably across all three groups of contracts,
with an increasing magnitude with respect to maturity, indicating that market participants
expect that the President impacts monetary policy persistently.
      We systematically investigate market perceptions of threats to central bank independence
during the Trump presidency with a high-frequency event study approach that exploits his
extensive use of Twitter as a primary tool of public communication. We scrape his account
for tweets that exclusively relate to the Federal Reserve which unequivocally advocate looser
monetary policy, hearkening back to the political pressure exerted on the Fed during the
Johnson and Nixon administrations. The impact of these tweets on expectations of the fed
funds rate is examined by using tick-by-tick data on fed funds futures contracts.
      Our identification scheme exploits a small time window around a single second precision
time-stamp on the tweets. The payoff of these futures contracts depends on the average
federal funds rate computed in the final month before expiry. As the fed funds target rate
is set at the eight predetermined FOMC meetings per year, we classify futures contracts of
different maturities based on the number of future meetings that precede the computation of
the payoff (i.e., final month of the contract). For each contract classification, we run a linear
regression of the expected fed funds rate, implied by the futures price, on a dummy variable
indicating five seconds before and five minutes after a tweet, including a time fixed effect to
control for all other factors that influence expectations about future monetary policy. For
the contracts whose payoffs occur strictly after one or more future meetings, the tweets have
a negative and statistically significant impact on the expected fed funds target. The average
effect across all contracts is around -0.25 bps per tweet and the cumulative effect is -10 bps,
which is sizable considering that the typical change in the target rate at each FOMC meeting
is   ¨25 bps. The expected fed funds rates at longer horizons are more negatively affected by
the tweets than the shorter horizon ones, with a peak of -18.5 bps at the longest horizon.
These results illustrate how markets believe that the President is influencing the conduct of
monetary policy in a persistent way.
      In alternative specifications, event windows ranging from 5 to 60 minutes and a different
criteria for selecting tweets are considered, all yielding similar results in terms of significance
and magnitude as our benchmark specification. As the target rate is only changed during the


                                                2
FOMC meetings, outstanding short maturity futures contracts that expire before the next
FOMC announcement provide a control group for microstructure and liquidity effects that
are potentially correlated with the tweets. The estimated reactions from the tweets implied
by these untreated contracts are negligible and not statistically significant which further
support how political pressure from the President is causing changes market expectations
about monetary policy.
   A joint estimation is conducted in which the impact of the tweets on the term structure
of expected target rates is obtained by considering a linear system of pricing equations
that collectively uses information from contracts of different maturities. This estimation
procedure also finds that the effect of the tweets is sizable and increases with the horizon,
highlighting the persistence in the revisions of expectations. Comparing the changes in
expectations at different horizons provides valuable information to discern if the tweets
impact the expected timing of an anticipated monetary policy change or if they instead lead
to a comprehensive revision in the expected course of monetary policy. We find evidence for
the latter scenario, both in the contract-specific estimation and in the joint estimation.
   We document that the tweets criticizing the Fed are not systematically related to changes
in stock market valuations. An insignificant stock market response helps to assuage the
potential concern that the revision in expected interest rates around the selected events
arise through the dependency of the target rate on output and the stock market through
the Fed reaction function, as opposed to through direct political influence. Tweets by the
president that comment on trade and tariff policy have, on average, a negligible effect on
expectations of the fed funds rate at all horizons, reflecting how his views on these policies
vary substantially depending on the trade partner, industry, or time period. In contrast, the
tweets directed at Fed policy unequivocally advocate lower interest rates, allowing for sharper
identification in our main empirical analysis examining threats to central bank independence.
   Overall, we find strong evidence that the consistent pressure applied by President Trump
to pursue more expansionary monetary policy is manifested in market expectations of a
lower target rate, implying a steady erosion in central bank independence over the course of
his presidency. Our findings that market participants do not perceive the Federal Reserve
as fully independent from the executive branch has indirect, but important, consequences


                                              3
for the actual autonomy of the central bank. Evidence that the Fed closely monitors and is
affected by market expectations of its own actions (e.g., Faust (2016) and Vissing-Jorgensen
(2019)) implies that even if President Trump does not directly influence Fed decisions, his
political pressure can still affect policy indirectly by changing market expectations regarding
the Fed.
   The methodological approach of our paper relates to the literature identifying monetary
policy shocks using high-frequency data (e.g., Kuttner (2001), Cochrane and Piazzesi (2002),
Faust, Swanson, and Wright (2004), G¨
                                    urkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2007), and Nakamura
and Steinsson (2018)) and papers studying the effect of these shocks on interest rates using
a high-frequency approach (e.g., G¨
                                  urkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005a), G¨
                                                                        urkaynak, Sack,
and Swanson (2005b), Beechey and Wright (2009), Swanson (2011), Hanson and Stein (2015),
Gertler and Karadi (2015), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011), Swanson (2017),
Gilchrist, Yue, and Zakrajsek (2019)). We follow a similar methodology as these papers, but
the objective of our paper is to identify violations of central bank independence. Like these
papers we measure expectations of the fed funds target using high-frequency futures prices.
The unique approach of our paper is to use tweets by President Trump that pressure the
Fed to lower interest rates as the news component. Constructing a tight window around the
precise time-stamp of each tweet, we identify the impact of the tweet on expectations of the
target fed funds rate with an event study approach. In ongoing work, the effect of a broader
set of Trump tweets are examined on different asset classes.
   Alesina (1988), Grilli, Masciandaro, and Tabellini (1991), Cukierman, Web, and Neyapti
(1992), Alesina and Summers (1993), Acemoglu, Johnson, Querubin, and Robinson (2008),
and Binder (2018) are examples of papers constructing indices of central bank indepen-
dence across countries that capture different forms of autonomy (e.g., legal, operational, or
economic). This literature examines the impact of the degree of independence on macroeco-
nomic outcomes. We differ from this literature in that we identify precise threats to central
bank independence using high-frequency financial data and messages from the social media
account of the President.
   Our findings complement the literature examining the effect of informal communication
of policymakers between FOMC meetings on equity markets. Lucca and Moench (2015)


                                              4
document a pre-announcement drift in stock returns Cieslak, Morse, and Vissing-Jorgensen
(2018) study returns over the FOMC cycle, and Ai and Bansal (2018) provide a revealed
preference theory for explaining the equity premium around the announcements. The focal
point of our paper is to identify particular instances of how direct pressure from the President
affects expected policy decisions in future FOMC meetings.
    The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the data used in our analysis.
Section 3 characterizes the high-frequency identification procedure and presents the baseline
estimates. Section 4 presents the joint estimation results. Section 5 compares the rela-
tive importance of Fed tweets with respect to FOMC announcements and trade tweets and
presents external corroborating evidence. Section 6 concludes.



2     Data Description
Our main empirical analysis uses three high-frequency data sources: Tweets by President
Trump, prices on fed funds futures contracts, and prices on the S&P 500 index.
    The set of tweets are collected from the personal Twitter account of President Trump
(@realDonaldTrump). Each observation includes the text and the accurate to the second
time-stamp. The benchmark analysis focuses on critical tweets by the President directed at
the Fed that explicitly or implicitly advocate lower interest rates. To this end, the following
selection criteria is implemented. First, tweets with at least one of the following keywords
are selected: `fed', `rate', `jerome', `jay', `powell'. Word extensions stemming from the
keywords are also included (e.g., `federal reserve' and `fed chairman' are both captured by
the keyword `fed'). Second, the following filters are then applied to the selected tweets.
Tweets unrelated to the conduct of monetary policy (e.g., trade, appointment of Fed board
members) are eliminated. Tweets that occur after an initial tweet, release of related news
articles, or interviews by the President within the narrow event window used in our event
study are dropped to avoid double counting and potential contamination. Appendix A
provides additional details of the tweet selection criteria.
    Following the methodology of G¨
                                  urkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005b) and Nakamura and
Steinsson (2018), market expectations of the future fed funds rate are extracted using tick-


                                               5
by-tick trade data of 30-day federal funds futures on the Chicago Board of Trade Exchange
(XCBT) obtained from the CBE. Price, volume, contract expiration, entry date, second
precision time-stamps of trades, and the trading sequence are observed. Observations with
zero volume, indicating that the trade was canceled, are dropped from the sample. If there
are multiple trades of the same contract within the same second, the trade with the lowest
sequence number is used (i.e., the earliest trade within that particular second).
    Intraday prices for the S&P 500 index ETF SPY (S&P 500 from now on) are obtained
from the Trade and Quote (TAQ) database. The raw data is cleaned following Barndorff-
Nielsen, Hansen, Lunde, and Shephard (2008) and Bollerslev, Li, and Xue (2018). Our
sample period starts on the announcement day of the presidential campaign of Donald Trump
(June 16, 2015) and ends on the last day for observations on futures prices are available in
our dataset (November 2019).



3     Threats to Central Bank Independence
This section identifies how critical tweets by President Trump directed at the Fed advocating
lower interest rates affect market expectations of the future path of monetary policy.


3.1    High-Frequency Identification

We begin by presenting the high-frequency identification strategy that exploits the at the
second accurate time-stamp of each tweet and the tick-by-tick federal funds futures prices
across varying maturities. Related news articles and interviews are not used in our tests given
that these formats typically contain a wide range of topics that can potentially contaminate
the analysis. Our selection criteria also excludes tweets for which such news arrives in the
event window.
    Market expectations of the fed funds rate are inferred from the traded price of the corre-
sponding futures contracts. Fed funds futures are contracts that reflect the market opinion
of what the average federal funds rate will be in the future. The price quotation for this
type of contract is 100 minus the arithmetic average of the daily effective federal funds rate
during the expiration month. Federal funds future contracts are financially settled on the

                                              6
first business day following the last trading day. For an expiring contract, the last trading
day corresponds to the last business day in the delivery month of the futures contract. The
corresponding daily federal funds overnight rate is provided by the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York. On weekends or holidays, this rate is equal to the previous reported rate on a
business day. The effective federal funds rate is the weighted average of all transactions for
a group of federal funds brokers.
   The federal funds future rate associated with a contract that expires i¡month ahead in
the future can be decomposed into two components:


                                      F F Ft,i    EtF F Ri   t,i,

where F F Ft,i is the i¡month ahead futures rate at time t, Et denotes the expectation
conditional on all the available information up to time t, F F Ri is the average of the daily
effective federal funds rate for each day of month i, and t,i is a bias term that varies with
the forecast horizon. The bias term can capture risk premia and variations in the effective
funds rate due to regulation requirements.
   We are interested in measuring the revision of expectations about the behavior of the
Federal Reserve following a tweet or other relevant information, as opposed to expectations
themselves. Our focus is on the fed funds target, F F T , the component that is directly under
the control of the Federal Reserve. The futures rate, F F Ft,i , depends on the average Federal
Funds target rate and the discrepancy between the average target and the average effective
Federal Funds rate in the final month of the futures contract:

                                                                                 
                     F F Ft,i    Et      FFTi         Et      F F Ri ¡ F F T i        t,i.   (1)


   Following the methodology of G¨
                                 urkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005b) and Nakamura
and Steinsson (2018), the baseline results assume that the tweets do not systematically
affect covariances between the pricing kernel and the fed funds rates at short horizons and
the discrepancy between the effective and target rates. Under these two assumptions, the
revision in expectations following a tweet can be obtained from the change in futures interest



                                                      7
rates:
                                               
                                  Et F F T i        F F Ft,i.                               (2)

Thus, futures rates can be used to recover changes in expectations at different horizons.
     The identifying assumption of our high-frequency approach is that no other systematic
shocks to market expectations about the future federal funds rates occur within a particular
time window around the tweet. Figure 2 highlights how two trades are selected for measuring
changes in the expected federal funds rate target. The symbols        ¢, ¥, ¥     represent an
observed price due to a trade. All trades that fall outside the outer windows, t   T0 , t ¡ T3 ,
or within the inner window, T1      t   T2, are disregarded. Of the two subsets, rT0, T1s and
rT2, T3s, the prices that satisfy arg maxttptuttT and arg mint tpt utT are selected ¢. The
                                                 T 1
                                                   0
                                                                    tT  3
                                                                        2

observations obtained are the closest trades before and after the tweet occurring at time 0.
     In the benchmark estimation, the pre-event outer window is between T0       240 min and
T1    0.1 min before the tweet.   This ensures that the last observation before the tweet is
not impacted by the event itself, but still is as recent as possible. In contrast to other high-
frequency studies, there is less concern for confounding information to arrive beforehand,
given that tweets are the first-hand source. The post-event outer window starts at T2        
5 min, which gives investors time to react and trade on the news.     The cutoffs at T0 ¡ T1 
240 min and T3 ¡ T2    120 min ensure that only contracts with recent trades are considered.
     We chose a relatively short time window for our benchmark analysis to make sure to
isolate the effects of the tweets that we are interested in. President Trump can sometimes
engage in a long series of tweets related to different topics. A short time window minimizes
the possibility that other tweets fall inside the window. We also considered alternative
windows and found very similar and in many cases stronger results. The results are reported
in Subsection 3.4 below.


3.2      Benchmark Estimates

We estimate revisions in expectations across different horizons caused by the selected tweets.
The horizon is measured in terms of the number of FOMC meetings a certain contract is
exposed to. Analyzing the term structure of expectations is an important dimension of


                                               8
our analysis because most of our selected tweets do not coincide with a month in which an
FOMC meeting is scheduled after the tweet. The discrete nature of the target rate changes
on meeting dates implies that the revisions in expectations caused by a tweet occurring in a
month without a scheduled meeting or afterwards would only be reflected in longer maturity
contracts that expire after the next meeting and not in shorter maturity contracts. Indeed,
we find that the price of short maturity contracts that expire before the next meeting are
unaffected by the tweets. Comparing the changes in expectations at different horizons also
provides information on whether the tweets affect the expected timing of a monetary policy
change that is already anticipated, or, on the contrary, they lead to a comprehensive revision
in the expected course of monetary policy. Overall, we find evidence for the latter hypothesis:
Tweets lead to a persistent decline in expected target rates with a magnitude that increases
with the horizon.
      As the federal funds target is set on eight predetermined FOMC meetings per year,
we categorize futures contracts across different maturities based on the number of FOMC
meetings between the time of the tweet and the contract expiration.3 If the tweets move
expectations about Fed actions in the next FOMC meeting, this should be reflected in the
price of the first contract fully exposed to this meeting. If markets instead do not expect
rate changes in the next meeting, but instead that downward adjustments will occur in
subsequent meetings, then the price of the contracts exposed to multiple FOMC meetings
would be expected to decline, while the price of short term contracts would be unchanged.
Finally, the average change in the expected federal funds rate across time horizons can be
obtained from contracts of varying maturities that are exposed to a different number of
FOMC meetings or by pooling all contracts together in the statistical analysis.
      A contract classified by exposure number j is selected to simultaneously have the shortest
time to expiration and at least the corresponding number of FOMC meetings j scheduled
before the beginning of the expiration month. This criterion makes sure that the shortest
maturity contract that is exposed to at least j FOMC meetings is selected. Then, for each
tweet and FOMC exposure, two trades are chosen to measure the change in the expected
federal funds rate. The first observation is the last trade five seconds before the tweet and
  3
      The times and dates of the FOMC meetings are obtained from the Federal Reserve Board website.



                                                    9
the second observation is the earliest trade five minutes after the tweet. For those trades,
the average distance to the pre-event window, T1 , is seven minutes. The average distance
between T2 and the post-event trade is 14 minutes. This highlights that most selected trades
occur within a narrow time window, validating the high-frequency approach taken. The
average number of trades in the pre-event outer window is 54 and 67 in the post-event outer
window.
   For each FOMC meeting exposure, the event study regresses the expected federal funds
rate, implied by the futures prices, on a dummy variable indicating whether the observation
is before or after a tweet, including fixed effects, according to:


                         Et¡i¨ rrt s     D¨   Fixed Effects   ,                              (3)


where Et¡i¨ rrt s is the market expectation of the federal funds rate for the month when the
corresponding future contract expires. The subscript    ¨ indicates whether the observation
is from the pre- or post-event outer window. For this benchmark specification, we only
include time fixed effect to control for all other factors that can affect the interest rate at a
particular point in time. The time fixed effect is the same right before and right after the
tweet. This guarantees that the estimated coefficient  captures the marginal effect of the
tweet, controlling for all other information available around the time of the tweet.
   The regression results sorted by contract exposure to the number of FOMC meetings j
are reported in Table 1. A column labelled j corresponds to the contract with the earliest
expiration month that is fully exposed to at least j meetings at each point in time. The
coefficient of interest,  , captures the average revision in expectations of the federal funds
rate around each tweet for a particular horizon. The coefficient is negative for all contracts
exposed to at least one meeting, with an increasing magnitude as the meeting exposure
j rises. The results for the short maturity contracts exposed to only one FOMC meeting
imply that the expected interest rate declines by 0.175 bps following a tweet. The change
in the expected interest rate for a contract exposed to ten FOMC meetings (a contract that
expires more than one year later), declines by 0.578 bps. For seven out of ten contracts,
the coefficients are statistically different from zero at the 5% level. Excluding zero maturity


                                               10
contract, every coefficient is statistically different from zero at the 10% level, and three of
them are statistically different from zero at the 1% level. Contracts that expire before the
next FOMC meeting provide a useful control group for potential microstructure and liquidity
effects that are potentially correlated with the tweets. The estimated coefficient for the zero
exposure contract is not statistically different from zero, ruling out potential microstructure
effects driving our main results. Overall, these estimates across contract categories provide
strong evidence that our selected tweets by President Trump influence market expectations
about the future path of interest rates.
   To interpret the economic magnitude of these effects, note that the typical change in the
fed funds target is ¨25 bps. Consider an example with two possible scenarios: The rates will
remain unchanged or they will be cut by 25 bps. Then, a decline of 0.578 bps corresponds
to a 2.3% increase in the probability of a 25 bps target cut, which is a relevant change in the
probability assigned to an expansionary monetary policy change. Furthermore, the reported
coefficient is the average effect of each tweet. The average cumulative effect is around -10
bps, with a peak of -18.5 bps at the longest horizon (i.e., contracts exposed to 10 meetings).
We will return to the issue of the relative magnitude of these effects in Section 5.
   In Table 2, we extend the analysis pooling all contracts together and studying the effects
on the stock market. Panel A of Table 2 reports the estimates of the average change in
expectations of the fed funds rate pooling across all ten contracts with a nonzero meeting
exposure at each point in time. The event study regresses the expected federal funds rate
across different horizons on a dummy variable indicating if the observation is before or after
a tweet:


                         Et¡i¨ rrt s     D¨   Fixed Effects                                (4)


Et¡i¨ rrt s is the market expectation of the federal funds rate for the month when the cor-
responding future contract expires and the subscript    ¨ denotes whether the observation
is from the pre- or post-event outer window. Fixed effects control for the event time and
the contracts across varying meeting exposures. We find that the average effect is negative
and highly statistically significant in the pooled estimation. The cumulative average effect


                                              11
implied by the pooling regression is around -10 bps, consistent with the contract-specific
regressions.
   Panel B of Table 2 contains the estimates of the average effect of the tweets on the stock
market using intraday transaction price data for the S&P 500 index. Similar to Panel A,
the regression projects the log index price on a dummy variable which indicates whether
the observation is before or after a tweet. The regression using extended trading hours
include tweets between 4:00 am and 8:00 pm Eastern Standard Time (EST). The second
specification only considers tweets during trading hours between 9:30 am and 4 pm EST.
In both specifications, the average stock price reactions to the tweets are not statistically
significant, which contrasts with the significant negative interest rate reactions reported in
Panel A (and by contract meeting exposure in Table 1).
   Panel C of Table 2 reports the correlations between the change in the stock price and
the change in expected federal funds rate in the event window around the selected tweets.
This is obtained by regressing the change in the expected fed funds rate on the change in
the stock market. For each contract meeting exposure, the correlation is close to zero and
not statistically significant. An insignificant stock market reaction that is also uncorrelated
with the change in expected fed funds rates around the selected events helps to alleviate the
potential concern that the tweets criticizing the Fed are associated with bad news about the
economy, leading to expectations of monetary policy easing through the dependency of the
Fed reaction function on output and the stock market (e.g., Rigobon and Sack (2003)), as
opposed to market expectations of lower rates attributed directly to political pressure.


3.3    Economic Interpretation

Our main results presented in Tables 1 and 2 demonstrate that political pressure from tweets
advocating lower rates significantly affect expectations about the fed funds rate. The revision
in expectations caused by the tweets is present across all contract horizons with an effect
that increases over time. These dynamic effects indicate that the tweets do not simply affect
expectations about the timing of changes that markets were already anticipating, but instead
move market expectations about the stance of monetary policy.
   Suppose that right before the tweet markets expect that the Fed will cut rates in six

                                              12
months, but not in the near future. If a tweet only induces a change in expectations about
the timing of the already anticipated interest rate cut, a revision in expectations would be
observed at only short horizons. Panel A of Figure 3 illustrates this example. Our estimates
documenting that the revision in expectations increases with the time horizon indicates that
the revision in expectations is more pervasive. Markets are not sure if the Fed will succumb
to the political pressure in the immediate future (e.g., during the next FOMC meeting), but
they assign an increasing probability to this outcome occurring at some point in the future.
Panel B of Figure 3 provides a depiction of this alternative example. As in the previous
case from Panel A, before the tweet, markets expect that the Fed will cut interest rates
in six months. However, now the tweet generates a decline in expectations both at short
and long horizons, implying that the tweet does not merely change the timing of an already
anticipated decline.
   More broadly, our findings suggest that market participants do not perceive the Fed as a
fully independent institution immune from political pressure from the executive branch. It
is beyond the scope of this paper to test the veracity of these beliefs. The objective of our
empirical exercise is to use a high-frequency identification strategy with a short time window
around the tweets to control for the many factors that can cause changes in expectations
about the conduct of monetary policy. Testing if the Fed actually succumbed to the requests
of the President is a substantially more challenging task in light of the multitude of factors
that the central bank analyzes prior to setting policy.
   The fact that market participants may not perceive the Fed as autonomous from the
executive branch can nevertheless influence Fed actions. Faust (2016) and Vissing-Jorgensen
(2019) show that the Federal Reserve pays close attention to market expectations about
its own actions. FOMC members often discuss the importance of not deviating from such
expectations. Indeed, one of the cited reasons behind the interest rate cut in July was that
markets were anticipating a cut, and not following through would effectively be a stance of
contractionary monetary policy (Timiraos (2019)). Therefore, even if the Trump threats only
have a direct impact on market expectations, they can still indirectly affect policy due to how
the Fed factors in market expectations when deciding on monetary policy. Vissing-Jorgensen
(2019) argues that FOMC members have an interest in moving market expectations to gain


                                              13
the upper hand in internal policy meetings and the tweets from the President might have a
similar effect.


3.4     Robustness

This section illustrates the robustness of our main results to alternative specifications. Table
3 presents estimates using different event windows (i.e., varying the inner window, rT1 , T2 s,
defined in Section 3.1) for the regressions of each contract meeting exposure in Equation 3.
Panels A to F report the estimates from windows where the pre-event window ranges from
0.1 minutes to 10 minutes before and the post-event window varies between 5 minutes to 60
minutes after. Like the benchmark, in all of the alternative specifications we find negative
and statistically significant estimates for the majority of the slope coefficients across contract
meeting exposures, with an increasing pattern across horizon.
   We also consider a less stringent tweet selection relative to the benchmark case. For
example, under the alternative selection criteria, tweets that do not directly criticize the
conduct of monetary policy, but are indirectly related are included. Appendix A contains
a detailed description of the selection criteria for both the benchmark and the alternative
case. Table 4 reports estimates of Equation 3 for each contract meeting exposure with
the benchmark event window but under the alternative tweet selection criteria. The slope
coefficients are also negative and most are statistically significant with a generally increasing
magnitude across horizon, similar to the benchmark case.
   Finally, Table 5 considers a placebo test where 100 randomly selected tweets in the same
sample period but excluding tweets that are selected under the benchmark and alternative
criteria are used to estimate Equation 3. We repeat the random selection 100 times and
report the average of the 100 estimation results. We find that the slope coefficients across
contract meeting exposure are all close to zero and not statistically significant, confirming
that tweets not related to monetary policy do not have any effect on market expectations
about future monetary policy.




                                               14
4     Joint Estimation
Section 3.1 estimates a term structure of expectations at each horizon individually by using
futures contracts sorted on the number of FOMC meetings affecting the payoff of a contract.
For each tweet, we estimate the revision in the expected fed funds rate for a particular
contract whose payoff is fully exposed to a certain number of FOMC meetings. In this
section, we estimate the revision in expectations by considering the price movements of all
contracts jointly. The revision in expectations implied by a contract that is exposed to four
FOMC meetings is not independent of the revision of expectations implied by a contract that
is exposed to only three FOMC meetings. Thus, we can extract more information about the
change in expectations by analyzing all price movements collectively. This joint estimation
procedure also allows us to infer the shadow price of contracts for which a price movement
is not observed because the change in expectations for a certain month can be inferred by
the movement in the prices of contracts with contiguous maturities.


4.1     Methodology

Contracts with different maturities provide evidence on the term structure of expectations.
The joint estimation needs to account for the number of scheduled FOMC meetings, before
and within the settlement month, but also for the relation between prices of contracts with
different maturities. Following the decomposition in Section 3.1, the fed funds future rate is
expressed as:
                                                                                 
                      F F Ft,i    Et      FFTi        Et      F F Ri ¡ F F T i        i,
where i is the month of interest. Importantly, we use i                 0 to denote the current month,
i  1 to denote the next month, and so on. There are four distinct cases to consider which
depend on the time between the tweet occurring at time t and the next FOMC meeting.

    1. Time t is included in month i and no FOMC meeting occurs during month i or the
      FOMC meeting for month i already occurred when the tweet was observed. This case




                                                     15
  is possible only if i  0. Thus, we have:

                                                  m0 ¡ dt            
                     F F Ft,0      m
                                   dt
                                      F F R0,t¡  
                                                   m
                                                         Et F F R0,t    0 ,
                                       0                       0


  where dt marks the day and time of the tweet, m0 is the number of days in month 0,
                                                                                              
  F F R0,t¡ is the realized average FFR for the days before the tweet, and Et F F R0,t 
  is the expected average fed funds rate over the remaining part of the month. Given
  that the realized average rate up to time t cannot change in response to the tweet, the
  term F F R0,t¡ cancels out when taking the difference.

2. Time t is included in month i and the FOMC meeting occurs during month i. This
  case is possible only if i  0. Thus, we have:

                                  d0 ¡ dt               m0 ¡ d0        I
        F F Ft,0   m
                   dt
                      F F R0,t¡  
                                    m
                                         Et F F R0,t   
                                                          m
                                                               Et F F R0   0 ,
                         0                    0                                 0


  where d0 marks the day of the FOMC meeting scheduled to occur in the current month,
               
  Et F F R0,t  is the expected average FFR over the remaining part of the month but
                                                                                    
                                                                                       I
  before the FOMC meeting scheduled for that month, and Et F F R0 is the expected
  average FFR over the period between the FOMC meeting scheduled for the month and
  the end of the month.

3. Time t is not included in month i and no FOMC meeting occurs during month i:

                                                                     
                                        F F Ft,i    Et      F F Ri        i ,
                     
  where Et F F Ri is the expected average effective federal funds rate over month i
  formed at time t.

4. Time t is not included in month i and month i includes an FOMC meeting:

                                      di             mi ¡ di        I
                        F F Ft,i      mi
                                         Et F F Ri  
                                                       mi
                                                            Et F F Ri   i ,

                     
  where Et F F Ri is the expected average effective federal funds rate in month i for the


                                                    16
     period before the FOMC meeting, di is the day in month i during which the FOMC
                                                                             
                                                                                    I
     meeting is scheduled, mi is the number of days in month i, and Et F F Ri is the
     expected average effective federal funds rate in month i for the period between the
     FOMC meeting and the end of the month.

   As in the individual contract regressions from Section 1, the identifying assumption is
that the term i and the difference between the effective federal funds rate and the target
rate are not affected by the tweet. Under this assumption, we can then take the difference of
the federal funds rate immediately before and after the tweet to derive the implied change
in expectations. The four cases described above lead to the following four conditions that
can be used to infer the change in expectations at different horizons:

  1. Time t is included in month i and no FOMC meeting occurs during month i or the
     FOMC meeting for month i had already occurred when the tweet was released:


                                          F F Ft,0     0.

     This condition implies that we should not observe a price jump for the contract that
     expires in the current month if in the month of the tweet there is not an FOMC meeting
     scheduled to occur after the tweet. We saw in Table 1 that this result holds in the
     data: The tweets do not move the price of the contracts that are not exposed to any
     FOMC meeting.

  2. Time t is included in month i and the FOMC meeting occurs during month i:


                               F F Ft,0
                                             ¡ d0 E F F T I  .
                                           m0m     t      0
                                                  0


     This condition implies that if a tweet occurs in a month in which an FOMC meeting is
     scheduled to occur after the tweet, we can use the change in the federal funds rate for
     the a contract that expires in the current month to derive what markets expect will
     occur in the FOMC meeting.




                                             17
  3. Time t is not included in month i and no FOMC meeting occurs during month i:

                                                                                
                                    F F Ft,i          Et               F F T i .


     In this case, given that there is no FOMC meeting in month i, any revision in expecta-
     tions is necessarily driven by a change in the target F F T implemented in the previous
     month. Therefore,
                                                                                    
                                                                            I
                                   F F Ft,i          Et             F F T i¡1 ,
                           
                       I
     where Et F F T i¡1 is the change in the expected average FFT following the FOMC
     meeting of the previous month, i ¡ 1 (there are not two months in a row without a
     FOMC meeting).

  4. Time t is not included in month i and the FOMC meeting occurs during month i:


                      F F Ft,i   m
                                 di
                                    Et
                                               
                                                  F F T i
                                                                        ¡ di E
                                                                      mim                      I
                                                                                       F F T i .
                                                                                       
                                                                              t
                                        i                                   i


     Because of cases 1 and 2, if month i is the first month with an FOMC meeting since
     the tweet, the equation above simplifies to:


                                 F F Ft,i
                                                     ¡ di E F F T I  .
                                                   mim     t      i
                                                             i


     Instead, if the most recent FOMC meeting was k months ago, the equation becomes


                     F F Ft,i   m
                                di
                                   Et
                                            
                                            F F T i¡k
                                                         I          
                                                                           ¡ di E
                                                                         mim
                                                                                          
                                                                                                I
                                                                                          F F T i .
                                                                                 t
                                    i                                           i



   Therefore, the four set of equilibrium conditions can all be expressed in terms of expec-
tations about policy decisions that will be taken in future FOMC meetings. The four sets of
conditions above can then be combined in a system of equations and used to derive changes
in expectations at horizons corresponding to the scheduled FOMC meetings:

                                                                 
                                                                                I
                                 FFFt        M ¦ Et                 F F T                             (5)


                                                    18
                                                                                    
                                                                                             I
where FFFt is a pm ¢ 1q vector of changes in federal funds futures rates, Et F F T               is
a vector with pf   ¢ 1q vector with revisions in expectations, M is a pm ¢ f q matrix mapping
beliefs about changes in the FFT into federal funds futures rates, m is the number of federal
funds futures contracts, and f is the number of FOMC meetings. In general, there are more
conditions than unknowns (m       ¡ f ) because there are only eight FOMC meetings in one
year, while there are contracts for each month. The equilibrium conditions generally do not
exactly hold in the data for at least two reasons. First, the price of the future contracts can
only move in discrete steps (multiples of .5 bps, .25 bps for the nearest expiring contract
month), which cannot perfectly accommodate small variations in expectations. Second, the
contracts might not be all traded at exactly the same time in response to a tweet. Thus,
the prices might reflect small fluctuations in beliefs about the impact of the tweet between
trades.
   To accommodate the fact that the equilibrium relations do not hold exactly, we allow
for observation error. Specifically, we first compute the residuals of the equilibrium relations
described above by taking the difference between the left and right hand sides of equation 5.
If the equilibrium relations held exactly, the residuals would be zero. We then compute the
                                                                                
                                                                                         I
sum of squared residuals and find the vector of revisions in expectations Et F F T           that
minimize the sum of squared residuals. Using a generalized inverse to solve for the vector
  
            I
E t F F T       delivers the same results for the cases considered in this paper.
   Instances in which some contracts are not traded around a particular tweet are treated
as missing observations. The only exception to this rule applies to the contracts that are
not exposed to any FOMC meeting. This occurs when the President tweets during a month
in which there is no FOMC meeting or if he tweets after the meeting. In this case, it is fair
to assume that the absence of any trade for a contract that is not exposed to any FOMC
meeting reflects the fact that for this particular contract nothing has really changed, given
that the tweet cannot affect the contract. In this case, we treat the missing observation as
evidence that the price of the contract has not changed setting the change in the FFF rate
to zero. We also tried treating these observations as missing values with similar results.




                                               19
4.2     Simple Example

For illustration, consider the example outlined in Figure 4. A tweet occurs at time t in March.
The first subsequent FOMC meetings are scheduled for March, after the tweet, and May.
No FOMC meeting is scheduled to occur for April and June. Thus, the four corresponding
equations are:

                      d0 ¡ dt             m0 ¡ d0         I  m0 ¡ d0         I
 F F Ft,0               m0
                             Et F F T 0  
                                            m0
                                                 Et F F T 0 
                                                               m0
                                                                    Et F F T 0 ,
                                              
                                                         I
 F F Ft,1             Et F F T 1       Et        F F T 0 ,
                      d2              m 2 ¡ d2         I
 F F Ft,2             m2
                         Et F F T 2  
                                         m2
                                              Et F F T 2
                           
                                  I 
                                      m2 ¡ d2          I
                      d2
                      m2
                         Et F F T 0  
                                         m2
                                              Et F F T 2 ,
                      d3              m3 ¡ d3          I                
                                                                               I
 F F Ft,3             m3
                         Et F F T 3  
                                         m3
                                              Et F F T 3  Et F F T 3  Et F F T 2 .

                                                                         
where in the first row we used the fact that Et F F T 0                      0.   Using matrix notation, we
have:                                                                 
                           F F Ft,0                 ¡
                                                  m 0 d0
                                                                0
                                                                            
                                                                                    I   
                                                    m0
                                                                      
                           F F Ft,1                 1           0        Et F F T 0
                       
                                    
                                              
                                              
                                                    d2          ¡
                                                             m 2 d2   
                                                                            
                                                                                    I
                                                                                        .
                           F F Ft,2                                      Et F F T 2
                                                    m2         m2     
                           F F Ft,3                 0           1

   This system of equations can be solved using a generalized inverse of the matrix or by
defining the sum of squared residuals of the equilibrium conditions. The two approaches de-
liver the same result for the cases considered in this paper. In this example, four equations
                             
                                      I             
                                                                I
are used to derive Et F F T 0 and Et F F T 2 . The terms corresponding to i  1, 3 can
then be obtained by using the zero restrictions that imply that expectations can change
                                                                            
                                                                                    I        
                                                                                                    I
only at horizons corresponding to FOMC meetings: Et F F T 0
                                     
                                                                                           Et F F T 1   and
            I                    I
Et F F T 2            Et F F T 3 . A similar logic holds for longer horizons and different as-
sumptions about the timing of the tweet and of the FOMC meetings.




                                                           20
4.3      Estimation Results

We conduct two exercises in this section. The first one is similar to our benchmark regression
of Section 3.2. We ask how large the revision of expectations at different horizons is based on
the number of FOMC meetings that have already occurred. The difference with respect to the
analysis conducted in Section 3.2 is that now the revision in expectations takes into account
all contracts jointly, as opposed to focusing individually on the contracts that were exposed
to a certain number of FOMC meetings. Table 6 reports results based on this approach for
both the benchmark time window and for the alternative time windows considered in Section
3.4.4 The results confirm our findings from Table 1: We find strong evidence that the tweets
criticizing the Fed lower market expectations about the future fed funds rate. The average
effect across horizons is around     ¡.21 basis points and the magnitude grows with the time
horizon. All coefficients except for one are statistically significant. The alternative time
windows are consistent with these estimates. In fact, the effect increases with respect to the
event window, suggesting that our benchmark time window delivers conservative estimates.
      The joint estimation gives us the jumps in expectations that coincide with the scheduled
FOMC meetings. We can then directly analyze the revision in expectations associated with
the different FOMC meetings. Expectations measured by our sample of futures contracts
should only change at the horizons that correspond to an FOMC meeting because this is
when the target can be changed. For example, in the simple scenario discussed above, we are
interested in the revision of expectations associated with the first (March) and the second
                                                
                                                          I          
                                                                               I
(May) FOMC meeting after the tweet, Et F F T 0 and Et F F T 2 . Thus, we can ask
what is the expected jump in correspondence of a particular FOMC meeting, as opposed to
the jump in expectations implied by a contract that is fully exposed to a certain number of
FOMC meeting.
      The results are reported in Table 7. This alternative approach also provides strong
evidence that the tweets affect market expectations of the fed funds rate, with an average
effect of   ¡0.21 basis points.   All coefficients are statistically significant and longer horizons
are associated with larger effects, in line with our benchmark estimates from Table 1. The
  4
    The results are based on exposure to up to eight FOMC meetings because the joint estimation requires
a terminal condition given by a month without any FOMC meeting.


                                                   21
alternative event windows confirm these results. As the event window increases, the effects
are generally larger at all horizons and the increasing pattern in slope coefficients with respect
to horizon gets stronger. A wider event window with more trades occurring makes it more
likely that the theoretical restrictions linking different maturities are satisfied. Thus, our
benchmark results based on the narrower event window can be considered a conservative
estimate of the effects of the tweets.



5     Additional Analysis
This section presents additional evidence highlighting the importance of tweets by the Pres-
ident criticizing the Fed. We first compare the effect of our selected tweets in which the
President criticize monetary policy to his tweets targeted at trade and tariffs, two other
important economic policies that he has frequently commented on. We then present some
external validation of our results.


5.1     Fed Tweets and Trade-Tariff Tweets

Trade and tariff tweets by the President are selected using the following criteria. First, we
search for tweets containing either a word stemming from set A   ttrade, tariff, export,
importu or tweets than contain at least one word stemming from set B1  tchina, mexico,
canada, japan, germanyu and B2  tdeal, buy, purchase, farmer, industryu. Second, we
refine the search by dropping all tweets that are not directly related to the subject of trade
and tariff policy and those that coincide with other tweets within the event window. The
remaining tweets are classified into three categories: Positive (e.g., the announcement of a
new trade agreement), negative (e.g., criticizing a trading partner or threatening tariffs), or
ambiguous (i.e., does not fit clearly into positive or negative categories).
    The positive and negative tweets do not necessarily need to correspond to actual changes
in trade or tariff policy. For example, a tweet is classified as negative even if it simply criticizes
the trade situation because it sends a negative signal to markets about the resolution of trade
disputes. Analogously, a tweet that mentions a positive meeting with a foreign leader about
trade is classified as positive. Our classification here is similar to our tweet selection criteria

                                                 22
in the benchmark analysis, in which all tweets contain criticism of policy, but not necessarily
correspond to explicit policy changes. In contrast to the multifaceted nature of the trade and
tariff tweets, the tweets directed at the Fed unequivocally advocate expansionary monetary
policy in our sample period.
   We compare the relative importance of tweets criticizing the Fed in Table 8 by reporting
the mean and standard deviation of changes in the fed funds rate in response to FOMC
announcements (Panel A), the critical tweets about the Federal Reserve (Panel B), and the
tweets on trade and tariffs (Panel C) in the benchmark event window. Changes in the fed
funds futures rate are computed as the average difference in the fed funds futures rates across
all horizons. For the trade and tariffs tweets, the statistics are reported for all related tweets,
positive tweets, and negative tweets. The sample size for the FFF rates reflect the fact that
we have multiple horizons for each tweet.
   The mean change in the fed funds futures rate around the Fed tweets is approximately
half of mean change around the FOMC announcements, highlighting the sizable effect of the
Fed tweets on market expectations regarding the conduct of monetary policy. Conversely,
the magnitude of the changes around the trade and tariffs tweets is quite small, even when
these tweets are separated into positive and negative news. The positive and negative trade
and tariff tweets are associated with opposite movements in the fed funds rate, contributing
to a noticeably smaller average change when both categories are pooled together. Significant
heterogeneity in the trade and tariff tweets often involving multiple dimensions besides only
interest rate policy weakens the average effect on market expectations of fed policy. In
contrast, the unified nature of the Fed tweets concentrated on lower interest rates yields
stronger effects on expected target rates.
   Table 9 reports the impact of trade and tariff tweets based on the pooled regression
specification given in Equation 4 and the benchmark event window. Panel A reports the
average effect of the tweets on the expected funds rate. When all trade and tariff tweets are
used, the effect is positive but not statistically significant, reflecting how the trade and tariff
tweets can contain both positive or negative news, depending on the trade partner, industry,
or time period. In contrast, the stance of the President on monetary policy unequivocally
advocates lower interest rates, allowing for sharper identification and strong statistical sig-


                                                23
nificance in our benchmark analysis that focuses on his critical tweets of Fed policy. When
only positive trade and tariff news is considered, we find a positive and statistically signifi-
cant effect on the expected federal funds rate, but a negative and insignificant effect when
only negative news is considered. These patterns are mirrored in the stock market, where
statistically significant responses are only observed for positive trade and tariff news that
raise stock market valuations. We interpret the dichotomy in the statistical significance of
the effects between positive and negative trade and tariff news is that President Trump uses
twitter very often to complain about other countries, but comments less frequently to convey
news about new tariffs. As a consequence, many negative tweets do not contain additional
informational content, lowering the significance of the average effect.
   In Panel C of Table 9, we inspect the relation between changes in the expected fed funds
rate and changes in the stock market. We adopt the same approach used for the tweets
criticizing the Fed (Panel C of Table 2). For each tweet, we compute the revision in the
expected fed funds rate and the change in the stock market. We then run a regression
of the changes in the expected fed funds rate on the changes in the stock market. As in
our benchmark analysis, we look at the behavior of expectations at different horizons by
grouping contracts based on the exposure to FOMC meetings. The change in prices of
futures contracts with zero exposure to FOMC meetings are not significantly correlated with
changes in stock market movement around trade and tariff tweets. Instead, the correlation
is positive and statistically significant for all exposed contracts with the effect intensifying
with respect to the time horizon.
   The correlation patterns around trade and tariff tweets are consistent with a narrative
in which such tweets move expectations about the fed funds rate through the dependency
of interest rates to the macroeconomic outlook (and the stock market itself) through the
reaction function. Tweets about trade translate into news about future real activity, encoded
in stock market valuations. Revisions in expected future growth prospects, reflected in
changes in stock market prices, lead to changes in expectations about future monetary policy.
Conversely, recall that the correlation between changes in the expected fed fund rate and
changes in the stock market around Fed tweets are not statistically significant (reported
in Table 2), suggesting that the trade and tariff tweets work through different economic


                                              24
channels than the Fed tweets.


5.2    Corroborating Evidence

In this last subsection, we provide corroborating evidence for our main results using infor-
mation outside of Twitter. The evidence presented here also suggests potential reasons for
why markets might not perceive the Fed as completely immune from political pressure.
   On June 18th, 2019, Bloomberg posted an article describing how President Trump had
asked lawyers at the White House about the possibility of removing Powell. The article
detailed how people familiar with the matter argued that Powell could not be fired without
cause, but that he could be removed as Chairman and remain in the FOMC as a governor.
Figure 5 shows the response of expected interest rates at different horizons to this news. The
change is reported as a percentage of the average absolute change in federal fund futures
following FOMC meetings announcement since June 2015 (around 2.2 bps). A decline in
interest rates is observed across all maturities, with a more pronounced effect at longer
maturities. At long horizons, the change in expectations is even larger than the typical
response to FOMC announcements.
   The observation that longer maturity futures contracts are more affected than shorter
maturity ones is consistent with the fact that regardless of the legal feasibility of replacing
the Powell with a new Chairman, such a decision would take time to be implemented. The
fact that markets reacted so strongly to the threat of removing Powell suggests that such an
action is potentially a direct channel through which the President can influence monetary
policy. While historically a Chairman has never been fired, Chairman Miller had a very
short tenure (March 8, 1978 - August 6, 1979) and left the Fed to become secretary of the
Treasury under Carter. President Trump is known for challenging institutional norms, so
perhaps a strong market reaction is not surprising.
   Figure 6 presents daily prices for a bet offered by the website PredictIt. The bet asks
"Will the Senate confirm a new Fed chair in 2019?" The bet pays $1 if a new Chairman is
confirmed before the end of 2019. Note that the bet is not about whether Powell will be
fired, because as explained above that might not be legally possible. However, the President
might have other ways to achieve the same goal, like offering Powell a position in the cabinet,

                                              25
demoting him to governor, or putting pressure on his resignation as Chairman. A similar
bet did not exist for Powell's predecessor, Chairwoman Janet Yellen.
       The price of the contract is positively related to the probability that the betting partici-
pants assign to the event that a new Chairman will be confirmed by Congress. This data is
only available at a daily frequency, so we cannot conduct the same high-frequency analysis
we used for the fed funds futures. As such, we only use this data to provide suggestive
evidence through a narrative account. The price increases after both the March 19-20, 2019
and April 30-May 1, 2019 FOMC meetings, where no rate changes occurred despite frequent
complaints by the President advocating lower interest rates on Twitter. Without following
through on the rate cuts recommended by the President, these attacks possibly changed bet-
tor perceptions of an increased likelihood that Powell is removed as Chairman. The prices
spike up again in response to the White House report that the President is looking into the
legal aspects of firing Powell (June 18th, 2019) and again in response to a series of tweets
on August 23, 2019 in which the President escalated his complaints against the Fed and at
Powell.5 The price has naturally been trending down as the end of 2019 approaches given
that the bet only pertains to the removal of Powell in 2019.
       We explore how the attitude of President Trump toward monetary policy changed after
announcing his Presidential campaign. The President might criticize the Fed because of his
particular view of monetary policy ­ it could be that President Trump is dovish when it
comes to the conduct of monetary policy. To this end, all tweets by President Trump before
he decided to run for President are analyzed. We select all tweets that comment on the
Fed that predate June 16, 2015, the day in which Donald Trump delivered his Presidential
Announcement Speech. A total of 17 tweets are identified mentioning the Federal Reserve,
spanning the period August 10, 2011 - September 30, 2013. Out of these 17 tweets, 14
tweets contain criticism of the Federal Reserve for being too dovish. In particular, President
Trump was at that time advocating for tighter monetary policy and the end of quantitative
easing, expressing concerns for the risk of high inflation and a weak dollar. These 14 tweets
   5
    The series of tweets includes two tweets that are particular relevant. The first one, "Now the Fed can
show their stuff!" (9:01 AM ET, August 23, 2019), suggests that the Fed should change monetary policy
course. The second one, "....My only question is, who is our bigger enemy, Jay Powell or Chairman Xi?"
(10:57 AM ET, August 23, 2019), presents one of the most direct complaints about Fed Chairman Jerome
Powell.


                                                   26
cover the period between August 10, 2011 - August 7, 2012, when economic conditions were
arguably substantially weaker than in 2018-2019. For example, the unemployment rate was
9% in August 2011, when he was advocating for tighter monetary policy, while it was 3.9%
in April 2018, when he started tweeting that the Fed should keep rates low (Data from
FRED II, BLS). The remaining three tweets are from August and September 2013 and do
not contain any criticism or praise of the Fed.
    The fact that President Trump was advocating for more hawkish monetary policy before
he decided to run for President while he advocates for more dovish monetary policy starting
from April 2018 suggests a shift in his attitude toward monetary policy. One possible reason
for his change is the political incentive as the incumbent President for more dovish monetary
policy leading up to his re-election campaign. Expansionary monetary policy can generate
higher stock market valuations and more robust real activity in the short-term. Another
possible reason is that President Trump views accommodative monetary policy as part of a
broader strategy to compete with other countries. In both cases, it seems fair to infer that
his advice to the Fed is not independent of his broader political agenda, akin to episodes of
political interference in the past.



6     Conclusion
This paper presents novel market-based evidence that President Trump impacts expected
monetary policy. Our high-frequency identification approach relies on a large collection of
unique tweets from the President criticizing the conduct of monetary policy in conjunction
with tick-by-tick fed funds futures prices over the past two years. The collected tweets
ardently pressure the fed to lower interest rates. High-frequency changes in expectations
of the fed funds target across horizons are extracted from the futures prices of different
maturities. An event study is conducted by constructing a small time window around the
precise at the second timestamps of each tweet to assess the reaction of the expected fed funds
target before and after each tweet. The cumulative effect of the collected tweets implied by
our estimation is around -10 bps since his first tweet attacking the Fed in April 2018. The
effect grows over the time horizon, with a peak of -18.5 bps at the longest horizon. Our


                                              27
findings suggest that market participants believe in the possibility of an erosion in central
bank independence due to persistent political pressure.




                                             28
References
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, P. Querubin, J. A. Robinson, 2008. When does policy reform
  work? The case of central bank independence. Unpublished working paper. National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Ai, H., R. Bansal, 2018. Risk preferences and the macroeconomic announcement premium.
  Econometrica 86(4), 1383­1430.

Alesina, A., 1988. Macroeconomics and politics. NBER macroeconomics annual 3, 13­52.

Alesina, A., L. H. Summers, 1993. Central bank independence and macroeconomic perfor-
  mance: some comparative evidence. Journal of Money, credit and Banking 25(2), 151­162.

Barndorff-Nielsen, O. E., P. R. Hansen, A. Lunde, N. Shephard, 2008. Designing realized
  kernels to measure the ex post variation of equity prices in the presence of noise. Econo-
  metrica 76(6), 1481­1536.

Beechey, M. J., J. H. Wright, 2009. The high-frequency impact of news on long-term yields
  and forward rates: Is it real?. Journal of Monetary Economics 56(4), 535­544.

Binder, C., 2018. Political Pressure on Central Banks. .

Bollerslev, T., J. Li, Y. Xue, 2018. Volume, volatility, and public news announcements. The
  Review of Economic Studies 85(4), 2005­2041.

Cieslak, A., A. Morse, A. Vissing-Jorgensen, 2018. Stock returns over the FOMC cycle. The
  Journal of Finance.

Cochrane, J. H., M. Piazzesi, 2002. The fed and interest rates-a high-frequency identification.
  American Economic Review 92(2), 90­95.

Cukierman, A., S. B. Web, B. Neyapti, 1992. Measuring the independence of central banks
  and its effect on policy outcomes. The world bank economic review 6(3), 353­398.

Faust, J., 2016. Oh, What a Tangled Web we Weave: Monetary policy transparency in
  divisive times. Hutchins Center Working Papers.

                                              29
Faust, J., E. T. Swanson, J. H. Wright, 2004. Identifying VARs based on high frequency
  futures data. Journal of Monetary Economics 51(6), 1107­1131.

Gertler, M., P. Karadi, 2015. Monetary policy surprises, credit costs, and economic activity.
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7(1), 44­76.

Gilchrist, S., V. Yue, E. Zakrajsek, 2019. US monetary policy and international bond mar-
  kets. Unpublished working paper. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Grilli, V., D. Masciandaro, G. Tabellini, 1991. Political and monetary institutions and public
  finance policies in the industrial democracies. Economic Policy 13, 341­392.

G¨
 urkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, E. Swanson, 2005a. The sensitivity of long-term interest rates
  to economic news: Evidence and implications for macroeconomic models. American Eco-
  nomic Review 95(1), 425­436.

G¨
 urkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, E. T. Swanson, 2005b. Do Actions Speak Louder Than Words?
  The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements. International
  Journal of Central Banking.

G¨
 urkaynak, R. S., B. P. Sack, E. T. Swanson, 2007. Market-based measures of monetary
  policy expectations. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 25(2), 201­212.

Hanson, S. G., J. C. Stein, 2015. Monetary policy and long-term real rates. Journal of
  Financial Economics 115(3), 429­448.

Kohn, D., 2013. Federal Reserve independence in the aftermath of the financial crisis: should
  we be worried?. Business Economics 48(2), 104­107.

Krishnamurthy, A., A. Vissing-Jorgensen, 2011. The effects of quantitative easing on interest
  rates: channels and implications for policy. Unpublished working paper. National Bureau
  of Economic Research.

Kuttner, K. N., 2001. Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: Evidence from the Fed
  funds futures market. Journal of monetary economics 47(3), 523­544.


                                             30
Lucca, D. O., E. Moench, 2015. The pre-FOMC announcement drift. The Journal of Finance
  70(1), 329­371.

Nakamura, E., J. Steinsson, 2018. High-frequency identification of monetary non-neutrality:
  the information effect. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(3), 1283­1330.

Rigobon, R., B. Sack, 2003. Measuring the reaction of monetary policy to the stock market.
  The quarterly journal of Economics 118(2), 639­669.

Swanson, E. T., 2011. Let's twist again: a high-frequency event-study analysis of operation
  twist and its implications for QE2. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity pp. 151­208.

Swanson, E. T., 2017. Measuring the effects of Federal Reserve forward guidance and asset
  purchases on financial markets. Unpublished working paper. National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Timiraos,     N.,   2019.   Fed    Readies    First   Interest-Rate   Cut    Since   2008.
  www.wsj.com/articles/fed-readies-first-interest-rate-cut-since-2008-11564563601.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A., 2019. Central Banking with Many Voices: The Communications Arms
  Race. working paper.




                                             31
                                                   Table 1: Regressions Sorted on Contract Meeting Exposure
     This event study regresses the expected federal funds rate, implied by the futures prices, on a dummy variable indicating whether the observation is before or after a tweet
     by President Trump which criticizes the Federal Reserve. The table reports the average change in the expected federal funds rate across time horizons implied by contracts of
     varying maturities. For each tweet and FOMC exposure, two trades of the same contract are chosen to measure the change in the expected federal funds rate around each tweet.
     The selected contract for the exposure to j FOMC meetings has the shortest time to expiration and simultaneously at least j FOMC meetings before the month of expiration.
     The regression specification reads

                                                                     Et¡i¨ rt  r s     D¨   Fixed Effects   ,
                   r s
     where Et¡i¨ rt is the market expectation of the federal funds rate for the month when the corresponding future contract expires. The rate is measured in basis points. The
     subscript  indicates whether the observation is from the pre or post-event outer window.  captures the average revision in expectations of the federal funds rate around
              ¨
     each tweet.




                                                                                     Exposure to FOMC Meetings
      Variable                   0             1            2             3             4            5             6             7             8            9            10

      Panel A: Regression Coefficients
      Intercept       212.9¦¦¦ 193.9¦¦¦ 183.7¦¦¦                      173.6¦¦¦      166.7¦¦¦ 161.8¦¦¦          158.3¦¦¦     154.6¦¦¦      151.7¦¦¦ 148.2¦¦¦           151.9¦¦¦




32
      . std. err.        2.94      3.61     4.43                        5.44           6.19     6.70             7.18         7.67           8.22     8.51              10.25
      . t-stat.         72.33     53.74    41.47                        31.93         26.92    24.15             22.04        20.17         18.46    17.42              14.81
      Dummy Coef.       0.012   ¡0.175¦¦¦ ¡0.163¦¦                    ¡0.163¦       ¡0.225¦¦¦ ¡0.187¦¦         ¡0.250¦¦     ¡0.200¦¦      ¡0.333¦¦¦ ¡0.321¦           ¡0.578¦
      . std. err.       0.024     0.061    0.072                        0.088         0.095    0.087             0.109         0.099        0.133    0.168              0.319
      . t-stat.          0.53     ¡2.88    ¡2.24                       ¡1.84         ¡2.38     ¡2.15            ¡2.30         ¡2.01        ¡2.51     ¡1.91             ¡1.81
      Panel B: Regression Properties
      N                  40        40                       40            40           40            40            40            40           39            39            32
      T0 [min]          240       240                      240           240          240           240           240           240          240           240           240
      T1 [min]          0.1       0.1                      0.1           0.1          0.1           0.1           0.1           0.1          0.1           0.1           0.1
      T2 [min]           5         5                        5             5            5             5             5             5            5             5             5
      T3 [min]          120       120                      120           120          120           120           120           120          120           120           120
                    Table 2: Regressions Pooling Contracts and the Stock Market
This table reports the impact of tweets threatening central bank independence on the expected federal funds rate and the stock
market. Panel A estimates the average change in expectations of the federal funds rate pooling across ten contracts with a
nonzero meeting exposure at each point in time. The event study regresses the expected federal funds rate across different
maturities, implied by the futures prices, on a dummy variable indicating whether the observation is before or after a tweet

                                         Et¡i¨ rtr s     D¨   Fixed Effects   
       r s
Et¡i¨ rt is the market expectation of the federal funds rate for the month when the corresponding future contract expires.
                                                     ¨
The rate is measured in basis points. The subscript  denotes whether the observation is from the pre or post-event outer
window. Fixed effects control for the event time and contracts across different expiration months.
Panel B estimates the average effect on the stock market. Similar to Panel A, the regression projects the variable log-S&P 500
on a dummy variable which indicates whether the observation is before or after a tweet. The regression using extended trading
hours include tweets between 4:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. ET. The regression without pre-market and after-hours trading includes
tweets between 9:30 a.m. and 4 p.m. ET.
Panel C investigates the correlation between changes in log-S&P 500 and changes in the expectations of the Federal Funds Rate
in the event window around the selected tweets. For each FOMC exposure, changes in the expected FFR from the respective
contract are regressed on a constant and the changes in log-S&P 500. Panel C includes the extended trading hours sample.



                           Coef.                 t-stat              Coef.                t-stat                  N

 Panel A: FFF Regression
                             164.8                72.2               ¡0.253                ¡6.10                 390
 Panel B: S&P 500 Regression
 Extended hours              566.3               669.0               ¡0.016                ¡1.29                  39
 Trading hours               567.1               464.0               ¡0.005                ¡0.32                  18
 Panel C: FFF & S&P 500 Regression
 FOMC     0                  0.02                 0.67                ¡0.21                ¡0.68                  39
 FOMC     1                 ¡0.16                ¡2.54                 1.37                 1.69                  39
 FOMC     2                 ¡0.14                ¡1.84                 0.99                  1.0                  39
 FOMC     3                 ¡0.15                ¡1.65                 0.79                 0.65                  39
 FOMC     4                 ¡0.22                ¡2.19                ¡0.09                ¡0.06                  39
 FOMC     5                 ¡0.18                ¡1.93                 1.00                 0.83                  39
 FOMC     6                 ¡0.23                ¡2.01                 1.91                 1.29                  39
 FOMC     7                 ¡0.19                ¡1.79                 1.16                 0.85                  39
 FOMC     8                 ¡0.31                ¡2.27                 1.50                 0.84                  39
 FOMC     9                 ¡0.32                ¡1.86                ¡0.22                ¡0.10                  39
 FOMC     10                ¡0.60                ¡1.76                ¡0.73                ¡0.18                  32




                                                             33
                                                                 Table 3: Alternative Event Windows
     This table reports the event study results based on six alternative inner time window specifications. Each panel reports the estimation results for a different pre window T1
     and post window T2 . Each panel regresses the expected federal funds rate, implied by the futures prices, on a dummy variable indicating whether the observation is before or
     after a tweet by President Trump which criticizes the Federal Reserve. The table reports the average change in the expected federal funds rate across time horizons implied
     by contracts of varying maturities. For each tweet and FOMC exposure, two trades of the same contract are chosen to measure the change in the expected federal funds rate
     around each tweet. The selected contract for the exposure to j FOMC meetings has the shortest time to expiration and simultaneously at least j FOMC meetings before the
     month of expiration. The regression specification reads

                                                                     Et¡i¨ rt r s     D¨   Fixed Effects   ,
                   r s
     where Et¡i¨ rt is the market expectation of the federal funds rate for the month when the corresponding future contract expires. The rate is measured in basis points. The
     subscript  indicates whether the observation is from the pre or post-event outer window.  captures the average revision in expectations of the federal funds rate around
              ¨
     each tweet.


                                                                                     Exposure to FOMC Meetings
      Variable                   0             1            2             3             4            5             6             7             8            9            10

      Panel A: [1 min, 5 min]
      Dummy Coef.       0.000             ¡0.175¦¦¦ ¡0.125            ¡0.163¦ ¡0.263¦¦¦ ¡0.212¦¦¦ ¡0.237¦¦                   ¡0.175       ¡0.295¦¦       ¡0.295       ¡0.547¦
      . t-stat.          0.00              ¡2.88    ¡1.61              ¡1.84   ¡2.72     ¡2.38     ¡2.18                     ¡1.62         ¡2.00         ¡1.64         ¡1.68




34
      Panel B: [0.1 min, 15 min]
      Dummy Coef.       0.000    ¡0.169¦¦               ¡0.213¦¦¦ ¡0.212¦           ¡0.250¦      ¡0.263¦ ¡0.313¦¦ ¡0.462¦¦ ¡0.462¦¦ ¡0.513¦¦ ¡0.591¦
      . t-stat.          0.00     ¡2.23                  ¡2.38     ¡1.81             ¡1.75        ¡1.82   ¡2.15    ¡2.26    ¡2.19    ¡2.17    ¡1.84
      Panel C: [5 min, 5 min]
      Dummy Coef.       0.006             ¡0.238¦¦¦ ¡0.175¦¦¦ ¡0.175¦ ¡0.313¦¦¦ ¡0.237¦¦¦ ¡0.237¦¦ ¡0.231¦ ¡0.333¦¦                                      ¡0.218        ¡0.422
      . t-stat.          0.27              ¡3.83     ¡2.33     ¡1.69   ¡3.01     ¡2.42     ¡1.98    ¡1.92   ¡2.23                                        ¡1.21         ¡1.27
      Panel D: [10 min, 30 min]
      Dummy Coef.      ¡0.077             ¡0.275¦¦ ¡0.437¦¦¦ ¡0.575¦¦¦ ¡0.612¦¦¦ ¡0.637¦¦¦ ¡0.725¦¦¦ ¡0.756¦¦¦ ¡0.724¦¦¦ ¡0.566¦ ¡0.676¦¦
      . t-stat.         ¡0.73              ¡2.07    ¡3.23     ¡3.07     ¡2.82     ¡2.76     ¡2.95     ¡2.71     ¡2.83     ¡1.94   ¡1.97
      Panel E: [10 min, 60 min]
      Dummy Coef.      ¡0.125              ¡0.262       ¡0.437¦¦ ¡0.625¦¦ ¡0.725¦¦¦ ¡0.725¦¦¦ ¡0.800¦¦¦ ¡0.885¦¦¦ ¡0.789¦¦¦ ¡0.618¦                                    ¡0.614
      . t-stat.         ¡1.18              ¡1.44         ¡2.15    ¡2.30    ¡2.48     ¡2.38     ¡2.60     ¡2.78     ¡2.48     ¡1.72                                     ¡1.63
                                                                Table 4: Alternative Tweet Selection Criteria
     This table reports the results for an alternative tweet selection criteria. In addition to all previous tweets by President Trump which criticize the Federal Reserve, the event
     study includes tweets which do not directly criticize the federal reserve directly. Furthermore, the study includes tweets that criticize the Federal Reserve but also contain news
     on trade. The event study regresses the expected federal funds rate, implied by the futures prices, on a dummy variable indicating whether the observation is before or after a
     tweet by President Trump. The table reports the average change in the expected federal funds rate across time horizons implied by contracts of varying maturities. For each
     tweet and FOMC exposure, two trades of the same contract are chosen to measure the change in the expected federal funds rate around each tweet. The selected contract for the
     exposure to j FOMC meetings has the shortest time to expiration and simultaneously at least j FOMC meetings before the month of expiration. The regression specification
     reads

                                                                       Et¡i¨ rt r s     D¨   Fixed Effects   ,
                     r s
     where Et¡i¨ rt is the market expectation of the federal funds rate for the month when the corresponding future contract expires. The rate is measured in basis points. The
     subscript  indicates whether the observation is from the pre or post-event outer window.  captures the average revision in expectations of the federal funds rate around
                 ¨
     each tweet. The number of observations N are twice the number of tweets.



                                                                                         Exposure to FOMC Meetings
      Variable                 0              1             2              3             4             5              6             7              8             9             10
      Panel A: Regression Coefficients
      Intercept        211.2¦¦¦    193.3¦¦¦             183.8¦¦¦      173.7¦¦¦       166.8¦¦¦      161.6¦¦¦       160.1¦¦¦      154.2¦¦¦       153.9¦¦¦      149.4¦¦¦       155.7¦¦¦
      . std. err.        4.09         4.34                4.67          5.24           5.74          6.04           6.15          6.72           7.06          7.21           8.83




35
      . t-stat.          51.63       44.58                39.35         33.14          29.04         26.75          26.05         22.95          21.78         20.72          17.64
      Dummy Coef.            0.014       ¡0.170¦¦      ¡0.222¦¦¦      ¡0.204¦¦      ¡0.287¦¦¦ ¡0.287¦¦¦ ¡0.340¦¦¦                ¡0.204         ¡0.314        ¡0.288       ¡0.720¦¦¦
      . std. err.            0.020        0.075          0.083         0.093          0.107     0.102     0.113                   0.190          0.244         0.247         0.305
      . t-stat.              0.68         ¡2.27          ¡2.67         ¡2.19          ¡2.68     ¡2.81     ¡3.02                  ¡1.07          ¡1.29         ¡1.17          ¡2.36
      Panel B: Regression Properties
      N                   54                 53             54            54             54            54             53            54             51            52             41
      T0 [min]           240                240            240           240            240           240            240           240            240           240            240
      T1 [min]           0.1                0.1            0.1           0.1            0.1           0.1            0.1           0.1            0.1           0.1            0.1
      T2 [min]             5                 5              5             5              5             5              5             5              5             5              5
      T3 [min]           120                120            120           120            120           120            120           120            120           120            120
                                                                              Table 5: Placebo Tests
     This table reports the results for an event study that includes 100 randomly selected tweets by President Trump since June 2015 from his Twitter account @realDonaldTrump.
     Tweets on the Federal Reserve, tariffs, and trade are excluded. The event study is conducted 100 times (100 times 100 tweets) and the table reports the average of the 100
     estimation results. Each event study regresses the expected federal funds rate, implied by the futures prices, on a dummy variable indicating whether the observation is before
     or after a tweet by President Trump. The table reports the average change in the expected federal funds rate across time horizons implied by contracts of varying maturities.
     For each tweet and FOMC exposure, two trades of the same contract are chosen to measure the change in the expected federal funds rate around each tweet. The selected
     contract for the exposure to j FOMC meetings has the shortest time to expiration and simultaneously at least j FOMC meetings before the month of expiration. The regression
     specification reads

                                                                      Et¡i¨ rt r s     D¨   Fixed Effects   ,
                   r s                                                                                                                                   ¨
     where Et¡i¨ rt is the market expectation of the federal funds rate for the month when the corresponding future contract expires. The subscript  indicates whether the
     observation is from the pre or post-event outer window.  captures the average revision in expectations of the federal funds rate around each tweet. The number of observations
     N are twice the number of tweets.



                                                                                       Exposure to FOMC Meetings
      Variable                  0            1             2             3             4             5             6             7              8             9            10
      Panel A: Regression Coefficients
      Intercept        60.5¦¦¦      61.2¦¦¦            62.2¦¦¦       64.1¦¦¦        66.1¦¦¦       69.5¦¦¦       70.4¦¦¦       74.0¦¦¦       75.4¦¦¦       78.7¦¦¦       80.7¦¦¦
      . std. err.       11.04        10.09               9.78          9.83           9.92          9.95          9.88          9.99         10.13         10.36         10.51




36
      . t-stat.          5.46         6.04               6.34          6.5            6.65          6.98          7.12          7.43          7.46          7.62          7.73
      Dummy Coef.            0.000         0.001         0.004        ¡0.008        ¡0.005        ¡0.024        ¡0.022         ¡0.017        ¡0.002        ¡0.008         0.011
      . std. err.            0.032         0.047         0.051         0.063         0.071         0.086         0.099          0.111         0.129         0.138         0.155
      . t-stat.             ¡ 0.01         0.03          0.11         ¡0.21         ¡0.10         ¡0.31         ¡0.27          ¡0.14         ¡0.03         ¡0.07          0.03
      Panel B: Regression Properties
      N                   50                 58            59            59            59            59            59            57            55             52            50
      T0 [min]           240                240           240           240           240           240           240           240           240            240           240
      T1 [min]           0.1                0.1           0.1           0.1           0.1           0.1           0.1           0.1           0.1            0.1           0.1
      T2 [min]             5                 5             5             5             5             5             5             5             5              5             5
      T3 [min]           120                120           120           120           120           120           120           120           120            120           120
                   Table 6: Joint Estimation Based on Minimal FOMC Exposure
This table reports the regression results for changes in the expected federal funds rate at different maturities. The revision
in expectations is computed by using the change in futures rates for contract of different maturities. Each column considers
the revision of expectations that occurs after a minimal number of FOMC meetings has occurred (from 1 to 8). The rate is
measured in basis points.




                                                          Exposure to FOMC Meetings
 Variable                   1            2            3            4            5           6            7            8

 Panel A (Benchmark): [0.1 min, 5 min]
 Dummy Coef.  ¡0.148¦¦ ¡0.13      ¡0.207¦¦                    ¡0.225¦¦¦ ¡0.233¦¦ ¡0.265¦¦¦ ¡0.251¦¦ ¡0.246¦
 . std. err.     0.073     0.079   0.101                          0.091      0.102        0.111        0.124        0.142
 . t-stat.      ¡2.026 ¡1.632 ¡2.056                           ¡2.483       ¡2.272       ¡2.393       ¡2.027       ¡1.733
 . N               39        39      39                            39          39           39           39           34

 Panel B: [1 min, 5 min]
 Dummy Coef.            ¡0.160¦¦ ¡0.118 ¡0.198¦ ¡0.236¦¦¦ ¡0.216¦¦ ¡0.256¦¦ ¡0.226¦ ¡0.218
 . std. err.             0.074        0.081        0.104          0.095      0.107        0.117        0.133        0.149
 . t-stat.              ¡2.144       ¡1.467       ¡1.915       ¡2.478       ¡2.024       ¡2.199       ¡1.697       ¡1.466
 . N                       39           39           39            39          39           39           39           34
 Panel C: [0.1 min, 15 min]
 Dummy Coef.  ¡0.163¦                ¡0.178¦ ¡0.331¦¦¦ ¡0.314¦¦ ¡0.298¦ ¡0.280 ¡0.378¦ ¡0.505¦¦¦
 . std. err.             0.098        0.104        0.138          0.139      0.154        0.174        0.198        0.190
 . t-stat.              ¡1.660       ¡1.721       ¡2.395       ¡2.259       ¡1.936       ¡1.606       ¡1.905       ¡2.663
 . N                       39           39           39            39          39           39           39           34
 Panel D: [5 min, 5 min]
 Dummy Coef.            ¡0.236¦¦¦ ¡0.206¦¦¦ ¡0.264¦¦¦ ¡0.302¦¦¦ ¡0.192¦ ¡0.230¦ ¡0.286¦¦ ¡0.265¦
 . std. err.             0.071        0.078        0.109          0.100      0.116        0.127        0.144        0.155
 . t-stat.              ¡3.342       ¡2.656       ¡2.413       ¡3.029       ¡1.658       ¡1.816        ¡1.99       ¡1.709
 . N                       39           39           39            39          39           39           39           34
 Panel F: [10 min, 30 min]
 Dummy Coef.            ¡0.345¦¦¦ ¡0.345¦¦¦ ¡0.523¦¦¦ ¡0.515¦¦¦ ¡0.54¦¦¦ ¡0.602¦¦¦ ¡0.685¦¦¦ ¡0.734¦¦¦
 . std. err.             0.118        0.126        0.181          0.190      0.212        0.218        0.255        0.285
 . t-stat.              ¡2.933       ¡2.738       ¡2.891       ¡2.715       ¡2.547       ¡2.756       ¡2.687       ¡2.573
 . N                       38           38           38            38          38           38           38           34
 Panel G: [10 min, 60 min]
 Dummy Coef.            ¡0.341¦ ¡0.324 ¡0.575¦¦ ¡0.625¦¦ ¡0.638¦¦ ¡0.719¦¦¦ ¡0.801¦¦¦ ¡0.887¦¦¦
 . std. err.             0.191        0.205        0.275          0.273      0.287        0.283        0.297        0.314
 . t-stat.              ¡1.784       ¡1.583       ¡2.093       ¡2.286       ¡2.224       ¡2.545       ¡2.697       ¡2.825
 . N                       38           38           38            38          38           38           38           34




                                                             37
                      Table 7: Joint Estimation Based on Exact FOMC Exposure
This table reports the regression results for changes in the expected federal funds that occur in correspondence of different FOMC
meetings. The revision in expectations is computed by using the change in futures rates for contract of different maturities.
Each column considers the revision of expectations that occurs in correspondence of the 1st, 2nd, 8th FOMC meeting after the
tweet.




                                                                    FOMC Meeting
 Variable                   1st          2nd          3rd            4th         5th          6th           7th          8th

 Panel A (Benchmark): [0.1 min, 5 min]
 Dummy Coef.  ¡0.139¦¦¦ ¡0.152¦¦ ¡0.175¦                        ¡0.222¦¦¦ ¡0.172¦ ¡0.251¦¦¦ ¡0.197¦¦ ¡0.335¦¦
 . std. err.     0.057     0.075   0.095                            0.093       0.092        0.105        0.100         0.145
 . t-stat.      ¡2.450 ¡2.016 ¡1.848                             ¡2.387        ¡1.858       ¡2.395       ¡1.973        ¡2.303
 . N               39        39      39                              39          39            39           39           38

 Panel B: [1 min, 5 min]
 Dummy Coef.            ¡0.148¦¦¦ ¡0.124 ¡0.164¦ ¡0.26¦¦¦ ¡0.194¦¦ ¡0.231¦¦ ¡0.162 ¡0.309¦¦
 . std. err.              0.056         0.078        0.092          0.097       0.094        0.111        0.116         0.155
 . t-stat.               ¡2.643       ¡1.575        ¡1.775       ¡2.692        ¡2.069       ¡2.086       ¡1.393        ¡1.993
 . N                        39           39            39            39          39            39           39           38
 Panel C: [0.1 min, 15 min]
 Dummy Coef.  ¡0.151¦                 ¡0.188¦¦ ¡0.219¦ ¡0.261¦ ¡0.267¦ ¡0.299¦¦ ¡0.438¦¦ ¡0.510¦¦¦
 . std. err.              0.078         0.095        0.123          0.141       0.147        0.151        0.194         0.209
 . t-stat.               ¡1.925       ¡1.972        ¡1.786       ¡1.844        ¡1.818       ¡1.976       ¡2.255        ¡2.438
 . N                        39           39            39            39          39            39           39           38
 Panel D: [5 min, 5 min]
 Dummy Coef.            ¡0.204¦¦¦ ¡0.188¦¦¦ ¡0.21¦¦ ¡0.303¦¦¦ ¡0.209¦¦ ¡0.212¦ ¡0.200 ¡0.326¦¦
 . std. err.              0.061         0.076        0.105          0.100       0.100        0.121        0.125         0.157
 . t-stat.               ¡3.342       ¡2.482        ¡1.997       ¡3.025        ¡2.084       ¡1.755       ¡1.603        ¡2.072
 . N                        39           39            39            39          39            39           39           38
 Panel F: [10 min, 30 min]
 Dummy Coef.             ¡0.123 ¡0.343¦¦¦ ¡0.462¦¦¦ ¡0.487¦¦¦ ¡0.517¦¦¦ ¡0.591¦¦¦ ¡0.612¦¦¦ ¡0.746¦¦¦
 . std. err.              0.076         0.119        0.169          0.179       0.208        0.215        0.263         0.271
 . t-stat.               ¡1.609       ¡2.891        ¡2.734       ¡2.713        ¡2.482       ¡2.754       ¡2.328        ¡2.748
 . N                        38           38            38            38          38            38           38           37
 Panel G: [10 min, 60 min]
 Dummy Coef.             ¡0.115 ¡0.343¦ ¡0.500¦ ¡0.593¦¦ ¡0.615¦¦ ¡0.660¦¦ ¡0.756¦¦¦ ¡0.817¦¦¦
 . std. err.              0.157         0.198        0.264          0.273       0.294        0.294        0.300         0.322
 . t-stat.               ¡0.735       ¡1.736        ¡1.891       ¡2.174        ¡2.093       ¡2.242       ¡2.521        ¡2.534
 . N                        38           38            38            38          38            38           38           37




                                                               38
                                        Table 8: Comparing Magnitudes
This table reports the summary statistics for the changes in the Federal Funds Futures for all available maturities around
FOMC announcements, tweets on the federal reserve, and tweets on trade and tariffs. The rate is measured in basis points. We
provide the mean, standard deviation, and the number of observations in our data sample. To construct the statistics for FOMC
announcements, we create an inner time window of 0.1 min prior to the announcement and 5 min after the announcement.




                                                               mean                  std.dev.                   N

 FOMC Announcements                                           ¡0.428                   3.247                   672

 Tweets on the Federal Reserve                                ¡0.212                   0.914                   715

 Tweets on Trade & Tariffs: All Tweets                         0.018                   1.091                  4526
 Tweets on Trade & Tariffs: Positive Tweets                    0.165                   1.339                  1356
 Tweets on Trade & Tariffs: Negative Tweets                   ¡0.053                   1.081                  2297




                                                            39
                                          Table 9: Trade and Tariff Tweets
This table reports the impact of tweets discussing trade and tariffs on the expected federal funds rate and the stock
market. Tweets that contain either a word from set A or tweets than contain at least one word from set B1 and B2
are considered. Set A    t                                 u
                              trade, tarif f, export, import , B1     t                                      u
                                                                      china, mexico, canada, japan, germany , and set B2     
t                                     u
 deal, buy, purchase, f armer, industry . Tweets which are not related to the subject of trade and tariffs are dropped, as well
as tweets which occur within a narrow time-window after another. The remaining tweets are classified into three categories:
Positive (such as the announcement of a new trade agreement), negative (such as criticizing a trading partner or threatening
tariffs), or ambiguous tweets which do not fit clearly into one category. Conditional on a set on the categorized tweets, panel
A estimates the average change in expectations of the federal funds rate pooling across ten contracts with a nonzero meeting
exposure at each point in time. The event study regresses the expected federal funds rate across different maturities, implied
by the futures prices, on a dummy variable indicating whether the observation is before or after a tweet

                                                 r s     D¨   Fixed Effects   .
                                           Et¡i¨ rt

        r s
Et¡i¨ rt is the market expectation of the federal funds rate for the month when the corresponding future contract expires.
                                                       ¨
The rate is measured in basis points. The subscript  denotes whether the observation is from the pre or post-event outer
window. Fixed effects control for the event time and contracts across different expiration months.
Panel B estimates the average effect on the stock market. Similar to Panel A, the regression projects the variable log-S&P 500
on a dummy variable which indicates whether the observation is before or after a tweet. The regression using extended trading
hours include tweets between 4:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. ET. The regression without pre-market and after-hours trading includes
tweets between 9:30 a.m. and 4 p.m. ET.
Panel C investigates the correlation between changes in log-S&P 500 and changes in the expectations of the Federal Funds Rate
in the event window around the selected tweets. For each FOMC exposure, changes in the expected FFR from the respective
contract are regressed on a constant and the changes in log-S&P 500. Panel C includes the extended trading hours sample.



                                     All                                  Positive                      Negative
                        Coef.      t-stat        N             Coef.      t-stat     N        Coef.      t-stat        N
                                                                                               

    Panel A: FFF Regression
                        0.027       1.32        2543           0.174       3.89      761     ¡0.022 ¡0.77             1293
    Panel B: S&P 500 Regression
    Extended hours      0.003       0.40         255           0.029       2.31      78      ¡0.013 ¡1.06              127
    Trading hours      ¡0.017 ¡0.08              82        ¡0.117 ¡0.17              25      ¡0.039 ¡1.07               38
    Panel C: FFF & S&P 500 Regression
    FOMC   0            ¡0.02      ¡0.13         216           ¡0.29       ¡1.11     68       ¡0.05       ¡0.33        108
    FOMC   1             1.16       5.12         243           1.83        4.76      72        1.50        5.00        122
    FOMC   2             1.40       4.93         249           2.08        5.58      76        1.66        4.03        126
    FOMC   3             1.71       4.65         248           2.32        5.01      75        1.94        3.84        126
    FOMC   4             2.03       4.53         246           2.97        5.17      75         2.3        3.72        125
    FOMC   5             2.25       4.3          244           2.87        2.66      75        2.58        4.44        122
    FOMC   6             2.25       3.81         243           2.81        2.26      72        2.67        3.81        123
    FOMC   7             2.66       4.01         238           3.43        2.11      74        3.27        4.84        117
    FOMC   8             2.76       3.91         223           2.95        1.41      69        3.51        7.42        116
    FOMC   9             3.45       4.52         226           4.58        2.33      69        4.16        5.41        115
    FOMC   10            3.29       4.8          219           4.49        3.90      65        4.88        8.07        111




                                                                40
                                     Figure 1: First Tweet Criticizing the Fed
This plot shows the changes in expected federal funds rates at different horizons with respect to the first
tweet that threatens central bank independence. The contracts are color-coded by their exposure to prior
FOMC meetings before expiration. Contracts in the first group are exposed to between 1 and 4 FOMC
meetings, contracts in the second group are exposed to between 5 and 8 FOMC meetings, and contracts in
the third group are exposed to at least 9 FOMC meetings. Changes are reported as a percentage of the
average absolute change in federal fund futures following FOMC meetings announcement since June 2015
(2.226 bps).
"Russia and China are playing the Currency Devaluation game as the U.S. keeps raising interest rates. Not
                 acceptable!" - Donald J. Trump on the 16th of April 2018 via Twitter
                           0                                         Tweets
                                                                     Exposure to 1 to 4 FOMC meetings
                         -5                                          Exposure to 5 to 8 FOMC meetings
                                                                     Exposure to at least 9 FOMC meetings

                         -10
            Et [rt+j ]




                         -15


                         -20


                         -25


                         -30
                               -10     -5         0          5          10               15                 20
                                                        time (min)




                                                        41
                                                   Figure 2: Event Window

¢, ¥, ¥
This figure illustrates the selection of trades to study the impact of an even which occurs at 0. The symbols
            represent trades. Trades that fall outside the outer windows, t   T0 , t ¡ T3 , or within the
inner window, T1   t   T2 , are disregarded. Within each subset, rT0 , T1 s and rT2 , T3 s, the trades satisfing
arg maxt tpt ut
              tT0 and arg mint tpt utT2 are selected, i.e. trades that minimize the distance to the inner
                T1                    tT3

window.

                                    Outer Window                                             Disregard



                               T0
                                                   ¢ T1          0
                                                                           ¢
                                                                          T2             T3

                                                          Inner Window



                                            Figure 3: Interest Rate Cut Timing
This figure provides two illustrative examples highlighting the importance of the timing of the interest rate
cuts in relation to our benchmark estimates. In both panels, the black and red lines represent the expected
path of the average FFR before and after the tweet, respectively. The numbers on top of the lines represent
the time horizon, while the numbers below the lines represent the change in expectations at that horizon.
Panel A presents an example of a revision in expectations that only affects short horizons. Panel B presents
an example in which the size of the revision of expectations grows over time.

                     Panel A
                          1         2   3      4       5     6        7    8   9    10   11     12 horizon
      Et rF F Ti s




                          0     ¡0.5 ¡0.5 ¡0.5 ¡0.5          0        0    0   0    0    0       0




                     Panel B
                          1         2   3      4       5     6        7    8   9    10   11     12 horizon
      Et rF F Ti s




                          0     ¡0.5 ¡0.5 ¡0.5 ¡0.5
                                                            ¡0.5 ¡0.5
                                                                          ¡1   ¡1   ¡1   ¡1     ¡1




                                                                 42
                               Figure 4: Time Horizons for Joint Estimation
This figure provides an illustration of the four distinct cases considered in our joint estimation of the term
structure of expectations with respect to the time horizon.

                       m0                       m1                         m2

              dt       d0 ¡ dt m0 ¡ d0

                                      I              I                     I       I              I
             r¡1         r0          r0       r1    r0          r2    r1  r0      r2       r3    r2
                   t          FOMC                                        FOMC


                       March                   April                       May              June




                                                         43
                                        Figure 5: News Threatening the Removal of Powell
This plot shows the changes in expected federal funds rates at different horizons with respect to the
Bloomberg story that Trump allegedly asked White House lawyers for options on removing Powell. The
contracts are color-coded by their exposure to prior FOMC meetings before expiration. Group A is exposed
up to 4 FOMC meetings, Group B up to 8, and Group C to at least 9 meetings. Changes are reported as a
percentage of the average absolute change in federal fund futures following FOMC meetings announcement
since June 2015.

                                            Trump Asked White House Lawyers for Options on Removing Powell (2019-06-18)

                          50

                          25

                           0
           Et [rt+j ]




                        -25

                        -50

                        -75         Publication
                                    Exposure to 1 to 4 FOMC meetings
                        -100        Exposure to 5 to 8 FOMC meetings
                                    Exposure to at least 9 FOMC meetings
                        -125

                           -1.0                 - 0. 5                     0.0                       0.5                  1.0                   1.5
                                                                                    time (min)


                                                Figure 6: Bets on the Removal of Powell
This figure shows the daily price of a contract that pays 1$ if the Senate confirms a new Fed chair in 2019
on PredictIt together with the scheduled FOMC meetings during 2019.
                                          PredictIt: Will the Senate confirm a new Fed chair in 2019?

           0.14


           0.12


           0.10
   Price




           0.08


           0.06


           0.04                        White House report
                                       August 23rd tweets
           0.02                        FOMC Meeting

                          2019-01   2019-02 2019-03      2019-04   2019-05       2019-06   2019-07    2019-08   2019-09   2019-10   2019-11   2019-12




                                                                                   44
A     Data
A.1     Asset prices
Futures Contracts
Market expectations of the future fed funds rate are inferred from tick-by-tick trade data
of 30-day federal funds futures on the Chicago Board of Trade Exchange (XCBT) obtained
from the CBE. This dataset covers the period of January 1995 to October 2019. Price,
volume, contract expiration, entry date, second precision timestamps of trades, and the
trading sequence are observed. Observations with zero volume, indicating that the trade was
cancelled, are dropped from the sample. If there are multiple trades of the same contract
within the same second, the trade with the lowest sequence number is used (i.e., the earliest
trade within that particular second).
    Federal funds future contracts are financially settled on the first business day following
the last trading day. For an expiring contract, the last trading day corresponds to the last
business day in the delivery month of the futures contract. The price quotation for this type
of contract is 100 minus the arithmetic average of the daily effective federal funds rate dur-
ing the contract month (expiration month). The corresponding daily federal funds overnight
rate is provided by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. On weekends or holidays, this
rate is equal to the previous reported rate on a business day.

S&P500 index ETF SPY
The stock market dataset consists of intraday transaction prices for the S&P500 index ETF
SPY. The tick-by-tick observations are obtained from the Trade and Quote (TAQ) database.
The raw data is cleaned following Barndorff-Nielsen, Hansen, Lunde, and Shephard (2008)
and Bollerslev, Li, and Xue (2018). Market microstructure noise is further reduced by
resampling the data and taking the median price within each second. Our sample period
starts on the announcement day of the presidential campaign of Donald Trump (June 16,
2015) and ends on the last day for observations on futures prices are available in our dataset.

A.2     Event Selection
FOMC Announcements
All past and future FOMC meeting days are collected from the website of the Federal Re-
serve Bank. For precise timestamps of past FOMC announcements we select the timestamp
of the first report on the federal funds rate decision. The first report is the earliest re-
port between the Terminal News Ticker from Bloomberg and the Twitter accounts @cnbc,
@cnbcnow, @zerohedge, and businessinsider.

Tweets
The entire set of tweets are collected from the Twitter account of President Trump from
his personal account (@realDonaldTrump). Each observation includes the text, the accurate
to the second timestamp, and a classification of the tweet into either a reply or a retweet.
All tweets issued after the announcement of his presidential campaign in June 2015 are con-
sidered. The last observation is from November 2019. The benchmark criteria for selecting


                                              45
tweets which pose a threat to central bank independence are as following. Select any tweet
by @realDonaldTrump which includes one of the following words: fed, rate, jerome, jay,
powell. This includes tweets which contain word extensions such as the word 'federal' is
captured by 'fed'. Next, the obtained set of tweets is cleaned according to
  1. Off-topic tweets
     Drop tweets that do not refer to the topic of interest. For example, 'fed' appears in a
     tweet that refers to the law enforcement agency
     Example: Terrible shootings in ElPaso, Texas. Reports are very bad, many killed.
     Working with State and Local authorities, and Law Enforcement. Spoke to Governor
     to pledge total support of Federal Government. God be with you all!
  2. Double tweets
     Drop subsequent tweets that occur after an initial tweet within a small time frame (i.e.
     threads) are dropped. This eliminates the possibility of double counting a particular
     event.
     Example:
     2019-10-31 09:37:39 People are VERY disappointed in Jay Powell and the Federal Re-
     serve. The Fed has called it wrong from the beginning, too fast, too slow. They even
     tightened in the beginning. Others are running circles around them and laughing all
     the way to the bank. Dollar & Rates are hurting...
     2019-10-31 09:37:45 ....our manufacturers. We should have lower interest rates than
     Germany, Japan and all others. We are now, by far, the biggest and strongest Coun-
     try, but the Fed puts us at a competitive disadvantage. China is not our problem, the
     Federal Reserve is! We will win anyway.
  3. Announcements
     Drop tweets that announce a new appointment to the Federal Reserve or a withdrawal
     of a candidate.
     Example: It is my pleasure to announce that @StephenMoore , a very respected Economist,
     will be nominated to serve on the Fed Board. I have known Steve for a long time and
     have no doubt he will be an outstanding choice!
  4. Retweets
     Drop tweets which do not contain new information other than the reiteration of the
     President of a tweet by someone else and are indicated by quotation marks.
     Example: "If the Fed backs off and starts talking a little more Dovish, I think we're
     going to be right back to our 2800 to 2900 target range that weve had for the S&P 500."
     Scott Wren, Wells Fargo.
  5. Irrelevance
     Drop tweets which are not a direct criticism of the Federal Reserve. While they are not
     off-topic and mention the Federal Reserve, these tweets don't advocate a clear pressure
     on the Fed to lower interest rates.
     Example: It is so important to audit The Federal Reserve, and yet Ted Cruz missed the
     vote on the bill that would allow this to be done.


                                            46
  6. Trade & Tariffs
     Drop tweets which include other information about the economy, in particular, com-
     ments on trade or tariffs with respect to a specific country.
     Example: Despite the unnecessary and destructive actions taken by the Fed, the Econ-
     omy is looking very strong, the China and USMCA deals are moving along nicely, there
     is little or no Inflation, and USA optimism is very high!

In the robustness section 3.4, an alternative selection criteria is considered. The results in
table 4 are based on the same set of tweets which include the keywords fed, rate, jerome,
jay, powell. Tweets are dropped according to the technical criteria 1-4, i.e. tweets which are
off-topic, doubles, announcements, or retweets. In contrast to the benchmark specification
we include tweets which were classified as irrelevant or which did contain information on
trade or tariffs.
Section 5.1 implements the following selection criteria for tweets on tariffs and trade by
President Trump's Twitter account. Select a tweet which contains either a word from set
A0 or at least one word from set B1 and simultaneously at least one word from set B2 . Set
A0 contains the words china, mexico, canada, japan, germany. Set B1 is a list with the
words china, mexico, canada, japan, germany and B2 includes deal, buy, purchase, farmer,
industry. This selection ensures that all relevant tweets are selected while minimizing the
number of tweets which are off-topic. Next, the obtained set of tweets is cleaned by removing
any off-topic tweets which do not refer to the topic of interest. An example is The U.S.,
together with Mexico and Canada, just got the World Cup. Congratulations - a great deal
of hard work! In addition, tweets which occur within a narrow time-window after another
are dropped. The remaining tweets are classified into three categories: Positive (such as
the announcement of a new trade agreement), negative (such as criticizing a trading partner
or threatening tariffs), or ambiguous tweets which do not fit clearly into one category. For
example, the tweet My meeting in Argentina with President Xi of China was an extraordinary
one. Relations with China have taken a BIG leap forward! Very good things will happen.
We are dealing from great strength, but China likewise has much to gain if and when a deal
is completed. Level the field! is classified as positive. The tweet I have just authorized a
doubling of Tariffs on Steel and Aluminum with respect to Turkey as their currency, the
Turkish Lira, slides rapidly downward against our very strong Dollar! Aluminum will now
be 20% and Steel 50%. Our relations with Turkey are not good at this time! is classified as
negative.




                                             47
