                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          MARRIAGE, FERTILITY, AND CULTURAL INTEGRATION IN ITALY

                                         Alberto Bisin
                                          Giulia Tura

                                      Working Paper 26303
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26303


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                        September 2019, Revised November 2019




We thank Pierre-André Chiappori, Alfred Galichon, Ilse Lindenlaub, Corinne Low, Costas
Meghir, Simon Weber and seminar participants at University of Bologna, CESifo Institute,
Collegio Carlo Alberto, Cowles Foundation, CReAM/RWI Workshop on the Economics of
Migration, 34th AIEL Conference of Labour Economics, EUI, LISER for very useful comments.
Data used in this paper has been examined at the ADELE Laboratory (Laboratorio per l'Analisi
dei Dati ELEmentari) at ISTAT, in compliance with the laws on the protection of statistical
confidentiality and of personal data. We are solely responsible for the results and the opinions
expressed in this paper, which do not constitute official statistics. We are grateful to Lorena
Viviano and Silvia da Valle of the ADELE Laboratory in Milan and Florence for their support in
providing us useful documentations and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Alberto Bisin and Giulia Tura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Marriage, Fertility, and Cultural Integration in Italy
Alberto Bisin and Giulia Tura
NBER Working Paper No. 26303
September 2019, Revised November 2019
JEL No. D1,J12,J13,J15

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the cultural integration of immigrants, estimating a structural model of marital
matching along ethnic dimensions, exploring in detail the role of fertility, and possibly divorce in
the integration process. We exploit rich administrative demographic data on the universe of
marriages formed in Italy, as well as birth and separation records from 1995 to 2012. We estimate
strong preferences of ethnic minorities' towards socialization of children to their own identity,
identifying marital selection and fertility choices as fundamental socialization mechanisms. The
estimated cultural intolerance of Italians towards immigrant minorities is also substantial.
Turning to long-run simulations, we find that cultural intolerances, as well as fertility and
homogamy rates, slow-down the cultural integration of some immigrant ethnic minorities,
especially Latin America, East Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa. Nonetheless, 75%of immigrants
integrate into the majoritarian culture over the period of a generation. Interestingly, we show by
counterfactual analysis that a lower cultural intolerance of Italians towards minorities would lead
to slower cultural integration by allowing immigrants a more widespread use of their own
language rather than Italian in heterogamous marriages. Finally, we quantitatively assess the
effects of large future immigration inflows.


Alberto Bisin
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
alberto.bisin@nyu.edu

Giulia Tura
Department of Economics
European University Institute
Via delle Fontanelle, 18
San Domenico di Fiesole, FI 50014
Italy
giulia.tura@EUI.eu
1       Introduction
The recent surge in migration flows to Western countries represents one of the most con-
tentious political and socio-economic phenomenon of the last decades. Voters' attitudes
towards immigration reveal large support for restrictive immigration policies. This support
appears to be motivated in large part by the perceived cultural externalities immigration
imposes on natives in the integration process, since sizeable negative labor market effects of
immigration on natives are far from well-documented (Bisin and Zanella, 2017).1 Indeed, the
empirical evidence documents slow rates of convergence and strong persistence in cultural
traits on the part of minorities (Algan et al., 2012; Fern´andez, 2011).
    But cultural convergence and integration are equilibrium phenomena, the result of a
demand of integration on the part of immigrants and a supply, in the form of cultural accep-
tance, on the part of natives. In order to gauge a better understanding of these mechanisms,
to distinguish the demand and supply components which contribute to the slow-down of
immigrants' economic and cultural integration, this paper takes a structural approach to
study the cultural integration of immigrants' minorities. More specifically, we propose a
model of marital matching along the cultural-ethnic lines, where individuals choose who
to marry whom forming expectations regarding their future marital utilities. Importantly,
marital utilities emerge endogenously in the model, as they are a function of intra-household
decisions, namely fertility, divorce and crucially the investments in the cultural socialization
of children. We focus here on the role of the family into the process of cultural integration
of new generations. The family has in fact, arguably, a pivotal function in this process
as the first, but possibly the most significant, place where values, attitudes and beliefs are
transmitted from parents to children.
    To this end, we study a structural model of family formation and intra-household decision
making in a context where ethnic differences between spouses potentially matter both in
terms of preferences and technologies for household production. The model is consistent
with several stylized facts of marriage markets, e.g., the strong positive assortative mating
along cultural-ethnic lines and the relative lack of stability of intermarriages. We estimate
the model parameters using rich administrative data on the universe of marriages formed in
Italy, as well as birth and separation records.

    1
     A large empirical literature in economics has investigated the effects of immigration on natives labour
market outcomes, without reaching a final consensus. Results are polarized. While some studies uncover
negative and persistent wage effects (Borjas, 2003, 2014), others provide evidence in favour of positive long-
term wage effects (Card, 2009; Ottaviano and Peri, 2012; Manacorda et al., 2012; Card and Peri, 2016) or
even heterogeneous effects along the wage distribution (Dustmann et al., 2013).



                                                      1
    More in detail, we consider a transferable utility (TU) marriage matching model in a
two-sided market without frictions. Spouses match along the cultural-ethnic dimension.
The joint marital utility is the sum of a systematic and an idiosyncratic component. The id-
iosyncratic component reflects individual unobserved heterogeneity (Choo and Siow, 2006).
The systematic component depends on observable spouses' characteristics and is the re-
sult of a collective household decision problem embedded within this matching framework.
Within marriage, parents choose fertility, investments in the cultural socialization of chil-
dren, and possibly divorce. Parents care about socializing their children and are endowed
with technologies to transmit their own cultural-ethnic traits to children (Bisin and Verdier,
2000, 2001). Socialization incentives and technologies vary, in particular, within homoga-
mous and heterogamous marriages. Furthermore, the socialization behavior depends on the
distribution of the population across ethnic groups. As a consequence, the model implies
a systematic dependence of fertility, socialization, and divorce patterns across household
ethnic characteristics.
    Our empirical analysis exploits variability in cultural-ethnic identity across immigrants
in the Italian marriage market. Indeed, Italy has recently experienced massive waves of eth-
nically heterogeneous immigration.2 We obtained administrative individual-level data from
ISTAT through its ADELE (Laboratorio per l'Analisi dei Dati ELEmentari ) Laboratory.
These data cover the universe of marriages formed in Italy from 1995 to 2012 and the uni-
verse of births and separations registered in Italy in the same time period. We then matched
marriage records with birth and separation records to provide a dynamic representation of
intra-household decisions, from the moment of marital formation to potential childbirth and
dissolution decisions.
    Descriptively, the data reveal strong positive assortative mating preferences along eth-
nic lines. Different behavioral patterns distinguish the majoritarian Italian group from the
minority ethnic groups. Systematic differences also characterize homogamous and heteroga-
mous household choices in terms of fertility, socialization, and divorce. For instance, homog-
amous minority households have a strong preference toward the transmission of their own
language, hence the probability of speaking Italian at home is lower compared to those in
heterogamous families.
    We estimate the parameters of the structural model via a method of moments estima-
tor, exploiting two sources of cross-sectional variability in outcomes, i.e., across (the ethnic

   2
     At the beginning of 2014, the number of foreign residents registered in Italy was more than 4.9 million,
accounting for 8.1% of the total resident population. This is in comparison to 2013, when the same percentage
was around 7.4% and as little as ten years earlier, in 2003, it was 2.6%. As a consequence, the percentage of
interethnic marriages nearly tripled during the period of investigation from 1995 to 2012.



                                                     2
composition of) marital matches and across geographical regions. The main parameters of in-
terest in the model are the cultural intolerance parameters, that is, the (psychological) value
a parent obtains when socializing a child to his/her own ethnic identity, relative to having a
child with a specific different cultural-ethnic identity. Cultural intolerances represent a mea-
sure of the strength of the cultural transmission effort of a specific ethnic group and hence
of the strength of its resistance to cultural integration. We estimate cultural intolerance
parameters that are positive, asymmetric and highly heterogeneous across cultural-ethnic
groups. In particular, ethnic minority parents display strong preferences towards socializa-
tion of children, as measured by language transmission, particularly so for parents from North
Africa-Middle East, whose estimated cultural intolerance is nearly seven times as high as the
one of Europe-EU15. On the other hand, we also estimate the highest cultural intolerance
of the Italian majority towards immigrants originating from Sub-Saharan Africa and North
Africa-Middle East (four times as high as the one towards immigrants from Europe-EU15).
    We investigate the evolution of the distribution of the population by cultural traits in
the long-run, by simulating our model of marital matching and intra-household choices over
successive generations. Despite cultural intolerance estimates highlight strong preferences of
immigrants for maintaining their cultural identity, all cultural-ethnic minorities are simulated
to converge to the Italian majority along the language dimension. Furthermore, 75% of im-
migrants integrate into the majoritarian culture over the period of a generation; that is, 75%
of the second generation immigrants speaks Italian at home with their children. However,
the pace of convergence is heterogeneous across cultural-ethnic groups. On the one hand,
we find that the Europe-EU15 and Other Europe minorities converge almost completely to
the majoritarian culture in a single generation. A similar pattern is also displayed by the
North Africa-Middle-East minority. On the other hand, a significantly slower convergence
rate is achieved by the Latin America minority which even restrain their integration process
towards the native culture in the first generation and after four generations only 70% of
immigrants culturally integrate along the language dimension. A slower convergence rate
also characterizes the East Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa minorities.
    The patterns of cultural integration of Europe-EU15 and Other Europe minorities are the
result of their relatively low cultural intolerance preferences. In a similar way, the East Asia
and Sub-Saharan Africa minorities' slower integration is due in part to their higher intoler-
ance parameters. But intolerance parameters are not the only determinants of the dynamics
of integration of different cultural-ethnic groups. For instance, while North Africa-Middle
East, Sub-Saharan Africa, and East Asia show relatively comparable cultural intolerance
preferences, they display significant differences in the dynamics of integration. Indeed, a
strong estimated selection into homogamous marriages for Sub-Saharan Africa migrants al-


                                               3
lows them to sustain their cultural heterogeneity by accessing superior direct socialization
technologies. On the other hand, estimated fertility rates are particularly high for East
Asia minorities and this is a fundamental factor behind this minority's integration pattern.
Finally, the relative success of the Latin America in securing their cultural distinctiveness
over time is due in large part to the fact that they turn out to be uniquely able to socialize
children also in heterogamous marriages with natives.
    The relative speed of the cultural integration of immigrants is also in relevant part due
to the cultural intolerance of Italians, the strength in their own cultural transmission pref-
erences. The sign of this counterfactual effect is somewhat surprising. In principle, letting
natives more (indeed fully) accepting of the cultural traits and beliefs of immigrants might
make their cultural integration easier and hence faster, for instance by fostering heteroga-
mous marriages. Actually, when we simulate our model by assuming an higher willingness
of the majority to welcome cultural dissimilarities, the dynamics of integration of minorities
towards Italian's culture is reduced by 15% over the period of a generation, and we observe a
remarkably larger persistence in heterogeneity of cultural traits. In fact, the intuition is that
an higher acceptance of the culture of minorities on the part of natives allows immigrants to
better maintain their cultural traits by means of higher socialization rates when married with
natives, with a consequential predicted increase in demand for intermarriages with natives,
and higher fertility.
    Finally, we study the effects of a rise in migration inflows on cultural heterogeneity in
Italy, by performing two counterfactual simulation exercises, doubling the number of second
generation minorities with different compositional assumption. The effects are varied. When
the inflows are designed to keep population shares constant, we see a reduction in cultural
convergence of 7 percentage points for third generation; that is, 86% of immigrants integrate
into the majoritarian culture by the third generation, compared to the 93% of convergence
at the baseline. More in detail, the rise in migration inflows has small effect on the cultural
integration of Europe-EU15, Other Europe and North Africa-Middle East minorities, while
it reduces integration of 20 and 6 percentage points, respectively, for Sub-Saharan Africa and
East Asia minorities. When we modify the relative distribution of minorities, overweighting
North Africa-Middle East, Sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia, we observe a similar pattern.
While North Africa-Middle East immigrants reduce convergence of only a 4 percentage points
by the third generation, the response of East Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa minorities ranges
from a 20 to a 60 points reduction in convergence, slowing down significantly the process of
cultural integration.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1.1, next, provides a discussion of the
related literature. Section 2 outlines the theoretical framework, discussing the general setup,


                                                4
the timing of the model and choice components, and we discuss theoretical results. Section 3
describes the data used in the empirical analysis and interesting patterns. Section 4 presents
the structural model, the estimation strategy, the identification of model parameters and a
discussion of the main assumptions of our empirical model. We present the estimation results
in Section 5 and we study the dynamics of the distribution of cultural-ethnic traits in the
population over successive generations in Section 6. We provide additional counterfactuals
in Section 7 by studying the effects of an increase of incoming migration flows on cultural
heterogeneity. Finally, Section 8 concludes.


1.1     Related Literature
This paper fits into the literature on family economics by studying a model of marital
matching and intra-household decisions.3 More specifically, we embed a collective household
decision problem into a marital matching framework, as first in Chiappori et al. (2017).
The context of the analysis is however different: Chiappori et al. (2017) study returns to
education, while we study cultural-ethnic socialization patterns. Other papers along similar
methodological lines include (Chiappori et al., 2018; Gayle and Shephard, 2019; Galichon
et al., 2019).4
    This paper also fits into the recent literature on cultural transmission. Cultural-ethnic
socialization patterns within the family are arguably the main mechanism to explain the
intergenerational transmission of cultural norms and preferences.5 In particular, we follow
Bisin et al. (2004) in that we characterize the contribution of various intra-household deci-
sions to the cultural transmission process. On the other hand, we focus on cultural-ethnic
rather than religious traits, we center on immigrants, studying the dynamics of integration
of cultural-ethnic minorities, and we formulate and estimate explicitly a marital matching
problem in which we embed socialization choices.
    Finally, this paper fits into the large literature on the cultural integration of immigrants.
In this respect, (Gordon, 1964; Meng and Gregory, 2005; Constant and Zimmermann, 2008;

   3
      See the early contributions by Gary Becker, (Becker, 1973, 1974; Becker et al., 1977; Becker, 1991).
   4
      See Choo and Siow (2006); Choo (2015); Chiappori et al. (2009, 2012); Dupuy and Galichon (2014);
Galichon and Salani´ e (2015); Ahn (2018) for the more recent contributions to the study of marital matching
problems and Chiappori and Salani´   e (2016) for a comprehensive survey; and see also Lundberg and Pollak
(1993); Chiappori (1988, 1992); Chiappori et al. (2002); Blundell et al. (2007); Del Boca et al. (2014); Voena
(2015) for advances in the study of spouses interactions in marriage.
    5
      See Bisin and Verdier (2000, 2001) for theoretical models of socialization. See Fern´
                                                                                          andez et al. (2004);
Nunn and Wantchekon (2011); Voigtl¨    ander and Voth (2012); Alesina et al. (2013); Grosjean (2014); Guiso
et al. (2016) for some of the many empirical studies documenting the persistence of cultural traits. Finally,
see Bisin and Verdier (2011) for a survey of the theoretical and empirical literature on the subject.



                                                      5
Algan et al., 2012; Furtado and Trejo, 2013; Guirkinger et al., 2019) focus on intermarriage,
(Abramitzky et al., 2019; Clots-Figueras and Masella, 2013; Fouka, 2019) on socialization by
means of children's first names and home language transmission, (Manning and Roy, 2010)
on self-reported national identity, and (Hwang, 2019) on neighbourhood sorting.6 Differently
from this paper, these studies adopt mostly a non-structural approach.




2       Theoretical Framework
We consider a large marriage market, with a population of m men and f women, heteroge-
neous in terms of their cultural-ethnic identity. Each man and each woman is identified by
a cultural-ethnic trait. For simplicity, in this section, we present the theoretical model for
dichotomous cultural traits; say n for natives and i for immigrants.7 The marriage market is
frictionless. Individuals match in the marriage market anticipating the utility of their future
choices as a household. The household choices we consider include fertility, divorce, and
socialization of children in terms of cultural-ethnic traits. Spouses interact cooperatively
within marriage and as a consequence intra-household decisions are Pareto efficient; follow-
ing a divorce, however, they choose non-cooperatively their socialization efforts. Utility is
transferable (TU) across spouses.8 Transfers are endogenously determined as equilibrium
outcomes, depending on the quality of the specific match but also on the set of available
opportunities in the marriage market. Total marital utility is the sum of two components: i)
a systematic component related to the fertility, divorce, and socialization in the household;
and ii) an idiosyncratic component, capturing residual idiosyncratic returns from marriage,
observed by the individuals prior to marriage.
    Each individual has a preference over the cultural-ethnic identity of his/her children and
has an available socialization technology. In the empirical application, we will proxy cultural
socialization by language transmission. Family types are heterogeneous, as spouses might or
might not share the same cultural traits. Let the notation {h, j } denote a household type
where the male has cultural-ethnic identity h and the female j with h, j  {n, i}; let {h, .}

    6
      With regards to economic rather than cultural integration, specifically, the wage and employment gap
between native and immigrants, see, e.g., Borjas (2014), the review of this book by Card and Peri (2016),
and Constant and Zimmermann (2013) for surveys of empirical findings.
    7
      The empirical exercise, and the theoretical model presented in the Appendix, allow for multiple cultural-
ethnic traits of immigrants.
    8
      Under TU, we assume that spouses are able to transfer utility between each other in absence of transition
costs at a constant rate of exchange. The resulting utility possibility frontier is linear. Hence, this assumption
implies that household decisions are orthogonal to changes affecting the structure of the marriage market as
well as changes in the allocation of power between spouses.


                                                        6
denote the household type composed of an unmarried male with trait h and let {., h} be
the type composed of an unmarried female with trait h. Let T denote the set of possible
types of household, along the cultural-ethnic identity.9 We use t  T to index all types of
household, including those composed of unmarried individuals. We use hj  T to index
married household types.


                                     Figure 1: Timing of the Model

      Individual                                                      Marital
unobserved preferences                                              match quality
          ,                                                              
                                                                         


   Marriage matching                    Fertility                      Divorce                     Socialization
          µt                               n                          d  {0, 1}                     = (m , f )




Timing. The timing of the marriage model is illustrated in Figure 1. Let h and h denote
the individual idiosyncratic preference shocks for men and women, respectively, with identity
h; a vector, each element of which represents the idiosyncratic component of utility associated
to a possible type of spouse the individual might be matched with (including none, if he/she
stayed single).10 The total expected utility of a household of type hj between man m with
identity h and female f of identity j (resp. h.) is then Uhj + hj + jh (resp. Uh. + h. ). In
the first stage individuals observe their idiosyncratic shocks and match along cultural-ethnic
identity traits in a frictionless marriage market with TU, anticipating their marital utility
Ut + t + t for all different potential matches. We normalize Uh. = U.h = 0, for all h = n, i.
Let µt denote the fraction of households of type t formed in the population.
    After households are formed in the marriage market, in the second stage, the spouses
in the household choose, cooperatively, fertility in the marriage, that is, the number of
children, n (abusing notation). In the third stage, a match quality shock hj is realized,
which is observed by the spouses. Depending to the realization of the shock, the spouses

    9
      Formally, this is the set of permutations with repetition. With K different traits, the set has (K +1)2 - 1
elements; hence 8 in the dichotomous trait case, in this section.
   10
      We assume that individual idiosyncratic preference shocks are additive separable in preferences and
depend on observable characteristics only. Despite this we still allow for sorting on unobservable dimen-
sions, this separability assumption excludes complementarity between unobserved spouses' characteristics
(Chiappori and Salani´   e, 2016).

                                                       7
cooperatively decide whether they remain married or to divorce: d = 1 indicates the choice
of divorcing and d = 0 the choice of continuing in marriage. Finally, children are socialized,
either as a cooperative decision by both parents in the household or as a non-cooperative
decision of the mother in case the household is separated in divorce.11

Matching. Let q h define the fraction of individuals with trait h in the population, mh males
and f h = q h - mh females. Under separability and proper distributional assumptions on the
individual unobserved heterogeneity components, the optimal stable assignment, µt , is the
solution of the following convex problem, subject to the feasibility constraints (Galichon and
Salani´e, 2015):

                                    max(µt 0)tT        tT µt Ut - (µ)
                                    s.t.
                                                                                                            (1)
                                       j µhj + µh. = mh   h = n, i,
                                       h µhj + µ.j = fj  j = n, i
   where (µ) represents the generalized entropy of the matching. Conditional on observed
spouses' characteristics, (µ) means to capture the dispersion of individual preferences with
respect to the aggregate preferences.12

   We turn now to construct the expected systematic utility component Uhj for each house-
hold type hj  T . Uhj is the indirect utility of the household future choices of fertility,
divorce, and socialization. We make a series of simplifying assumptions. First of all, the
marital utility is proportional to fertility n and the utility per child is composed of an ex-
pected utility from socialization uhj and constant direct utility  from having a child in the
marriage as opposed to outside the marriage. Investment in fertility entails a cost c(n).
Furthermore, the marital quality shock  enters marital utility only if the household stays
married (does not divorce), that is, it chooses d = 0:

                  Uhj = n (E (uhj ) +  (1 - d)) + (1 - d) - c(n), with E () = 0                             (2)

From the above equation notice that the systematic value of a match arises endogenously
in the model, and it is a function of the match specific utility that parents derive from

   11
      The fact that socialization efforts are chosen conditional on divorce is merely a simplification, but it
does not affect the main results. In fact, what we need is that at least part of the socialization process takes
place after divorce or, said differently, that socialization is completed only conditional on marital status.
   12
      The detailed expression of (µ) under the specific distributional assumptions we make in our model is
described in Section 4.



                                                       8
socialization uhj .
   We proceed backwards, from socialization to fertility.

Socialization. We start from the socialization problem, given (n, hj , d). In fact, under the
preference structure we imposed, the socialization choice is independent of fertility n and it
depends on hj only through d.
    Let Vjh denote the utility a parent with trait j obtains if the child is socialized to trait
h, for all h, j . Each parent's preference over the cultural-ethnic identity of his/her children
is biased towards his/her own trait:

                                    Vhh > Vhj , for all h = j  {n, i}.13

    With regards to the socialization technology, we introduce several simplification assump-
tions. First of all, within a family all children identify to the same trait.14 Secondly, ho-
mogamous native households socialize their children with probability 1; that is, children of
native parents speak the native language. Thirdly, in a household of type hj the socialization
effort of the father, m , has the objective and the effect of increasing the probability that the
children identify with his trait, h; similarly, the socialization effort of the mother, f , has
the objective and the effect of increasing the probability that the children identify with her
trait, j . Parents in heterogamous households, such that h = j , face conflicting incentives in
the socialization of children, while parents in homogamous households, with h = j , benefit
from coordinate incentives. Finally, the socialization technology responds to the social en-
vironment, in such a way that if a child fails to be socialized within the family, socialization
occurs mimicking a role model selected at random from the population of reference. The
contribution of the social environment represents the horizontal component of the cultural
socialization process.
           h
    Let Phj  (, d) denote the probability that a child in a family of type hj is socialized with
the father's trait h = n, i, when the socialization effort is  = (m , f ) and the divorce
choice is d. Assuming that the mother is given custody of children in divorce15 , we posit

   13                     h      j
      By assuming that Vh   > Vh   , we focus our attention on purely cultural socialization incentives of parents
and we abstract from considering economic integration incentives. For a general discussion, refer to Bisin
and Verdier (2001, 2010).
   14
      In particular, we abstract from differences in socialization preferences regarding the gender and/or the
birth order of children and from socialization externalities driven by spillover effects across siblings.
   15
       We introduce an asymmetry between spouses in the probability of child custody assignment upon
dissolution, independently from the ethnic-groups h, j . We calculate that in 88% of separation and divorce
proceedings in Italy, the mother is given effective custody of children. We uncover some significant differences
in custody assignment conditional on mother and father migrant status, but we abstract from incorporating
them in the model for the sake of simplicity. Specifically, foreign mothers married with a native husband


                                                        9
socialization technologies, extending Bisin and Verdier (2000), as follows:


           n           n
         Pnn  (, 0) = Pnn (, 1) = 1
         Pii (, 0) = m + f + (1 - m - f )q i , Pii
           i                                     n
                                                   (, 0) = (1 - m - f )(1 - q i )
           i
                                                                                                         (3)
         Pin (, 0) = m + (1 - m - f )q i ,       n
                                               Pin (, 0) = f + (1 - m - f )(1 - q i )
           i
         Pni (, 0) = f + (1 - m - f )q i ,       n
                                               Pni (, 0) = m + (1 - m - f )(1 - q i )

                                               h
    Socialization probabilities under divorce Phj (, 1) are equivalent to those reported in
(3), after imposing m = 0. The total marital utility from the socialization process, net of
socialization costs c( ) is:

                         h
            uhj (, d) = Phj (, d) Vhh + Vjh + 1 - Phj
                                                   h
                                                      (, d)              Vhj + Vjj - c( )
                        = Vhj + Vjj + Phj
                                       h
                                          (, d) Vhj - Vjh 1 Vhj > Vjh
                                       j
                                    +Phj (, d) Vjh - Vhj 1 Vjh  Vhj - c( ).

   where Vhj = Vhh - Vhj and Vjh = Vjj - Vjh represent the cultural intolerance of cultural-
ethnic group h and j , respectively.
   Socialization effort  is then the solution to

                                              max uhj (, d).                                             (4)
                                                0

Let the solution be denoted hj (d). Notice that it depends only on Vhj , Vjh rather than
on the utility levels Vjh (which do not affect the maximization problem in (4)).

Divorce. After observing the realization of the marriage quality shock hj , the spouses
optimally choose whether to dissolve the marriage (divorce) or not, rationally anticipating
their total utility from the socialization process. Given n, a type hj household divorces,
choosing d = 1, if

                           n (uhj (hj (1), 1)) > n ( + uhj (hj (0), 0)) + hj .



Fertility. Given F (hj ) the cumulative distribution of hj , the probability of divorce of a
type hj household with n children is

are less likely to obtain their child's custody by 1.4 (3.4) p.p. compared to native mothers, upon separation
(divorce). On the contrary, native mothers are more likely to obtain their children custody by 5.1 (6.9) p.p.
following a separation (divorce) if married with a foreign husband.


                                                     10
                         hj (n) = F (nuhj ( (1), 1) - nuhj ( (0), 0) - n ) .

    The quantity-quality trade-off that characterizes endogenous fertility choices (Becker,
1960) is captured in the model as the optimal number of children is determined by the
expected socialization quality per child, interacted with the effect of fertility itself on disso-
lution, and the marginal cost of raising them:

               max n (hj (n) uhj ( (1), 1) + (1 - hj (n))( + uhj ( (0), 0))) - c(n)                      (5)
                 n



2.1     Results
We describe here informally the most important implication of the marriage model in the
previous section, for a culturally heterogeneous society, with q i  (0, 1/2).

Socialization. Parents make costly investments in order to socialize their children, both in
homogamous and heterogamous families. Socialization investments in homogamous families
benefit from coordinated incentives. Conversely, a positive socialization investment in het-
erogamous families hinges on cultural intolerance asymmetries. In addition, homogamous
families, when married, hold a more efficient socialization technology, compared to heterog-
amous ones. If they divorce, the socialization technology is the same independently of the
type of household. As a consequence,

           In homogamous minority households ii, when the parents stay married, both
       parents' socialize the children. If, instead, the household divorces, only the mother
       has custody and socializes the children, by assumption, and the investment in so-
       cialization is lower. In heterogamous households ni and in, when the parents
       stay married, only the parent with higher cultural intolerance has a strictly posi-
       tive socialization effort. If, instead, the household divorces, in this case as well,
       only the mother socializes the children. Heterogamous households, contrary to
       homogamous household, invest more in socialization when divorced than when
       married.

    For all household types, married or divorced, the probability of successful socialization
to the trait desired by the parents (or parent) doing the investment is greater than the rate
associated to random matching.16 We turn now to study comparative statics relationships.

  16
     It is equal for heterogeneous household with equal intolerances, as in this specific case parents do not
socialize children.

                                                     11
           In homogamous minority households, whether parents divorce or stay mar-
       ried, both parents' socialization efforts are monotonically increasing in cultural
       intolerance and decreasing in the size of their cultural group, q i . In heterogamous
       households, the socializing parent effort is monotonically increasing in his/her
       own cultural intolerance; if parents stay married, the socializing parent's effort is
       also decreasing in his/her spouse's cultural intolerance. It is also the case that
       the minority i socializes more than the majority n, ceteris paribus.17


Divorce. Consider an household with positive fertility, n > 0. As the systematic gains from
marriage derive from socialization and divorce leads to a generally less efficient socialization
technology,

           All types of household hj  T stay married if their marriage quality shock
       is positive, hj  0; they divorce only if the quality shock is negative and large
       enough (in absolute value).

On the other hand, in heterogamous households, mothers have an advantage in socialization
after divorce, and therefore,

           The divorce probability of heterogamous families is higher compared to homog-
       amous minority families, for the same realization of the stability shock, hj , if the
       mother has higher cultural intolerance. If instead the father has higher cultural
       intolerance, the divorce probability of heterogamous families is higher compared
       to homogamous families if and only if the father belongs to the cultural-ethnic
       minority i.

Divorce choices for heterogamous families might be interpreted as a strategic deviation from
marriage for mothers who have a preference to socialize children and expect to have a higher
probability of child custody attainment.18
   Furthermore, we can show that,

          The divorce probabilities, for both homogamous and heterogamous families,
       are decreasing in the number of children.

  17
     This is a property called cultural substitution in Bisin and Verdier (2001).
  18
     This perspective is pointed out by Dohmen et al. (2012). Indeed, they make the point that children
are more strongly socialized by a divorced mother rather than in heterogamous families, while there is no
significant difference in socialization compared to homogamous families.




                                                   12
More generally, our model displays a quantity-quality trade-off in fertility, since quality is
effectively represented by the associated efficiency of socialization. This implies a negative
relationship between the probability of divorce of a family and the number of children in
that family.

Fertility. The fertility rates for all types of households are strictly positive. The main result
is that,

            The fertility rate in homogamous families is larger than the fertility rate in
         heterogamous families.


Matching. The systematic component of the marital utilities exhibits a form of endogenous
complementarity in socialization technologies, such that

             The optimal allocation in the marriage market generates positive assortative
         mating along cultural-ethnic lines. Individuals optimally select into homogamous
         families. Deviations from positive sorting are the result of the presence of hetero-
         geneity in individual unobserved preferences and of potential market asymmetries
         in the distribution of cultural-ethnic traits between the two sides of the market.


3        Descriptive Evidence
In this section, we first present the data we use in the estimation. In terms of cultural-ethnic
traits, we distinguish between Italians, as the majoritarian group, and migrant minorities, ag-
gregated by country of origin. We obtain K = 7 cultural-ethnic groups: n = Italian; i = Eu-
ropean (EU15 countries), Other European, North African and Middle-Eastern, Sub-Saharan
African, East Asian and Latin American. This classification reflects both the prevalence
of each ethnic-group in Italy and the relative cultural distance of countries with respect to
Italy.19 We adopt the standard classification that divides Italy in 20 distinct administrative
regions and we consider the region of residence of spouses at the moment of marriage.20

    19
      The classification of immigrants' countries of origin by cultural-ethnic group is reported in Table B.1.
Figure B.1 shows the distribution of the migrant population resident in Italy by country of origin. Figure
B.2 shows the correspondence between our ethnic-group classification and the cultural distance of countries
with respect to Italy, proxied by genetic (Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2009) and ethnolinguistic (Lewis et al.,
2009) distance. Overall, we document the presence of some geographical clusters in cultural dissimilarity
by continent. In particular, our classification parallels the heterogeneity in genetic distance within Africa,
between the Arabic countries in the North and Sub-Saharan countries, as well as the within Asia divide
between Middle-East countries and East Asia countries.
   20
      Interregional migration choices are not taken into account, in line with the theoretical model. See
Section 4.4 for a discussion.

                                                     13
3.1     Data
We take advantage of original administrative individual-level data, which covers the universe
of marriages formed in Italy from 1995 to 2012, and the universe of births and separations
registered in Italy during the same period. Data were made available by ISTAT through its
ADELE Laboratory.21 We constructed a unique dataset, by matching marriage records with
birth and separation records through time-invariant observable characteristics of spouses,
which are available in both registries. Specifically, the union of the exact date of marriage
and exact date and place of birth of both spouses provides an exact one-to-one matching for
98.5% of the universe of marriages. The dynamic structure of data has two main advantages.
First, it allows us to follow households over time, having a full dynamic representation of
intra-household decisions, from the moment of marital formation to potential childbirth and
decisions over marital dissolution. Secondly, it allows us to rule out household sample-
selection driven by divorce choices.
     The final sample consists of more than 4 million marriages, that cover 92.6% of the
universe of marriages celebrated in Italy from 1995 to 2012.22 From this data, we recover
i) the bivariate distribution of marriages, by cultural-ethnic group of spouses and by region;
ii) fertility rates, by cultural-ethnic group of spouses and by region; and iii) the separation
rates, by cultural-ethnic group of spouses and by region.
     Descriptively, the 87.3% of marital unions are homogamous Italian marriages, while the
remaining percentage refers to marriages that involve at least one foreign spouse. The
aggregate bivariate distribution of marriages by ethnic group of spouses is presented in
Table B.3. First marriages account for the 88.3% of the total sample. The comparison of
two marital distributions for first and second or further marriages suggests that remarriage
rates are not systematically different across spousal ethnic groups. In the sample the fertility
rate corresponds to 69.6% with an average of 1.54 children per family. Of all marriages, the
7% end up in separation in the first years of the marital union.

   21
       Requests for accessing the data for research purposes should be addressed to ISTAT through an open
application procedure. Authorized researchers can access and use the data from work stations located in
secure rooms within the ISTAT offices. The output of analysis is made available upon inspection by ADELE
officers in compliance with the laws on the protection of statistical confidentiality and of personal data. For
further information, see https://www.istat.it/it/informazioni-e-servizi/per-i-ricercatori/laboratorio-adele. A
synthetic description of data sources and variables of interest is provided in Table B.2, while a comprehensive
discussion of available data and sample construction is reported in Appendix A.
    22
       We restrict our attention to legal marriages, while cohabitations are not included in our sample. Despite
that the cohabitation rate increased in the last decade, implicitly, we interpret the differential between
legal marriage and cohabitation choices, in light of the fact that marriages involve an additional degree
of commitment, which is especially salient for investments over the long term such as the socialization of
children (Lundberg and Pollak, 1993; Chiappori et al., 2017).



                                                      14
    We complement these data with individual Italian Census data, for 2001 and 2011, to
obtain the distribution of unmatched men and women, by cultural-ethnic group and region.23
The distribution of single male and female adult individuals is reported in Table B.4. Having
information on the distribution of unmatched individuals across cultural-ethnic groups allows
us to uncover systematic differences in selection into marriage. Indeed, among minorities
the probability of entering into marriage is as high as 63% for Latin America individuals,
59% for Sub-Saharan Africa individuals and it reduces to 46% for North Africa-Middle East
individuals, the group that is less likely to marry.
    We derive the population distribution by cultural ethnic group and region for the time
period 1995-2012 from municipality records on the movements of the foreign resident popu-
lation. Population shares by ethnic group and region are calculated thanks to administrative
data on the total resident population at the regional level. The maps in Figure B.3, display
the geographical variability in the ethnic groups' distribution across markets.
    Finally, we proxy the cultural-ethnic transmission with language socialization, relying on
the observation that the ethnic identity and spoken language are relevant culturally related
specific attributes and both allow the direct transmission of cultural characteristics across
generations; see (Dustmann, 1997; Casey and Dustmann, 2008; Ginsburgh and Weber, 2011;
Clots-Figueras and Masella, 2013; Fouka, 2019).24 We recover socialization probabilities by
cultural-ethnic group of spouses and by region from the Condition and Social Integration
of Foreign Nationals Survey (2011-2012). The survey is targeted to foreign residents in
Italy and it is intended to provide a comprehensive representation of the socio-cultural as
well as economic integration of foreign residents, by collecting essential information on their
living conditions, behaviours, attitudes and opinions. For our analysis, we construct our
socialization measure, by considering children and young adults of less than 25 years old,
living with their parents at the time of the interview. The final sample consists of 8,007
individuals belonging to about 5,000 families, 86.7% of these families have married parents

  23
      We select only adult unmatched men and women (of more than 18 years of age). We classify an
individual as unmatched in case she/he is never married, legally separated, divorced or widowed. To account
for the possibility that unmatched individuals might marry in the future, we follow Chiappori et al. (2017)
and restrict the set of unmatched individuals to unmatched men and women after their marriageable age,
defined as the 90th percentile of the age at first marriage distribution for men and women, respectively. In
our data, unmatched rates increase quite symmetrically for all ethnic groups, from 2001 to 2011, the overall
Spearman rank correlation test is as high as 0.88, and equal to 0.57 and 0.98 for available adult men and
adult women, in turn, suggesting that the ethnic-group rank order remains stable over the period, especially
for women.
   24
      We interpret the Italian linguistic socialization as a form of parental investment in integration, which
might be motivated by cultural as well as socio-economic opportunities. Even though we cannot disentangle
the two dimensions, this does not hinder our identification, which exploits both differences in socialization
across groups jointly with marital and intra-household moments.



                                                     15
while the remaining are either separated or divorced. We measure language socialization by
the language spoken within the family: an individual is socialized to the Italian language if
he/she declares to speak Italian within the family;25 otherwise we assume he is socialized to
his mother language, defined as idiom acquired during the preschool period of childhood.



3.2     Stylized Patterns
We provide here a brief descriptive analysis of the stylized patterns in the data.

Marriage. Several contributions in the sociological and economic literature provide evi-
dence in favor of positive assortative mating along cultural lines in terms of ethnic, racial
and linguistic identity (Fu and Heaton, 2008; Fryer, 2007; Schwartz, 2013).26 This evidence
pertains mainly to the US. Our data confirms it for the Italian marriage market. By report-
ing the observed homogamy rates for ethnic minorities across markets, Figure 2 documents
strong assortativeness in marriage for all cultural-ethnic groups. Interestingly, however, we
observe heterogeneous degrees of assortativeness across groups; e.g., particularly high for
Sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia minorities.

Fertility. Differential fertility rates across homogamous and heterogamous families, for all
cultural-ethnic groups, are documented in Table 1. Homogamous Italian households tend to
be more fertile than homogamous immigrant minorities (1.56 children on average; greater
than all groups except Sub-Saharan African, 1.59 children on average). Interestingly, the
probability of having at least one child in a homogeneous Italian family is of 73.5%, higher
that the equivalent probability in any homogamous immigrant group (including Sub-Saharan
African, 53%). Moreover, we observe a significant differential in fertility rates between ho-
mogamous and heterogamous families, both at the extensive and intensive margin, with the
homogamous displaying higher childbirth investments. For instance, the probability of hav-
ing a child in a heterogamous family with at least one Italian spouse is of 41.8%, compared

  25
      Language socialization allows us to study the degree of cultural convergence of migrants into the host
socio-economic environment. Indeed, several studies uncover a positive association between the proficiency
in the destination language and migrant socio-economic integration, favoring the educational achievement
of lag-behind children during compulsory schooling (Dustmann et al., 2010), and fostering employment and
earning opportunities (Dustmann and Fabbri, 2003). Table B.11 and B.12 shows that our measure of Italian
linguistic socialization, by capturing the assimilation effort of migrant cultural-ethnic groups, is positively
associated with various proxies of socio-cultural and linguistic integration.
   26
      Schwartz (2013), in particular, underlines the parallel between ethnic and linguistic homogamy, where
both ethnicity and spoken language are relevant culturally specific attributes.



                                                      16
      Figure 2: Probability of Homogamous Marriage by Ethnic Group of Minorities
                                                     (a) Europe-EU15                                                            (b) Other Europe


                                           .6




                                                                                                                     .6
            Prob. of Homogamous Marriage




                                                                                      Prob. of Homogamous Marriage
                                           .4




                                                                                                                     .4
                                           .2




                                                                                                                     .2
                                           0




                                                                                                                     0
                                                0        .2            .4   .6                                            0         .2             .4   .6
                                                                  iE                                                                      iO
                                                               Q                                                                         Q




                                                (c) North Africa-Middle East                                                  (d) Sub-Saharan Africa
                                           .6




                                                                                                                     .6
            Prob. of Homogamous Marriage




                                                                                      Prob. of Homogamous Marriage
                                           .4




                                                                                                                     .4
                                           .2




                                                                                                                     .2
                                           0




                                                                                                                     0




                                                0        .2            .4   .6                                            0         .2             .4   .6
                                                               iM                                                                            iA
                                                              Q                                                                           Q




                                                       (e) East Asia                                                            (f) Latin America
                                           .6




                                                                                                                     .6
            Prob. of Homogamous Marriage




                                                                                      Prob. of Homogamous Marriage
                                           .4




                                                                                                                     .4
                                           .2




                                                                                                                     .2
                                           0




                                                                                                                     0




                                                0        .2            .4   .6                                            0         .2             .4   .6
                                                                  iS                                                                          iL
                                                               Q                                                                          Q




    Notes: This figure shows the sample probability that a member of a specific cultural-ethnic minority
    marries homogeneously, over the correspondent population share by region of residence (average
    over the time period). E: Europe-EU15; O: Other Europe; M: North Africa and Middle-East; A:
    Sub-Saharan Africa; S: East Asia; L: Latin America. Source: Marriage records from vital statistics
    (1995-2012), Italy.


to the 73.5% of homogamous Italian households. Observed asymmetries in fertility rates
across family types suggest that cultural differences between spouses lower the investment
in marital-specific capital.

                                                                                 17
                              Table 1: Fertility Rates by Ethnic Group of Spouses

                                             Panel a. Extensive Margin                                 Panel b. Intensive Margin
                                             Prob. of Having Children                                    Number of Children
                                                                     Heterogamous                                               Heterogamous
                                 Homogamous       Heterogamous                             Homogamous       Heterogamous
                                                                   Italians excluded                                          Italians excluded
                                      nhh              nhj            nhj , h, j = n            nhh               nhj           nhj , h, j = n

 Italian                             0.735            0.418                -                   1.561            1.390                 -
 Europe-EU15                         0.420            0.578              0.359                 1.465            1.490               1.385
 Other Europe                        0.494            0.401              0.381                 1.293            1.365               1.342
 North Africa-Middle East            0.541            0.303              0.350                 1.462            1.297               1.313
 Sub-Saharan Africa                  0.534            0.352              0.247                 1.592            1.369               1.346
 East Asia                           0.682            0.308              0.282                 1.516            1.302               1.298
 Latin America                       0.322            0.344              0.359                 1.241            1.308               1.295
 Notes: This table reports fertility rates by ethnic group of spouses, both in terms of the probability of having children (panel a) and in terms
 of the average number of children (panel b). Columns 1 and 4 report estimates for homogamous families, Columns 2 and 5 report estimates for
 heterogamous families, Columns 3 and 6 report estimates excluding mixed marriages with natives. Marriage and Birth records (1995-2012), Italy.




Separation. In line with previous literature, we observe a positive differential in marital in-
stability of heterogamous marriages as compared to culturally homogeneous unions (Becker
et al., 1977; Kalmijn et al., 2005; Bratter and King, 2008; Zhang and Van Hook, 2009). Ta-
ble 2 shows that the probability of separation for homogamous Italian couples in the overall
period is equal to 6.4%, while in mixed families with at least one Italian spouse it increases
to 7.5%. Larger differences across families are uncovered from the pairwise comparison of
separation rates across the remaining ethnic groups, i.e. the gap for the European group is of
2.4%, 4.1% for Other European, 7.1% for North Africa-Middle East, 6.6% for Sub-Saharan
Africa, 5.4% for East Asia and 4.2% for Latin America. Moreover, by looking at ethnic group
variability across homogamous unions, Table 2 reports evidence that the separation rate of
Italian families, as the majoritarian group, is higher with respect to those of homogamous
minorities.27

Socialization. We report Italian language socialization rates by cultural-ethnic group in
Table 3, for homogamous and heterogamous families, in turn. Socialization rates to Italian
are quite low in Italy, in particular for homogamous unions of spouses belonging to minorities.
But across group variability is high, as well as it is the variability across household type:
e.g., the probability that an East Asian parent speaks Italian with his child is equal to
20% in a homogamous marriage, whereas it increases to 92% in a heterogamous marriage.
Table B.9 presents Italian language socialization frequencies by spousal ethnic group and

  27
    Separation rates are quite low in Italy and especially so for homogamous marriages, compared to other
Western countries (Stevenson and Wolfers, 2007).28



                                                                       18
marital status. Socialization in divorced homogamous households is higher than in married
homogamous households. For example, the probability that a child speaks Italian is equal
to 36.4% in a European homogamous married family and it increases to 43.6% for the same
family under divorce. On the other hand, for comparable European heterogamous families,
the probability that a child speaks Italian is equal to 79.5% and 92.2%, respectively, in case
of divorce or not.

                    Table 2: Separation Rates by Ethnic Group of Spouses

                                                                  Separation Rates
                                                                                      Heterogamous
                                            Homogamous        Heterogamous
                                                                                     Italians excluded
                                                  hh               hj                  hj , h, j = n

            Italian                              0.064            0.075                      -
            Europe-EU15                          0.024            0.048                    0.058
            Other Europe                         0.030            0.071                    0.057
            North Africa-Middle East             0.045            0.116                    0.070
            Sub-Saharan Africa                   0.026            0.092                    0.066
            East Asia                            0.013            0.067                    0.054
            Latin America                        0.050            0.092                    0.076
            Notes: This table reports the separation rates by ethnic group of spouses Column 1 reports esti-
            mates for homogamous families, Column 2 reports estimates for heterogamous families, and Col-
            umn 3 reports estimates excluding mixed marriages with natives. Source: Marriage and Separation
            records (1995-2012), Italy.



           Table 3: Italian Socialization Probabilities by Spouses Ethnic Group

                                                          Italian Socialization Frequencies
                                                                                        Heterogamous
                                            Homogamous Heterogamous
                                                                                      Italians excluded
                                                   n                  n                   n
                                                  Phh                Phj                Phj , h, j = n

            Italian                                1                0.915                     -
            Europe-EU15                          0.424              0.867                   0.641
            Other Europe                         0.395              0.925                   0.803
            North Africa-Middle East             0.267              0.884                   0.706
            Sub-Saharan Africa                   0.377              0.891                   0.727
            East Asia                            0.196              0.816                   0.692
            Latin America                        0.469              0.904                   0.926
            Notes: This table shows Italian socialization frequencies by ethnic group of spouses. The outcome
            variable corresponds to the probability that a child speaks Italian as main language at home.
            Column 1 reports estimates for homogamous families, Columns 2 reports estimates for heteroga-
            mous families, and Columns 3 reports estimates excluding mixed marriages with natives. Source:
            Condition and Social Integration of Foreign Nationals Survey (2011-2012), Italy.




                                                           19
4        Estimation: Methodology
We estimate the parameters of the model by observing the marital matching patterns, as
well as the fertility, separation and socialization frequencies. To take the model to data we
need to extend the theoretical model presented in Section (2) to allow for K cultural traits
in the society. Furthermore, we consider R geographical regions as the unit of reference for
marital and intra-household decisions. Specifically, we consider a multi-market framework
where marriage markets are disjoint but agents share common preference parameters across
markets.
    In the following Section, we specify the structural model, by introducing the relevant
assumptions and the functional form parametrization. Then, we describe our parameters of
interest, we introduce an appropriate estimation procedure and discuss parameters identifi-
cation.


4.1      The Structural Model
We extend the model to allow for multiple cultural-ethnic traits (K = 7), associated with
Italians, denoted n, and to 6 distinct immigrants groups i  {iE , iO , iM , iA , iS , iL }. The
subscripts identify minority groups, i.e. E: Europe-EU15; O: Other Europe; M: North Africa-
Middle East; A: Sub-Saharan Africa; S: East Asia; L: Latin America. To this end, we assume
that in households ii, in and ni children only might be socialized to the trait i or to n; while
in a heterogamous household with both immigrants parents, the children can be socialized
either to one of the parents' traits or to n.29 The remaining socialization probabilities are
constrained to be zero.
    Also, we allow the specification of socialization and fertility cost to capture systematic
differences between homogamous and heterogamous households, indexed by s  {het, hom},
respectively:
                                           1                
                          C ( ) = s s  2 + (1 - s )e 1- - 1                                  (7)
                                           2

    29
     Specifically, in a generic heterogamous marriage of type hj with h = j and h, j  {iE , iO , iM , iA , iS , iL },
                                                                                     n
in divorce status d = 0, the probabilities of socialization to the Italian language Phj , to the father language
  h                                  j
Phj and to the mother language Phj are respectively:

                                      n
                                     Phj (, 0) = (1 - m - f )(1 - q h - q j ),
                                      h
                                     Phj (, 0) = m + (1 - m - f )q h ,                                           (6)
                                      j                                j
                                     Phj (, 0)   = f + (1 - m - f )q .




                                                         20
and
                                                                          s
                        C (n) = ns ns (n)s + (1 - ns )en - 1 , s > 1,                                      (8)

    where the parameter s captures the dependence of fertility costs on childbearing deci-
sions.30
    For flexibility in the estimation, we allow the distribution of hj to have a mean that
depends on the household type hj . More specifically, we assume that hj follows a generalized
logistic distribution with location ahj and scale parameter b.
    We introduce an outside option for singlehood hs , for all h ethnic groups, separately for
homogamous and heterogamous families, s  {het, hom}.
    Following Choo and Siow (2006), we assume that t , t are independent and identically
distributed random variables with a type I extreme-value distribution (Gumbel). Under sep-
arability and distributional assumptions, the matching model presented in (1) in its welfare
maximization form translates into the multinomial logit model (McFadden, 1974).31 As a
consequence, the total expected utility of a household of type hj net of the outside options
of singlehood, U ~hj = Uhj - hs - js , is identified as follows:

                                                             2
                                             ~hj = log (µhj ) .
                                             U                                                            (10)
                                                      µh. · µ.j
   Finally, we model the role played by the society within the transmission process, relaxing
the initial assumption of unbiased horizontal socialization frequencies. We explicitly intro-
duce a positive segregation bias, , allowing each minority to face a segregated socialization
pool composed of a fraction Qi of individuals of group i; where

                                 Qi = q i i  {iE , iO , iM , iA , iS , iL }                               (11)

and the horizontal socialization of the majority group is rescaled to represent its complement.

  30
      The parametrization of socialization and fertility cost functions guarantee that they are increasing and
convex functions in the parents socialization efforts and childbearing choices, respectively, and that they
satisfy regularity Inada conditions for interior solutions; see the Appendix for details.
   31
      Under such assumptions, Galichon and Salani´    e (2015, 2017); Chiappori et al. (2017) specifically show
that the two-sided matching problem reduces to a series of one-sided discrete choice problems. The general-
ized entropy in (1) is (Galichon and Salani´ e, 2015):

                              (µ) =               µhj log µj |h +              µhj log µh|j .              (9)
                                       h{n,i}                       h{n,i,.}
                                      j {n,i,.}                     j {n,i,}




                                                          21
4.2     Parameters and Estimation Procedure
The main parameters of interest are the cultural relative intolerance parameters: Vhj =
Vhh - Vhj , for all cultural-ethnic groups h, j . In the estimation, we impose Vhh to be constant
across groups, for all h (Vhh = V ); that is, we assume that the value for a parent in sharing the
same cultural trait of his/her own child is constant across groups, while relative differences
in transmission are allowed to vary across groups. For identification purposes, we normalize
V = 100, so we are left with K (K - 1) = 42 cultural intolerance parameters to estimate.
Let V be interpreted as the per-parent lifetime utility of having a child of your own culture.
    The other parameters to be estimated are: socialization and fertility cost function pa-
rameters, s , s and ns , ns ; dependence of fertility costs on childbearing decisions, s > 1;
direct value of fertility (independently from cultural transmission),  ; index of segregation
; outside option of being single hs , for all h and s. Furthermore, with regards to the
distribution of hj , we normalize b = 1 and we set ahj to match the dissolution probability
of couples without children in the data for all hj ; i.e. ahj : F (0; ahj , b) =    ^hj (0).32 This as-
sumption allows us to capture systematic differences in separation rates across ethnic groups
for households without children, aggregate evidence is reported in Table B.7.
    Let  denote the vector of parameters. The structural model provides us with the
theoretical moments in reduced form, (( )) as function of structural parameters  , for
given exogenous population distribution q h , for all ethnic groups h, a vector whose elements
are indexed by the region r  R. We switch from now on, without loss of generality, to
this vector notation to avoid explicit use of the index r. The moments are represented more
specifically by mappings from  into U      ~hj , nhj , hj , for all hj , and P k (d) for all hj and k ,
                                                                              hj
and for marital status d.
    The empirical moments are:

                                      ^hj , n
                                   = {U     ^ hj ,       ^ k },
                                                   ^hj , P        h, j, k.
                                                           hj


                                                 ^hj thanks to the identification equation of
   In particular, we compute the marital surplus U
the marital matching function in (10), where µ
                                             ^hj is obtained from the bivariate distribution
of marriages, cumulated over the period 1995-2012; while µ   ^h. and µ^.j are taken from the
population vectors by ethnic group, gender and marital status of individual Italian Census
data in 2001 and 2011. We compute fertility rates n^ hj as the average number of children in

  32
     Because of data limitations, we estimate non-parametrically the probability of dissolution of couples
without children,  ^hj (0), as the linear combination of a family-specific component, to capture heterogeneity
in divorce rate across matches, and a regional specific component, to capture heterogeneity across marriage
markets.


                                                     22
households of type hj , including zeros. We evaluate separation rates    ^hj as the fraction of
marriages of type hj ending in separation during the period of analysis, conditional on having
children. Finally, we construct socialization frequencies, P^ k as the fraction of households
                                                             hj
of type hj in which children speak a given language k at home.33 Given normalization
restrictions, we end up with a total of 68 parameters to match 2,416 moments.34
    We estimate model parameters via a method of moments estimator, by matching the vec-
tor of theoretical moments implied by the model, (( )) for a specified choice of parameters
 , with their empirical counterparts observed in the data (). The method of moments
estimator  ^ minimizes the criterion function QN ( ), such as:

                              ^ = arg min[ - ( )] WN [ - ( )],
                                                                                                         (12)
                                          

given WN a weighting matrix, being N the sample size.35
    We solve the optimization problem in (12) via the Differential Evolution (DE) algorithm.
The DE is a global optimization algorithm, first introduced by Storn and Price (1997). It
is designed for non-convex and non-linear programming problems with potentially multiple
local optima. Compared to alternative local optimization methods, its remarkable perfor-
mance on continuous numerical minimization problems has been extensively explored, Price
et al. (2006).36


4.3     Identification
Parameters identification hinges on the two sources of cross-sectional variation. First, we ex-
ploit variation across cultural-ethnic groups and family types. Second, we exploit exogenous
variation in the ethnic composition of the population across regions. With respect to the
the literature, e.g., Choo and Siow (2006), this geographical variation provides us with the

   33
      Because within each family socialization frequencies sum up to one, we exclude from the estimation
redundant moments. See Appendix A for a comprehensive description of empirical moments computation.
   34
      In the estimation, we exploit 628 moments for gains to marriage and fertility rate, 623 moments for
separation rate and 537 moments for socialization frequencies. The distribution of such moments by family
type is the following: 592 for homogeneous families, 980 for heterogamous families with one Italian spouse
and the remaining 844 for intermarriages among immigrants. Notice that for limited data availability, in the
estimation we exclude socialization moments for divorced families.
   35
      Given the uneven distribution of marriages in our sample, the weighting matrix is constructed by balanc-
ing sample size considerations and representation. Hence, we assign the same weight to Italian homogamous
marriages and to the rest of marriages; in turn, the rest of the marriages are weighted by their relative
representation in the data.
   36
      As with other evolutionary algorithms, DE solves optimization problems by evolving a population of
candidate solutions and by using floating-point encoding and arithmetic operations in mutation of population
members. We refer to Storn and Price (1997) and Price et al. (2006) for more details.



                                                     23
needed additional identification power, under the assumption that each region corresponds
to a separate ­but local­ marriage market.37 In this perspective, our identification strategy
is related to Chiappori et al. (2017) that exploits variation across cohorts in the returns to
human capital investment on the US marriage market.
    More specifically, in our estimation procedure, identification hinges on the following re-
strictions. First of all, cultural intolerance parameters Vhj are specific to the household type
hj , but are assumed to be constant across region r  R. Second, outside options of being
single hs are specific to the ethnic group h and differ by family type s, but constant across
region r  R. These parameters are pinned down by the average probability of marrying
for each ethnic group and family type across regions. Similarly, socialization and fertility
cost parameters (s , s , ns , ns , s ,  ) are assumed to be independent across ethnic-groups
h and region r  R. The same for segregation . Moreover, the random variable hj has the
same distribution across households of different type hj .


4.4     Discussion
In this section we discuss some of the main assumptions of our empirical model.

    The geographical unit of reference for marital and intra-household choices coincides with
the region. This assumption is motivated by computational reasons, since we have data at
higher level of disaggregation, at the province level. Assuming that the region is the relevant
unit of reference for individual behaviour is potentially problematic if a higher level of dis-
aggregation would reveal different patterns of segregation of minorities across geographical
units, potentially affecting our estimates. The validation we discuss in Section 5 sheds a
light in this direction. Our estimates, based on regional moments, are able to predict the
distribution of marriages by type by province, implied by the distribution of the population
at the province level. Furthermore, a large body of empirical evidence shows that, in fact,
immigrant minorities tend to segregate in small but homogeneous neighbourhoods (Borjas,
1995; Edin et al., 2003), which act as a restricted pool of reference for marital and intra-
household choices. By taking the region as the unit of our analysis, we implicitly treat these
cultural-ethnic enclaves as minorities with respect to the regional population of reference
and as a consequence we predict high investment into the socialization of children to their

   37
     To give a sense of how stringent is our assumption, we calculate that in more than 92.7% of marriages,
wife and husband share the same region of resident at the moment of marriage. Notice that, this assumption
does not rule out the possibility of interregional migration per se, but it does rule out that migration choices
are driven by marriage reasons.



                                                      24
own cultural values, which in turn translate into a high level of cultural intolerance. Con-
versely, by taking the neighbourhood as the unit of our analysis, the same cultural-ethnic
enclaves now appear to be a majority, with obvious consequences in terms of low predicted
investment into the cultural socialization of children and low cultural intolerance preferences.
As a matter of fact and in line with Bisin et al. (2004), this conclusion does not contradict
our identification strategy, by assuming that residential segregation itself acts as a costly
mechanism of cultural socialization.

    The distribution of the population across regions is exogenous. In other words, we ab-
stain from modeling endogenous moving and/or residential location decisions. Endogenous
moving or location decisions might be problematic for our estimates, if these decisions were
motivated in part by marriage and socialization as well as by unobserved heterogeneity. For
example, suppose those minorities that are particularly attached to their cultural identity
and thus more willing to invest in the socialization of their children select to locate/move to
more segregated areas, if so we should expect to see a positive correlation between vertical
and horizontal socialization, other things equal. We investigate this relationship by plotting
the probability of direct socialization in homogamous families over the correspondent pop-
ulation share by regions, as reported in Figure B.4. The evidence is consistent with direct
cultural transmission within the family substituting horizontal socialization, i.e., if anything,
minorities in more segregated regions display lower socialization rates to the language of par-
ents.

    Marital matching is along cultural-ethnic lines only. In particular, we do not take into
account sorting along other, in principle, important and observable dimensions, like age and
education. We capture the multidimensionality of the marital selection process in a reduced
form way through the outside options. For instance, the outside option to singlehood act as
residual in the model, capturing differential sorting in both observable and unobservable rel-
evant attributes across cultural-ethnic groups and between homogamous and heterogamous
families. In this respect, Adda, Pinotti, and Tura (2019) develop and estimate a multidimen-
sional equilibrium model of marriage and separation on Italian data. Their model explicitly
allows for trade-offs between cultural distance, legal status, and other socio-economic spousal
characteristics. Results suggest that preferences for cultural similarity within the couple are
way more important than age and education in explaining marital selection of cultural mi-
norities in Italy.




                                               25
    Cultural-ethnic groups aggregate several and potentially heterogeneous countries of origin
in six minority groups. While considering each country of origin as a single cultural group is
impossible, two aspects of our classification need to be discussed. First, migrants' cultural
belonging is identified by nationality in years 1995 to 1997 and not by country of birth,
because of data limitation. This potentially leads to underestimate migrants, because of
naturalization. Our estimates are robust to the exclusion of these initial years, when we
estimate the model on the universe of marriages formed from 1998 to 2012. Second, the
group Other Europe includes Eastern European countries which became EU members after
the enlargements in 2004 and 2007. In this respect, Adda, Pinotti, and Tura (2019) provide
evidence that the successive enlargements of the EU changed profoundly the composition of
mixed marriages in the Italian marriage market, by altering the incentives of some migrants
to marry natives. Our results, therefore, need to be interpreted as average estimates over
the entire period of analysis.


5        Estimation: Results
We start describing the fit of the model and its validation. The model fits the data well. The
raw correlation between predicted and observed gains to marriage is equal to 0.84 and we
predict very well the matching patterns observed in the data. Table 4 compares the average
observed and predicted moments, for homogamous and heterogamous families, respectively.
Overall, we match well the socialization frequencies with a correlation between predicted
and observed foreign language socialization rates of 0.83, for both homogamous and heterog-
amous families. Figure 3 displays the average fit for Italian socialization probabilities and
gains to marriage for homogamous families. Similarly, the model fits well the fertility rates
for heterogamous families and for some homogamous families, but less so for some others.
Finally, the model is able to capture the general pattern of separation choices across groups,
even though separation rates appear to be slightly underestimated.38 Moreover, the model is
able to capture the geographical variability across markets. Focusing on homogamous fam-
ilies of ethnic group minorities, Figure B.5 displays the relationship between predicted and
observed gains to marriage over the corresponding population share by region of residence.
     In addition, we validate our estimates by predicting the socialization frequencies of di-
vorced couples ­non targeted in the estimation­ and comparing them with socialization
frequencies observed in our survey data. The model matches these external moments very

    38
     Because all moments are similarly weighted in the estimation, small scale variations in separations rates
are not captured.



                                                     26
                                          Table 4: Fit of the Model

                                                              a. Homogamous Families
                                  Italian Soc      Father Soc       Separation         Fertility      Marital Gain
                                 Data    Model    Data    Model    Data    Model    Data    Model     Data      Model
 Italian                         1.00     1.00    1.00     1.00     0.06    0.04     1.10    1.08     -0.54     -0.54
 EU15                            0.68     0.62    0.32     0.38     0.03    0.01     0.69    1.00     -4.81     -4.81
 Other EU                        0.40     0.44    0.60     0.56     0.02    0.00     0.63    0.84     -3.04     -3.04
 North Africa-Middle East        0.34     0.40    0.66     0.60     0.05    0.03     0.80    0.69     -3.47     -3.47
 Sub-Saharan Africa              0.41     0.42    0.59     0.58     0.02    0.00     0.83    0.74     -0.29      0.50
 East Asia                       0.19     0.45    0.81     0.55     0.01    0.00     1.10    0.83     -1.00     -1.00
 Latin America                   0.54     0.45    0.46     0.55     0.03    0.01     0.40    0.83     -1.23     -1.23
                                                            b. Heterogamous Families
                                  Italian Soc      Father Soc       Separation         Fertility      Marital Gain
                                 Data    Model    Data    Model    Data    Model    Data    Model     Data      Model
 Italian                         0.94     0.94    0.69     0.66     0.05    0.02     0.62    0.53     -4.04     -4.00
 EU15                            0.91     0.97    0.46     0.52     0.04    0.02     0.88    0.62     -4.29     -4.38
 Other EU                        0.96     0.95    0.76     0.73     0.04    0.02     0.59    0.50     -3.54     -3.54
 North Africa-Middle East        0.94     0.94    0.34     0.36     0.07    0.07     0.39    0.38     -6.23     -6.14
 Sub-Saharan Africa              0.95     0.97    0.65     0.64     0.07    0.04     0.48    0.44     -6.65     -6.49
 East Asia                       0.86     0.97    0.80     0.82     0.05    0.03     0.40    0.50     -6.47     -6.55
 Latin America                   0.94     0.71    0.84     0.62     0.06    0.04     0.45    0.52     -4.23     -4.20
 Notes: This table shows the fit of the model by ethnic group of spouses, separately for homogamous (panel a)
 and heterogamous (panel b) families.



well, the correlation between the observed and predicted Italian socialization probabilities
is equal to 0.76 and it is even higher for mother socialization probabilities. Figure B.6 dis-
plays the fit for Italian socialization and mother socialization frequencies by family type, in
turn. As a final test, we validate our estimates by using them to predict the distribution of
marriages by type by province implied by the distribution of the population at the province
level, i.e. a thinner level of geographical disaggregation. Figure B.7 displays the relationship
between the predicted and observed distribution of marriages by type. The model performs
quite well in capturing the geographical variability in outcomes across provinces.
    Table 5 presents the estimation results. From the estimates on cultural intolerance pa-
rameters, we discuss three classes of results. First, cultural intolerance parameters are strictly
greater than zero, suggesting that parents of each cultural-ethnic group have strong prefer-
ences for speaking their own mother language at home with children. Second, intolerance
parameters are highly heterogeneous across cultural-ethnic groups, i.e. some groups are much
more resilient in their cultural identity compared to others. In particular, Figure 4 reports
as a graph the cultural intolerance of minorities versus natives (Panel a); estimates reveal
that immigrants from North Africa-Middle East countries have very strong preferences for


                                                         27
Figure 3: Fit of the Model in Homogamous Families - Socialization Frequency and Gains to
Marriage
                         (a) Foreign Language Socialization                                                              (b) Gains to Marriage
                                                                                        II
                         1




                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                         SS AA
                                                                                                                                                                          II




                                                                                                          -1
                         .8




                                                                                                                                                               LL

                                                                  MM




                                                                                                          -2
                         .6




                                                             AA
             Predicted




                                                                                              Predicted
                                                   LL        OO             SS




                                                                                                          -3
                                                                                                                                                OO
                         .4




                                       EE
                                                                                                                                    MM




                                                                                                          -4
                         .2




                                                                                                                    EE




                                                                                                          -5
                         0




                              0   .2        .4              .6         .8           1                          -5           -4           -3              -2         -1       0
                                                 Observed                                                                                     Observed



     Notes: This figure shows the average fit of the model by household type for homogamous families,
     considering Italian socialization probabilities (panel a) and gains to marriage (panel b). I: Italians;
     E: Europe-EU15; O: Other Europe; M: North Africa and Middle-East; A: Sub-Saharan Africa; S:
     East Asia; L: Latin America.

                                                 Table 5: Structural Model Parameters

                                                            Cultural Intolerance Parameters
 j:                                                         Italian         EU15         Other EU                        Middle East           Africa         Asia       Latin America
 V Ij , Italian                                                             33.38          58.60                            67.88              78.23          61.53          19.27
 V Ej , Europe-EU15                                          10.21                         52.60                             4.77               6.69          18.54           0.33
 V Oj , Other Europe                                         39.97          0.05                                            69.32              56.63          30.42          23.02
 V M j , North Africa-Middle East                            65.35           7.00            58.98                                             97.85          52.12          52.25
 V Aj , Sub-Saharan Africa                                   55.00          28.37            58.42                          96.37                             81.22          42.50
 V Sj , East Asia                                            40.02           0.30            87.08                          54.70               47.29                        93.13
 V Lj , Latin America                                        38.95          10.69            20.77                          58.99               46.96         29.13
                                                 Outside Option of Singlehood Parameters
 Outside option for homogamous, i                            43.04          37.33            22.94                          14.75               15.57         21.48              21.54
 Outside option for heterogamous, i                          19.90          28.57            10.67                           2.25                6.79         13.84              13.44
                                                                  Cost Function Parameters
 Socialization Cost Parameters                               hom            10.82        Fertility Cost Parameters                                            n hom              67.62
                                                             hom            0.559                                                                             n hom              0.006
                                                             het            21.61                                                                              hom               1.021
                                                             het            0.571                                                                             n het              99.56
 Extra Marital Gain per Child                                               0.820                                                                             n het              0.021
 Segregation Parameter                                                      1.765                                                                               het              1.229
 Notes: This table shows structural parameter estimates.



maintaining their cultural identity, with estimates that are more than six times as high as
the one of Europe-EU15, followed by Sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia migrants' minori-
ties. The highest estimates reported on Panel b. of Figure 4, instead, capture the cultural
intolerance of Italian natives towards Sub-Saharan Africa, North Africa-Middle East and
East Asia minorities in order. Third, the matrix of intolerance parameters is not symmetric,


                                                                                         28
                                                                     Figure 4: Cultural Intolerance Parameters
                                               (a) Migrants towards Natives                                                                             (b) Natives towards Migrants
                                          90




                                                                                                                                                   90
                                          80




                                                                                                                                                   80
                                          70




                                                                                                                                                   70
        Cultural Intolerance Parameters




                                                                                                                 Cultural Intolerance Parameters
                                          60




                                                                                                                                                   60
                                          50




                                                                                                                                                   50
                                          40




                                                                                                                                                   40
                                          30




                                                                                                                                                   30
                                          20




                                                                                                                                                   20
                                          10




                                                                                                                                                   10
                                          0




                                                                                                                                                   0
                                               EU15   EUOther   Mid-East   SubAfrica   E.Asia   L.America                                               EU15   EUOther   Mid-East   SubAfrica   E.Asia   L.America

       Notes: This figure reports parameter estimates for the cultural intolerance of migrants versus
       natives Vin (panel a) and natives versus migrants Vn        i
                                                                     (panel b) for all cultural-ethnic minorities
       i  {iE , iO , iM , iA , iS , iL }, with E: Europe-EU15; O: Other Europe; M: North Africa-Middle East;
       A: Sub-Saharan Africa; S: East Asia; L: Latin America.


i.e. the intolerance of group h versus group j does not parallel the intolerance of group j
versus group h. We uncover considerable asymmetries in preferences across ethnic minorities
and of Italians towards different ethnic groups, which potentially imply significantly different
patterns in the dynamics of integration across minorities in Italy.39
    The outside option parameters of remaining single are highly heterogeneous both across
families (homogamous vs heterogamous) and across cultural-ethnic groups, with homoga-
mous Italian natives showing the highest outside option parameter and the heterogamous
North Africa-Middle East group showing the smallest ones. Figure B.9 displays hr param-
eters. Even thought our model is not dynamic, we might interpret the estimated outside
option as a reservation utility, hence the larger the estimated outside option the larger the
utility the individual might get from a future marriage. We estimate a significant difference
in socialization costs across families, i.e.  of heterogamous families is twice as high as the
one estimated for homogamous families, while the estimates of  (i.e. the weight associated
to the degree of convexity of the cost function) are comparable for homogamous and heterog-
amous couples. This difference in socialization costs reinforces the differences in incentives of
spousal investment in socialization between homogamous and heterogamous. For instance,
the direct socialization probabilities of homogamous families when fully minority (q i = 0) are

  39
     Similarly to Adda, Pinotti, and Tura (2019), we investigate the relationship between our estimated
measure of cultural intolerance and different measures of cultural distance, well recognized in the literature
(Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2016). Figure B.8 displays systematically a positive correlation between our cultural
intolerance estimates and cultural distance along genetics (Panel a), language (Panel b), religion (Panel c),
and values from WVS (Panel d).


                                                                                                            29
                         Figure 5: Estimates of Minorities Socialization Effort and Italian Socialization
                                                                                    (a) Homogamous Families
                                                    Socialization Effort                                                                                     Italian Socialization
                               1




                                                                                                                                         1
                               .8




                                                                                                                                         .8
                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                             Prob. of Italian Soc. - P
     Socialization Effort - 




                                             North Africa-Middle East
                               .6




                                                                                                                                         .6
                                                                                                                                                            Europe-EU15
                               .4




                                                                                                                                         .4
                                                  Europe-EU15


                                                                                                                                                       North Africa-Middle East
                               .2




                                                                                                                                         .2
                               0




                                                                                                                                         0
                                    0   .1             .2               .3             .4               .5                                    0   .1             .2               .3             .4               .5
                                                                    i                                                                                                         i
                                                                Q                                                                                                         Q




                                                                                    (b) Heterogamous families
                                                    Socialization Effort                                                                                     Italian Socialization
                               1




                                                                                                                                         1
                               .8




                                                                                                                                         .8
                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                             Prob. of Italian Soc. - P
     Socialization Effort - 

                               .6




                                                                                                                                         .6




                                                                                                                                                                                            Europe-EU15
                               .4




                                                                                                                                         .4




                                                                                  Europe-EU15
                               .2




                                                                                                                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                                       North Africa-Middle East
                                                                             North Africa-Middle East
                               0




                                                                                                                                         0




                                    0   .1             .2               .3             .4               .5                                    0   .1             .2               .3             .4               .5
                                                                    i                                                                                                         i
                                                                Q                                                                                                         Q



    Notes: This figure reports estimates of socialization effort and the Italian socialization probability
    of Europe-EU15 and North Africa-Middle East minorities over the potential population share by
    region. Panel (a) reports estimates for homogamous families. Panel (b) reports estimates for
    heterogamous marriages with Italians.


positive:  is estimated between 0.38 (Europe-EU15) and 0.60 (North Africa-Middle East).
This difference implies that North Africa-Middle East parents have 50% higher probability
of socializing children to their own culture, compared to Europe-EU15 parents in homog-
amous families. Thus, the probability of Italian socialization, P n in homogamous families
ranges between 40 (North Africa-Middle East) to 64 (Europe-EU15) percent at maximum
and lowers as q i increases, for all minorities i.
    Figure 5 (panel a.) displays the cultural substitution pattern between vertical and hor-
izontal socialization for the two groups of North Africa-Middle East and Europe-EU15 ho-
mogamous families, which are at the two extremes of the spectrum. On the other hand, the
direct socialization probabilities of heterogamous families when fully minority (q i = 0, q j = 0)
are positive:  i ,  j are estimated between 0 and 0.46. The probability of Italian socialization
in heterogamous families ranges between 48 to 100 percent. Figure 5 (panel b.) displays the
cultural substitution pattern between vertical and horizontal socialization for the two groups

                                                                                                             30
of North Africa-Middle East and Europe-EU15 heterogamous families.
    Additionally, we estimate a positive difference in fertility costs between homogamous and
heterogamous families, i.e. n of heterogamous families is greater than one third compared
to the same cost parameter for homogamous families. Moreover, the dependence of fertility
costs on childbearing decisions,  , is equal to one for homogamous families, while it increases
by 20% in mixed ones. Overall, estimates suggest that fertility investments are much more
costly whenever spouses belongs to different cultural-ethnic groups. Irrespective of cultural
socialization quality, we estimate a direct value of fertility of 0.82. Finally, we estimate a
segregation index, , of about 2, which suggests that the contribution of the society at large
in the socialization process of minorities is twice as much as its actual representation in the
population.


6     Long-Run Integration Patterns
In this section, we simulate the dynamics of the distribution of cultural-ethnic traits in the
population induced by our structural estimates of marital matching, fertility, divorce, and
socialization. While the exercise rests on the strong assumption that parameters are invariant
over time, these simulation highlight the implication of our estimated model with respect
to the prospective pattern of cultural-ethnic integration of different minorities in Italy. It is
important to note that the notion of integration we are necessarily bound to adopt, given
our data, refers to the practice of speaking Italian at home; that is, we say that a minority
is integrated when its descendants speak Italian at home.


6.1    Population Dynamics
The time unit in the simulations is a generation, i.e., a time interval of about 25-30 years.
We fix the initial condition, generation t = 0, to coincide with the distribution of the
population by region and ethnic group in our data. More precisely, we can interpret our
data as representing a cross section of the Italian population in 2012, by region and ethnic
group, the demographic characteristics of which we observe as they form and evolve over
time since 1995. Let this distribution be denoted pt ; and let pirt represent the measure of the
population of ethnic group i in region r at time t. The structural model we have estimated
induces a map from pt into pt+1 . Indeed, the estimated model maps any distribution pt
into a vector of demographic characteristics of the population, in terms of marital matching,
fertility, divorce, and socialization, by ethnic group and region. The mapped fertility and
socialization, by region and ethnic group, induce in turn a distribution of the population


                                               31
                Figure 6: Long-run Dynamics of Cultural Traits (index=1 in t = 0)




                       1.2
                       1
                       .8
                       .6
                  Qi
                       .4
                       .2
                       0




                            t=0                     t=1                    t=2                       t=3
                    Initial Condition        Second Generation      Third Generation          Fourth Generation


                                        Europe-EU15          Europe-Other              Latin America
                                        Middle-East          Sub-Sah Africa            East Asia




       Notes: This figure shows the long-run dynamics of the distribution of cultural traits in the popu-
       lation for minority groups, over successive generations.


pt+1 of the children of the population at time t, pt .40 We continue recursively to induce
pt+2 , pt+3 , . . .. 41
    The simulated long-run dynamics of the fraction of the population with cultural-ethnic
                                                                                                i
trait i for all i  {iE , iO , iM , iA , iS , iL } are reported in Figure 6, normalized so that qt =1
in t = 0 for comparability.42 Despite cultural intolerance estimates highlight strong prefer-
ences of immigrants for maintaining their cultural identity, all cultural-ethnic minorities are

  40
      Reproduction is asexual in the model, hence we consider future generations populated by men and
women of equal proportion. Note also that the individuals in the population composing the distribution pt
are distributed across the age dimension. We disregard this in the estimates, and hence also in the simulation,
but we can interpret the distribution pt+1 as representing the same distribution across age.
   41
      At each step, we compute the marital matching equilibrium in the marriage market, represented by
equation (10) subject to feasibility constraints in (1). This amounts to solving a system of 2K quadratic
equations in as many unknowns, with K the number of cultural traits in the population, for each of the R
regions. To this end, we take advantage of an iterative projection fitting procedure (IPFP) designed to find
projections on intersecting sets of constraints, by projecting iteratively on each constraint (Galichon and
Salani´e, 2015; Galichon et al., 2015).
   42
      The distribution of cultural traits in the population at time t = 0 is computed from population data
as the average across regions weighted by the total resident population. See Figure B.10 for non-normalized
long-run dynamics of cultural traits.



                                                           32
simulated to converge to the Italian majority along the language dimension. Furthermore,
75% of immigrants integrate into the majoritarian culture over the period of a generation;
that is, 75% of the immigrants' population at t = 1 speaks Italian at home with their chil-
dren. However, the pace of convergence is heterogeneous across cultural-ethnic groups. On
the one hand, we find that the Europe-EU15 and Other Europe minorities converge almost
completely (reduce about 87% of the gap) to the majoritarian culture in a single genera-
tion. A similar pattern is also displayed by the North Africa-Middle-East minority. On the
other hand, a significantly slower convergence rate is achieved by the Latin America minority
which even restrain their integration process towards the native culture in the first generation
and after four generations only 70% of immigrants culturally integrate along the language
dimension. A slower convergence rate also characterizes the East Asia and Sub-Saharan
Africa minorities, who integrate by only 82% and 57% along the language dimension in one
generation. By looking at third generations, overall 93% of immigrants converge towards
Italian culture in about 50-60 years. Said differently, 93% of the immigrants' population at
t = 2 speaks Italian at home.
    The patterns of cultural integration of Europe-EU15 and Other Europe minorities are
the result of their relatively low cultural intolerance preferences. In a similar way, the East
Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa minorities' slower integration is due in part to their higher
intolerance parameters. But intolerance parameters are not the only determinants of the
dynamics of integration of different cultural-ethnic groups. Homogamous marriage rates,
fertility rates, and other demographic characteristics in fact turn out to have sizable inde-
pendent effects on cultural integration in the simulations.43 This is clearly illustrated by
the fact that, while North Africa-Middle East, Sub-Saharan Africa, and East Asia show
relatively comparable cultural intolerance preferences, they display significant differences in
the dynamics of integration. Indeed, a strong estimated selection into homogamous mar-
riages for Sub-Saharan Africa migrants allows them to sustain their cultural heterogeneity
by accessing superior direct socialization technologies; see Figure B.11 for evidence on the
evolution of the homogamous marriage (panel a.) and intermarriage (panel b.) rates over
successive generations. Details about homogamous marriage rates across groups are reported
in Figure B.12. On the other hand, estimated fertility rates are particularly high for East
Asia minorities and this is a fundamental factor behind this minority's integration pattern.
Finally, the relative success of the Latin America in securing their cultural distinctiveness
over time is due in large part to the fact that they turn out to be uniquely able to socialize

  43
     With respect to fertility, this is the case even though predicted fertility rates for all groups are below
reproduction level, which potentially has implications on marriage market competition as well.



                                                      33
                                                                               i
Figure 7: Long-run Dynamics of Cultural Traits with Italians Fully Tolerant, Vn  = 0
(index=1 in t = 0)




                      2.4
                      2
                      1.2 1.6
                 Qi
                      .8
                      .4
                      0




                           t=0                     t=1                    t=2                       t=3
                   Initial Condition        Second Generation      Third Generation          Fourth Generation


                                       Europe-EU15          Europe-Other              Latin America
                                       Middle-East          Sub-Sah Africa            East Asia




      Notes: This figure shows the long-run dynamics of the distribution of cultural traits in the popu-
      lation for minority groups, over successive generations assuming the case of complete tolerance of
      Italian majority towards minorities.


children also in heterogamous marriages with natives.


6.2      Counterfactual Cultural Intolerance Parameters
In this section we study more in detail the mechanisms that promote the cultural integration
of immigrants. In particular, we analyze the role of the cultural intolerance parameters,
studying the dynamics of the distribution of cultural-ethnic traits in the population under
                                              i
several extreme counterfactual values of Vn     .
                                               i
    We consider, first, the case in which Vn = 0 for all i  {iE , iO , iM , iA , iS , iL }; that is,
we assume full tolerance of Italians towards all minorities. Results, displayed in Figure 7,
are striking. In principle, letting natives more (indeed fully) accepting of the cultural traits
and beliefs of immigrants might make their cultural integration easier and hence faster, for
instance by fostering heterogamous marriages. On the contrary, in fact, this counterfactual
experiment induces on average a reduction in the dynamics of integration of minorities
towards Italian's culture by 15% over the period of a generation. Also, in the long-run, the


                                                          34
                      Table 6: Counterfactuals on Cultural Intolerance Parameters

 Simulations                                   Overall convergence                       Convergence by ethnic minority
                                              in a generation period                         in a generation period

 Baseline (at parameter estimates)                       75%               Europe-EU15 86%; Other Europe 83%; North Africa-
                                                                           Middle East 92%; Sub-Saharan Africa 57%; East Asia
                                                                           82%; Latin America -12%
                           i
 Full Italian tolerance (Vn  = 0)                       -15%               Europe-EU15 -18%; Other Europe -37%; North Africa-
                                                                           Middle East 31%; Sub-Saharan Africa -6%; East Asia
                                                                           40%; Latin America -98%
 Full minorities' tolerance (Vin = 0)                    92%               Europe-EU15 95%; Other Europe 87%; North Africa-
                                                                           Middle East 97%; Sub-Saharan Africa 98%; East Asia
                                                                           98%; Latin America 94%
                             i
 Full Italian intolerance (Vn  = 100)                    80%               Europe-EU15 85%; Other Europe 81%; North Africa-
                                                                           Middle East 93%; Sub-Saharan Africa 57%; East Asia
                                                                           82%; Latin America 47%
 Notes: This table reports the convergence results from simulations of counterfactuals by changing cultural intolerance parameters.



heterogeneity of the cultural traits of immigrants shows a remarkable persistence.
    The intuition for this result is illustrated by decomposing the effects of complete tolerance
of Italians. The ability of minorities to maintain their cultural traits, in the absence of
cultural intolerance on the part of Italians, is due to three different mechanisms. Figure B.15
and Figure B.16 provide evidence on these mechanisms. First, in line with above predictions,
we observe a huge increase in demand for intermarriages with natives and in parallel a
lower demand for homogamous marriages previously motivated by a parental socialization
premium. Second, we document a sizable increase in fertility rate in intermarriages with
natives, because the expected socialization quality of children is higher. Third, the parental
socialization conflict is now muted within heterogamous couple and socialization to the
majoritarian culture is driven only by society at large. This implies a reduction in Italian
socialization in intermarriages compared to the baseline and in parallel an increase in foreign
language socialization.
    Finally, we notice that the positive but slow integration of some minorities is coun-
terbalanced by lack of convergence of other groups. Specifically, we find that at t = 3,
Europe-EU15, East Asia and North Africa-Middle East fourth generations culturally con-
verge towards the majoritarian culture by about 80%, 59% and 40%, respectively. Instead,
Other Europe and Sub-Saharan Africa forth generations remains largely distinct from the
majoritarian cultural values showing a very limited convergence of only about 20% and 10%.
Once again, the Latin America minority appears to be an outlier, the cultural distinction of
Latin American forth generations with respect to the native culture increases by 50%.
    We consider next the case in which minorities do not have any taste for maintaining their
own identity, Vin = 0 for all i  {iE , iO , iM , iA , iS , iL }. In this case, the direct investment in


                                                                    35
socialization of minority parents is muted and socialization to foreign language occurs as a
residual from socialization of the society at large. Thus, the cultural integration of minorities
towards Italian is on average of 92% over the period of a generation. In this particular case,
any heterogeneity in cultural convergence across ethnic groups is washed out and in the long-
run, all minorities fully integrate into the socio-cultural fabric of the host country. Table 6
reports the results in comparison with previous counterfactual scenarios, while Figure B.17
graphically show the patterns of convergence along cultural lines over the long-term.
    Finally, we investigate the case in which Italians are fully intolerant culturally towards
                    i
all minorities, Vn    = 100 for all i  {iE , iO , iM , iA , iS , iL }. In this case, the dynamics of
convergence of ethnic minorities follow the results in the baseline, with 80% of immigrants
who integrate into the majoritarian culture over the period of a generation. The most
significant difference in integration is attributable to Latin America minority, who fails to
maintain its cultural identity and assimilate to Italian culture by 47% in t = 1. Figure B.18
reports the results over successive generations.


7     Counterfactual Migration Flows
In the last few years, Italy has been characterized by a significant increase of incoming
migration flows, especially originating from Sub-Saharan Africa and Middle-East countries.
In this section we study the effects of such a rise in migration inflows on cultural heterogeneity
in Italy, by performing two counterfactual simulation exercises. In both cases, we exogenously
increase the number of second generation minorities and we study the long-term effects
of this increase on cultural convergence. But in the first exercise we double the share of
second generation minorities proportionally for all minority cultural-ethnic groups; while
in the second exercise we still double the overall share of second generation migrants by
assigning one third of the increase exclusively to North Africa-Middle East, Sub-Saharan
Africa and East Asia minorities.
    Keeping invariant the share of each group, Figure 8 compares the dynamics of the dis-
tribution of cultural-ethnic traits in the population at the baseline (solid line) with the
distribution resulting from the rise in migration flows (dashed line). Population shares are
                      i
normalized so that qt   = 1 in t = 0. Overall, doubling the shares of second generation minori-
ties (at t = 1) leads to a reduction in cultural convergence of 7 percentage points for third
generations; that is, 86% of immigrants integrate into the majoritarian culture by t = 3,
compared to the 93% of convergence at the baseline. More in detail, the rise in migration
inflows has no effect on the cultural integration of Europe-EU15, Other Europe and North
Africa-Middle East minorities already in the third generation. On the contrary, the incoming


                                                36
               Figure 8: Long-run Dynamics with Proportional Increase in Migration Inflows

                                              Europe-EU15                                                                                 Other Europe                                                                      North Africa-Middle East
            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                        1
            .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                    .8
                                                                                                        .8
            .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                    .6
                                                                                                        .6
       Qi




                                                                                                   Qi




                                                                                                                                                                                               Qi
            .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                    .4
                                                                                                        .4
            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                    .2
                                                                                                        .2
            0




                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                    t=0                t=1                   t=2                      t=3                       t=0                t=1                   t=2                      t=3                       t=0                t=1                    t=2                      t=3
            Initial Condition   Second Generation     Third Generation         Fourth Generation        Initial Condition   Second Generation     Third Generation         Fourth Generation        Initial Condition   Second Generation      Third Generation         Fourth Generation

                                   Baseline            Rise in Migration Inflows                                               Baseline            Rise in Migration Inflows                                               Baseline             Rise in Migration Inflows




                                       Sub-Saharan Africa                                                                                  East Asia                                                                                  Latin America
            1




                                                                                                        1




                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
            .8




                                                                                                        .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.6
            .6




                                                                                                        .6
       Qi




                                                                                                   Qi




                                                                                                                                                                                               Qi

                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.2
            .4




                                                                                                        .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                    .8
            .2




                                                                                                        .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                    .4
            0




                                                                                                        0




                    t=0                t=1                   t=2                      t=3                       t=0                t=1                   t=2                      t=3                       t=0                t=1                    t=2                      t=3
            Initial Condition   Second Generation     Third Generation         Fourth Generation        Initial Condition   Second Generation     Third Generation         Fourth Generation        Initial Condition   Second Generation      Third Generation         Fourth Generation

                                   Baseline            Rise in Migration Inflows                                               Baseline            Rise in Migration Inflows                                               Baseline             Rise in Migration Inflows




 Notes: This figure shows the long-run dynamics of the distribution of cultural traits in the population
                                                                         i
 for minority groups, over successive generations, normalized so that qt   = 1 in t = 0. The solid line
 represents the dynamics at the baseline, while the dash line represents the dynamics after doubling the
 share of second generation minorities, proportionally for all minority groups. Figure B.13 reports the
 non-normalized long-run dynamics and highlights the exogenous rise in inflows for all second generation
 minorities (black arrows).


waves of Sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia immigrants produce an effect in delaying their
full cultural convergence to host country cultural practices. In particular, we simulate a
20 and 6 percentage points reduction in convergence of Sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia
minorities, respectively, compared to baseline.
    We observe qualitatively similar results (even though stronger in magnitude) in the second
exercise, when we modify the relative distribution of minorities, overweighting North Africa-
Middle East, Sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia. The implications on the distribution of
cultural-ethnic traits resulting from this immigrants' inflow are graphically represented in
Figure 9. For a comparable increase in migration flows, the three groups highlight significant
differences in their patterns of integration, with Sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia minorities
accentuating dramatically their successful transmission of cultural values.44 In particular,
the cultural integration response of North Africa-Middle East immigrants to the exogenous
rise in inflows is reduced by only a 4 percentage points. The response of East Asia and Sub-
Saharan Africa minorities to a comparable variation ranges from 20 to 60 points, slowing
down significantly the process of cultural integration.

  44
       See Figure B.13 and B.14 for non-normalized long-run dynamics of cultural traits for both exercises.




                                                                                                                                          37
         Figure 9: Long-run Dynamics with Compositional Increase in Migration Inflows

                                           Europe-EU15                                                                                 Other Europe                                                                      North Africa-Middle East
         1




                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                     1
         .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                 .8
                                                                                                     .8
         .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                 .6
                                                                                                     .6
    Qi




                                                                                                Qi




                                                                                                                                                                                            Qi
         .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                 .4
                                                                                                     .4
         .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                 .2
                                                                                                     .2
         0




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                 t=0                t=1                   t=2                      t=3                       t=0                t=1                   t=2                      t=3                       t=0                t=1                    t=2                      t=3
         Initial Condition   Second Generation     Third Generation         Fourth Generation        Initial Condition   Second Generation     Third Generation         Fourth Generation        Initial Condition   Second Generation      Third Generation         Fourth Generation

                                Baseline            Rise in Migration Inflows                                               Baseline            Rise in Migration Inflows                                               Baseline             Rise in Migration Inflows




                                    Sub-Saharan Africa                                                                                  East Asia                                                                                  Latin America
         1 1.2 1.4 1.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.2
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                     .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                     .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                 .8
         .2 .4 .6 .8
    Qi




                                                                                                Qi




                                                                                                                                                                                            Qi
                                                                                                     .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                 .6
                                                                                                     .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                 .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                 .2
         0




                                                                                                     0




                 t=0                t=1                   t=2                      t=3                       t=0                t=1                   t=2                      t=3                       t=0                t=1                    t=2                      t=3
         Initial Condition   Second Generation     Third Generation         Fourth Generation        Initial Condition   Second Generation     Third Generation         Fourth Generation        Initial Condition   Second Generation      Third Generation         Fourth Generation

                                Baseline            Rise in Migration Inflows                                               Baseline            Rise in Migration Inflows                                               Baseline             Rise in Migration Inflows




 Notes: This figure shows the long-run dynamics of the distribution of cultural traits in the population for
                                                                   i
 minority groups, over successive generations, normalized so that qt = 1 in t = 0. The solid line represents
 the dynamics at the baseline, while the dash line represents the dynamics after raising the share of
 second generation North Africa-Middle East, Sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia minorities. Figure B.14
 reports the non-normalized long-run dynamics and highlights the exogenous rise in inflows for North
 Africa-Middle East, Sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia second generations minorities (black arrows).



8        Conclusions
Recent migration flows into Europe are possibly having relevant economic consequences in
terms of their effects on the labor market of the receiving countries. They most certainly
are changing the political landscape in Europe, inducing a sizable and drastic shift of the
electorate towards populist anti-immigration movements and parties. Arguably, a substantial
motivation behind this shift in voting sentiments is a reaction of natives against the cultural
beliefs and traits of immigrants and their perceived slow integration.
    In this paper we study cultural integration as an equilibrium phenomenon, the result of
a demand of integration on the part of immigrants and a supply, in the form of cultural
acceptance on the part of natives. This structural approach allows us in particular to per-
form several counterfactual exercises illustrating the long-run implications of our analysis
in terms of cultural convergence and integration. We find that, despite cultural intolerance
estimates highlight strong preferences of immigrants for maintaining their cultural iden-
tity, all cultural-ethnic minorities are simulated to converge to the Italian majority along
the language dimension. Furthermore, 75% of immigrants integrate into the majoritarian
culture over the period of a generation; that is, 75% of the second generation immigrants


                                                                                                                                       38
speaks Italian at home with their children. However, the pace of convergence is heteroge-
neous across cultural-ethnic groups. A significantly slower convergence rate is achieved by
the Latin America minority which even restrain their integration process towards the native
culture in the first generation and after four generations only 70% of immigrants culturally
integrate along the language dimension. A slower convergence rate also characterizes the
East Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa minorities. Doubling the number of second generation
minorities, overweighting North Africa-Middle East, Sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia, we
see that North Africa-Middle East immigrants reduce convergence of only a 4 percentage
points, while the response of East Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa minorities ranges from a 20
to a 60 points reduction in convergence, slowing down significantly the process of cultural
integration.
    These kind of analyses and results have in principle fundamental implications for more
thoughtful immigration policies in Europe, beyond well-meaning across-the-board integration
policies as well as beyond restrictive closed-border (closed-ports) policies. In this respect,
our result that an higher acceptance of the culture of minorities on the part of natives allows
immigrants to better maintain their cultural traits by means of higher socialization rates
when married with natives, deserves careful attention. We shall pursue the study of these
implications in future work.




                                              39
References
Abramitzky, R., L. Boustan, and K. Eriksson (2019). Do Immigrants Assimilate More Slowly
 Today Than in the Past? American Economic Review: Insights .

Adda, J., P. Pinotti, and G. Tura (2019). There's More to Marriage than Love: The Effect of
 Legal Status and Cultural Distance on Intermarriages and Separations. Working Paper .

Ahn, S. Y. (2018). Matching Across Markets: Theory and Evidence on Cross-Border Mar-
 riage. Working Paper .

Alesina, A., P. Giuliano, and N. Nunn (2013). On The Origins of Gender Roles: Women
  and The Plough. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (2), 469­530.

Algan, Y., A. Bisin, A. Manning, and T. Verdier (2012). Cultural Integration of Immigrants
  in Europe. Oxford University Press.

Becker, G. S. (1960). An Economic Analysis of Fertility. Columbia University Press.

Becker, G. S. (1973). A Theory of Marriage: Part I. Journal of Political Economy 81 (4),
  813­846.

Becker, G. S. (1974). A Theory of Marriage: Part II. Journal of Political Economy 82 (2),
  11­26.

Becker, G. S. (1991). A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard Uni-
  versity Press.

Becker, G. S., E. M. Landes, and R. T. Michael (1977). An Economic Analysis of Marital
  Instability. Journal of Political Economy 85 (6), 1141­1187.

Bisin, A., G. Topa, and T. Verdier (2004). Religious Intermarriage and Socialization in the
  United States. Journal of Political Economy 112 (3), 615­664.

Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2000). Beyond The Melting Pot: Cultural Transmission, Mar-
  riage, And The Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 115 (3), 955­988.

Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2001). The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Dynamics
  of Preferences. Journal of Economic Theory 97 (2), 298­319.




                                            40
Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2010). The economics of cultural transmission and socialization.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2011). The Economics of Cultural Transmission and Socialization.
  Handbook of Social Economics , 339­416.

Bisin, A. and G. Zanella (2017). Time-consistent Immigration Policy under Economic and
  Cultural Externalities. Economic Policy 32 (91), 415­446.

Blundell, R., P.-A. Chiappori, T. Magnac, and C. Meghir (2007). Collective Labour Supply:
  Heterogeneity and Non-Participation. The Review of Economic Studies 74 (2), 417­445.

Borjas, G. J. (1995). Ethnicity, Neighborhoods, and Human-Capital Externalities. American
  Economic Review 85 (3), 365­90.

Borjas, G. J. (2003). The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the
  Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4),
  1335­1374.

Borjas, G. J. (2014). Immigration Economics. Harvard University Press.

Bratter, J. L. and R. B. King (2008). But Will It Last?: Marital Instability Among Interracial
  and Same-Race Couples. Family Relations 57 (2), 160­171.

Card, D. (2009). Immigration and Inequality. American Economic Review 99 (2), 1­21.

Card, D. and G. Peri (2016). Immigration Economics by George J. Borjas: A Review Essay.
  Journal of Economic Literature 54 (4), 1333­49.

Casey, T. and C. Dustmann (2008). Intergenerational Transmission of Language Capital
  and Economic Outcomes. Journal of Human Resources 43 (3), 660­687.

Chiappori, P.-A. (1988). Rational Household Labor Supply. Econometrica 56 (1), 63­90.

Chiappori, P.-A. (1992). Collective Labor Supply and Welfare. Journal of Political Economy ,
 437­467.

Chiappori, P.-A., M. C. Dias, and C. Meghir (2018). The Marriage Market, Labor Supply,
 and Education Choice. Journal of Political Economy 126 (S1), S26­S72.

Chiappori, P.-A., B. Fortin, and G. Lacroix (2002). Marriage Market, Divorce Legislation,
 and Household Labor Supply. Journal of Political Economy 110 (1), 37­72.


                                             41
Chiappori, P.-A., M. Iyigun, and Y. Weiss (2009). Investment in Schooling and the Marriage
 Market. American Economic Review 99 (5), 1689­1713.

Chiappori, P.-A., S. Oreffice, and C. Quintana-Domeque (2012). Fatter Attraction: An-
 thropometric and Socioeconomic Matching on the Marriage Market. Journal of Political
 Economy 120 (4), 659­695.

Chiappori, P.-A. and B. Salani´
                              e (2016). The Econometrics of Matching Models. Journal of
 Economic Literature 54 (3), 832­861.

Chiappori, P.-A., B. Salani´
                           e, and Y. Weiss (2017). Partner Choice, Investment in Children,
 and the Marital College Premium. American Economic Review 107 (8), 2109­67.

Choo, E. (2015). Dynamic Marriage Matching: An Empirical Framework. Economet-
 rica 83 (4), 1373­1423.

Choo, E. and A. Siow (2006). Who Marries Whom and Why. Journal of Political Econ-
 omy 114 (1), 175­201.

Clots-Figueras, I. and P. Masella (2013). Education, Language and Identity. The Economic
  Journal 123 (570), 333­357.

Constant, A. F. and K. F. Zimmermann (2008). Measuring Ethnic Identity and Its Impact
  on Economic Behavior. Journal of the European Economic Association 6 (2-3), 424­433.

Constant, A. F. and K. F. Zimmermann (2013). International Handbook on the Economics
  of Migration. Edward Elgar Publishing.

Del Boca, D., C. Flinn, and M. Wiswall (2014). Household Choices and Child Development.
  The Review of Economic Studies 81 (1), 137­185.

Dohmen, T., A. Falk, D. Huffman, and U. Sunde (2012). The Intergenerational Transmission
 of Risk and Trust Attitudes. The Review of Economic Studies 79 (2), 645­677.

Dupuy, A. and A. Galichon (2014). Personality Traits and The Marriage Market. Journal
 of Political Economy 122 (6), 1271­1319.

Dustmann, C. (1997). The Effects of Education, Parental Background and Ethnic Concen-
 tration on Language. Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance 37, 245­262.

Dustmann, C. and F. Fabbri (2003). Language Proficiency and Labour Market Performance
 of Immigrants in the UK. The Economic Journal 113 (489), 695­717.

                                           42
Dustmann, C., T. Frattini, and I. P. Preston (2013). The Effect of Immigration along the
 Distribution of Wages. Review of Economic Studies 80 (1), 145­173.

Dustmann, C., S. Machin, and U. Sch¨
                                   onberg (2010). Ethnicity and Educational Achievement
 in Compulsory Schooling. The Economic Journal 120 (546), 272­297.

Edin, P.-A., P. Fredriksson, and O. Aslund (2003). Ethnic Enclaves and the Economic
  Success of Immigrants. Evidence from a Natural Experiment. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 118 (1), 329­357.

Fern´
    andez, R. (2011). Does culture matter? In Handbook of Social Economics, Volume 1,
  pp. 481­510. Elsevier.

Fern´
    andez, R., A. Fogli, and C. Olivetti (2004). Mothers and Sons: Preference Formation
  and Female Labor Force Dynamics. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (4), 1249­1299.

Fouka, V. (2019). Backlash: the Unintended Effects of Language Prohibition in US Schools
  After World War I. Review of Economic Studies Forthcoming .

Fryer, R. G. (2007). Guess Who's Been Coming to Dinner? Trends in Interracial Marriage
  Over The 20th Century. Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (2), 71­90.

Fu, X. and T. B. Heaton (2008). Racial and Educational Homogamy: 1980 to 2000. Socio-
  logical Perspectives 51 (4), 735­758.

Furtado, D. and S. J. Trejo (2013). Interethnic Marriages and their Economic Effects.
  International Handbook on the Economics of Migration , 276.

Galichon, A., S. Kominers, and S. Weber (2015). The nonlinear Bernstein equation in
 Economics.

Galichon, A., S. D. Kominers, and S. Weber (2019). Costly Concessions: An Empirical
 Framework for Matching With Imperfectly Transferable Utility. Journal of Political Econ-
 omy Forthcoming .

Galichon, A. and B. Salani´
                          e (2015). Cupid's Invisible Hand: Social Surplus and Identification
 in Matching Models.

Galichon, A. and B. Salani´
                          e (2017). The Econometrics and Some Properties of Separable
 Matching Models. American Economic Review 107 (5), 251­55.

Gayle, G.-L. and A. Shephard (2019). Optimal Taxation, Marriage, Home Production, and
 Family Labor Supply. Econometrica 87 (1), 291­326.

                                             43
Ginsburgh, V. and S. Weber (2011). How Many Languages Do We Need?: The Economics
  of Linguistic Diversity. Princeton University Press.

Gordon, M. (1964). Assimilation in American Life. Oxford University Press.

Grosjean, P. (2014). A History of Violence: The Culture of Honor and Homicide in the US
  South. Journal of the European Economic Association 12 (5), 1285­1316.

Guirkinger, C., J.-P. Platteau, and Z. Wahhaj (2019). Behind the Veil of Cultural Persistence:
 Marriage and Divorce in a Migrant Community. Working Paper .

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2016). Long-term Persistence. Journal of the
 European Economic Association 14 (6), 1401­1436.

Hwang, Y. G. (2019). An Estimable General-Equilibrium Structural Model of Immigrants'
 Neighborhood Sorting and Social Integration. Working Paper .

Kalmijn, M., P. M. de Graaf, and J. P. Janssen (2005). Intermarriage and The Risk of
 Divorce in The Netherlands: The Effects of Differences in Religion and in Nationality,
 1974­94. Population Studies 59 (1), 71­85.

Lewis, M. P., G. F. Simons, and C. D. Fennig (2009). Ethnologue: Languages of the World,
  Volume 9. SIL International Dallas, TX.

Lundberg, S. and R. A. Pollak (1993). Separate Spheres Bargaining and the Marriage Market.
  Journal of Political Economy , 988­1010.

Manacorda, M., A. Manning, and J. Wadsworth (2012). The Impact of Immigration on
 the Structure of Wages: Theory and Evidence from Britain. Journal of the European
 Economic Association 10 (1), 120­151.

Manning, A. and S. Roy (2010). Culture Clash or Culture Club? National Identity in
 Britain. Economic Journal 120 (542), F72­F100.

McFadden, D. (1974). Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior. Frontiers
 in Econometrics , 105­142.

Meng, X. and R. G. Gregory (2005). Intermarriage and the Economic Assimilation of Im-
 migrants. Journal of Labor Economics 23 (1), 135­174.

Nunn, N. and L. Wantchekon (2011). The Slave Trade and The Origins of Mistrust in Africa.
 American Economic Review 101 (7), 3221­52.

                                             44
Ottaviano, G. I. and G. Peri (2012). Rethinking the Effect of Immigration on Wages. Journal
  of the European Economic Association 10 (1), 152­197.

Price, K., R. M. Storn, and J. A. Lampinen (2006). Differential Evolution: A Practical
  Approach to Global Optimization. Springer Science & Business Media.

Schwartz, C. R. (2013). Trends and Variation in Assortative Mating: Causes and Conse-
  quences. Annual Review of Sociology 39, 451­470.

Shapley, L. S. and M. Shubik (1971). The Assignment Game I: The Core. International
  Journal of Game Theory 1 (1), 111­130.

Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2009). The Diffusion of Development. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 124 (2), 469­529.

Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2016). Ancestry, Language and Culture. In The Palgrave
  Handbook of Economics and Language, pp. 174­211. Springer.

Stevenson, B. and J. Wolfers (2007). Marriage and Divorce: Changes and Their Driving
  Forces. Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (2), 27­52.

Storn, R. and K. Price (1997). Differential Evolution­A Simple and Efficient Heuristic for
  Global Optimization over Continuous Spaces. Journal of Global Optimization 11 (4), 341­
  359.

Voena, A. (2015). Yours, Mine and Ours: Do Divorce Laws Affect the Intertemporal Behavior
  of Married Couples? American Economic Review 105 (8), 2295­2332.

Voigtl¨
      ander, N. and H.-J. Voth (2012). Persecution Perpetuated: the Medieval Origins of
  Anti-Semitic Violence in Nazi Germany. Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3), 1339­
  1392.

Zhang, Y. and J. Van Hook (2009). Marital Dissolution Among Interracial Couples. Journal
  of Marriage and Family 71 (1), 95­107.




                                            45
A     Data and Sample Construction
The empirical analysis uses rich administrative Italian data at the individual level, from 1995
to 2012. We obtained data from ISTAT trough its ADELE Laboratory. In what follows, we
describe the data sources and the main information provided in each dataset.


A.1     Marriages, Fertility, Separation and Singles
Marriage. We exploit marriage records from municipal vital statistics registries to recover
matching patterns by ethnic group of the spouses. Marriage records contain the universe
of marriages celebrated each year in Italy from 1995 to 2012. They provide information on
the main socio-demographic characteristics of the spouses. They are collected through the
ISTAT model compiled by the Registrar of the City Civil State in which the marriage took
place. For each marriage, the section dedicated to the wedding reports: the date of marriage,
the type of ceremony (religious or civil), the municipality of the ceremony and the choice
of the property regime by the spouses (community or separation property). The informa-
tion provided for each spouse includes: date of birth, municipality of birth, municipality of
residence at the time of marriage, the place of future residence of the spouses, the previous
marital status, the education level, the employment status, and for migrant individuals the
nationality and the country of origin. In order to account for out-migration selection of
families, the sample is restricted to marriages where at least one spouse is resident in Italy
at the time of the marriage.

Fertility. Fertility rates come from municipality births registries, which contain the uni-
verse of individual birth records of residents in the municipality of enrolment, for each year
from 1990 to 2012. Individual birth records include socio-demographic variables of interest
such as gender, date and province of birth, citizenship and parental information regarding
their date of birth, citizenship and marital status.

Separation. Separation data come from the registries of civil court chancelleries and cover
the universe of legal separations registered in Italy, covering the period 1995-2012. The
statistical data collected allow us to analyse different aspects of the marital dissolution phe-
nomenon. Information is provided regarding the judicial proceedings and any appeal for
legal assistance; the marital union as the date and the type of ceremony; spousal socio-
demographic characteristics as reported in marriage records; any children involved with date
of birth and gender; the post-dissolution arrangements like alimony obligations, recipient


                                              A.1
subject and annual amount of contribution for maintenance and the custody of children45 .
We focus on separation rates, which better represent marital dissolution decisions in the
Italian context, for two main reasons. First, separation is the juridical act that launches the
divorce proceedings. With Law 74/1987 and until 2015, a minimum period of 3 years of legal
separation was required before eventually submitting a divorce request. Second, on average
only 65% of separations are followed by a divorce, which implies that divorce choices signif-
icantly underestimate marital dissolution behaviours. In light of this, separations provide a
more accurate representation of actual household dissolution choices.

Single Individuals. We derive the population vectors by ethnic group, gender and marital
status from individual Italian Census data of 2001 and 2011. We select adult individuals,
hence the age range we focus on is of more than 18 years old. Census data classify the
marital status of an individual as: never married, at present married, separated de facto,
legally separated, divorced or widowed. We consider an individual available in the case that
she/he is never married, legally separated, divorced or widowed. We also discard institu-
tional households, corresponding to correctional institutions, but also military and mental
care facilities. We take into account potential measurement error concerns due to truncation
of unmatched population vectors as described in Section (3).



A.2      Dataset Construction and Sample Selection
The empirical estimation is based on a unique dataset that links households information
across different sources. We matched marriage, birth and separation records on the exact
date of marriage and spouses' exact date and place of birth (Italian province for natives and
country of origin for foreigners), which are reported in all registries. In the birth records
matching, the combination of these characteristics allows for an exact one-to-one matching
for 98.8% of marriages, while in the separation matching, we match exactly the 99.5% of mar-
riages, and we discard the remaining fraction. Such low percentages suggest that marriages
can be uniquely identified through the set of time-invariant characteristics listed above. The

   45
      For the period under investigation, registries of civil court chancelleries constitute the unique source
for separations and divorces data, while starting from December 2014 (in application of Law n. 162/2014)
consensual separation and divorce proceedings can be submitted to the civic registrar. The time-period of
our analysis rules out potential concerns in the selection of available data. Proceedings classified to end with
conciliation, cancellation, or change of rite are registered, but post-dissolution information is not available
for them. We drop them from the final sample because not representative of effective households' marital
dissolution choices. Separation records that end up in conciliation are 2,149, those cancelled are 1,884 and
those that changed rite are 1,772; hence they account of the 1.59% of the total number of separations.


                                                     A.2
final sample of marriages (4,151,551) corresponds to 92.58% of the universe of marriages
celebrated in Italy during the time interval 1995-2012. In the final dataset the fertility rate
corresponds to 69.56% with an average of 1.54 children per family. Of all marriages, 7% end
up in separation in the first years of the marital union.
    From this final sample, we recover the following empirical moments. The expected marital
utility net of the outside options of singlehood U ^hj for the household of type hj is identified
from equation (10), exploiting the number of hj marriages formed in each region r, (µhj ),
and the number of unmatched men of type h and women of type j for each region r, (µh. , µ.j ).
    Fertility rates n
                    ^ hj for each household type hj and for all regions r are computed as follows:
                                                      µhj
                                                 1
                                       n
                                       ^ hj   =             Nhj ,
                                                µhj   m=1

   with Nhj the number of children born from within a hj household, for all region r.
   Separations rates ^hj for each household type hj and for all regions r are computed as:
                                                      µhj
                                                 1
                                       ^hj    =             Dhj ,
                                                µhj   b=1

   where Dhj is a dummy equal to one if the hj marriage end up in separation during the
investigation period.


A.3     Socialization Probabilities
Socialization data come from the Condition and Social Integration of Foreign Nationals Sur-
vey, conducted in 2011 and 2012 in all Italian regions on a sample of 9,600 families. The
survey targeted foreign residents in Italy and it was conducted at the household level to pro-
vide socio-demographic information about all family members, for a total sample of 25,356
respondents. The aim of the survey was to collect relevant aspects of the socio-economic inte-
gration process of migrants in Italy, with a particular focus on linguistic integration. Differ-
ent dimensions have been targeted such as: family composition, educational level, migratory
path, employment status, discrimination and integration perception, living environment con-
ditions, religious affiliation, social network formation and socio-political participation. The
survey follows a pivotal survey conducted in 5 sampled regions on a sample of 250 families
with at least one foreign member. The pivotal survey was particularly useful in the definition
and evaluation of the questionnaire, which also requires the participation of sociologists and
cultural mediators. The final questionnaire was translated in 10 different languages to over-
come potential language barriers and to reduce attrition. The actual survey was conducted


                                                 A.3
through direct interviews supported by the CAPI (Computer Assisted Personal Interview)
system to ease the development of the whole questionnaire46 . In each selected household, all
members were interviewed, both foreign-born and natives.
    We exclude from our analysis, respondents who are single and families without children, at
the time of the interview. For our analysis, we consider children and young adult of less than
25 years old, living with their parents at the time of the interview. The final sample consists
of 8,007 individuals belonging to about 5,000 families, 86.7% of these families are married
while the remaining are either separated or divorced.We consider the sample representative
for the study of migrant linguistic integration by ethnic group in each region of residence. We
construct our measure of socialization based on the language spoken at home. The survey
also provides questions to evaluate the level of Italian language proficiency and we check
individual self-declared responses on language spoken.
    We measure language socialization by the language spoken within the family to capture
both the family socialization dimension and the horizontal socialization dimension. We de-
fine the language socialization, by exploiting three pieces of info: (i) language spoken at
home; (ii) mother tongue (main); (iii) mother tongue (secondary). Specifically, we consider
that an individual is socialized in Italian language if he/she declares to speak Italian within
the family. On the contrary, we impute the socialization to his/her mother language, defined
as idiom acquired during the preschool period of childhood. Moreover, if a subject declares
he/she was speaking another language when young, we assign equal weight to the socializa-
tion of the main and secondary mother tongue, to account for bilingualism 47 . For children
of less than 6 years old, we impute the language spoken within the family.
    We compute the vector of socialization frequencies P   ^ k (d) for all h, j and k , conditional
                                                            hj
on being married, d = 0, and for all regions r, as follow:

                                                             Mhj
                                      ^ k (d = 0) = 1
                                      P                             k
                                                                   Shj .
                                        hj
                                                   Mhj       b=1

   with Mhj being the number of children and young adults of less than 25 years old be-
longing to the hj household, and speaking language S k . Due to data limitations in the
number of divorced households per type of family and region, we exploit in the estimation
only socialization moments for married families.

  46
      Examples      of     the    questionnaire       and    invitation   letter    are      available     at
http://www.istat.it/it/archivio/10825.
   47
      The three questions are framed in the following way. Language spoken at home: In Italy, in your family,
do you speak more often Italian or another language?. Mother tongue (main): What language did you speak
when you were young, before going to school?. Mother tongue (secondary): In addition to this, did you also
speak another language when you were young and which one?


                                                    A.4
A.4     Population Distribution
The population distribution by ethnic group for each province is derived from municipality
records on the movements of the foreign resident population for the years 1995 to 2010. Eth-
nic group shares are calculated thanks to municipality data on the total resident population,
aggregated at the regional level.




                                            A.5
B         Additional Figures and Tables

                 Figure B.1: Relevance of Migrant Population Resident in Italy in 2012




(75000,933354]
(15000,75000]
(9000,15000]
(1500,9000]
(200,1500]
[2,200]
No data



    Notes: This figure shows the distribution of the migrant population resident in Italy in 2012 by
    country of origin. Source: Movements of the foreign resident population (2012), Italy.




                                                 A.6
Figure B.2: Ethnic-Group Classification and Cultural Distance Measures wrt Italy
                                  (a) Our Cultural-Ethnic Group Classification




                                       (b) Genetic Distance Classification




             (1801.38,2403.28]
             (1386.125,1801.38]
             (992.47,1386.125]
             (694.85,992.47]
             (240.66,694.85]
             (91.255,240.66]
             [6.08,91.255]
             No data




                                      (c) Linguistic Distance Classification




             (6.89,7.46]
             (6.74,6.89]
             (6.31,6.74]
             (6.1,6.31]
             (4.95,6.1]
             [3.09,4.95]
             No data




Notes: This figure shows our ethnic-group classification (panel a) as well as country cultural
distance towards Italy as proxied by genetic distance (panel b) and ethnolinguistic distance (panel
c). Data are available thanks to Spolaore and Wacziarg (2016). Genetic distance measures the
probability that two alleles selected at random in two populations will be different: the higher the
genetic distance between two populations, the longer they have been apart from each other, the
greater would be the difference in culture. Ethnolinguistic distance is based on the language tree
classification, which groups languages into families based on perceived similarities between them.
Hence, the lower the number of common nodes between two languages, the greater the distance
between them.




                                                       A.7
                                                                        Figure B.3: Migrants' Distribution across Regions
                  (a) Europe - EU15                                                                     (b) Other Europe                                                (c) North Africa-Middle East
                              0.69                                                                               2.75                                                                              0.85
                                              0.26                                                                               3.27                                                                              0.36

0.40                                 0.20                                            1.43                               2.96                                            1.50                              0.97
                      0.36                                                                              1.92                                                                               1.36

    0.24                                                                                2.49                                                                               1.15

                             0.22                                                                               2.55                                                                              1.55
           0.43                                                                                1.51                                                                               0.70


                             0.42                  0.26                                                         2.73                  2.77                                                        0.68                  0.98
                                            0.45                                                                               3.55                                                                              1.05


                                                          0.20                                                                               2.20                                                                              0.35
                                              0.50                                                                               2.70                                                                              0.52
                                                                 0.09                                                                               0.88                                                                              0.27

                                                                              0.09                                                                               0.78                                                                              0.21
                                                                    0.08                                                                               0.77                                                                              0.26
                                                                           0.06                                                                               0.76                                                                              0.24


               0.21                                                                              0.46                                                                               0.23


                                                                              0.09                                                                               0.98                                                                              0.47




                                                                 0.12                                                                               0.53                                                                              0.51




  (.41,.69]                                                                            (2.74,3.55]                                                                        (1.015,1.55]
  (.23,.41]                                                                            (2.0599999,2.74]                                                                   (.60000002,1.015]
  (.105,.23]                                                                           (.82999998,2.0599999]                                                              (.31,.60000002]
  [.06,.105]                                                                           [.46,.82999998]                                                                    [.21,.31]



        (d) Sub-Saharan Africa                                                                                 (e) East Asia                                                             (f) Latin America
                              0.12                                                                               0.53                                                                              0.30
                                              0.52                                                                               0.41                                                                              0.24

0.11                                 0.65                                            0.18                               0.91                                            0.33                              0.25
                      0.59                                                                              1.32                                                                               0.75

    0.33                                                                                0.37                                                                               0.41

                             0.64                                                                               1.05                                                                              0.29
           0.18                                                                                0.36                                                                               1.17


                             0.33                  0.34                                                         1.07                  0.74                                                        0.36                  0.33
                                            0.31                                                                               0.42                                                                              0.54


                                                          0.14                                                                               0.29                                                                              0.22
                                              0.37                                                                               1.11                                                                              0.56
                                                                 0.04                                                                               0.12                                                                              0.12

                                                                              0.10                                                                               0.12                                                                              0.05
                                                                    0.12                                                                               0.24                                                                              0.09
                                                                           0.03                                                                               0.13                                                                              0.06


               0.16                                                                              0.18                                                                               0.08


                                                                              0.07                                                                               0.24                                                                              0.06




                                                                 0.18                                                                               0.35                                                                              0.06




  (.35499999,.65]                                                                      (.82499999,1.32]                                                                   (.38499999,1.17]
  (.18000001,.35499999]                                                                (.36500001,.82499999]                                                              (.27000001,.38499999]
  (.115,.18000001]                                                                     (.20999999,.36500001]                                                              (.085,.27000001]
  [.03,.115]                                                                           [.12,.20999999]                                                                    [.05,.085]



       Notes: This figure shows the distribution of migrant population across regions computed as the
       share of migrant population over the total resident population by region and ethnic group. The
       ethnic group classification is defined in Table B.1. The color classification corresponds to the
       quartiles of the population distribution. Source: Movements of the foreign resident population
       (1995-2010), Italy.




                                                                                                                               A.8
                                        Figure B.4: Minorities Socialization Probabilities and Horizontal Socialization
                                       (a) Other Europe                                  (b) North Africa-Middle East                                                                                                    (c) Sub-Saharan Africa
                              .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                        .9




                                                                                                                                                                                   iA
                              .7
iO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .8
                                                                                                                                                                                   Prob. Soc. Sub-Sah. Africa - P
                                                                                         iM
Prob. Soc. Other Europe - P




                                                                                         Prob. Soc. Middle-East - P

                                                                                                                        .8
                              .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .6
                                                                                                                        .7
                              .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .4
                                                                                                                        .6
                              .4




                                                               Slope = -.010 (.03)                                                                         Slope = -.118 (.05)                                                                    Slope = -.091 (.21)




                                                                                                                        .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .2
                                   0      1          2          3                    4                                       0        .5           1                       1.5                                           0      .2           .4                .6
                                                    iO                                                                                      iM                                                                                        iA
                                                   Q (%)                                                                                   Q (%)                                                                                     Q (%)




                                        (d) East Asia                                                                            (e) Latin America
                              1




                                                                                                                        1
                              .9




                                                                                         iL



                                                                                                                        .8
                                                                                         Prob. Soc. Latin America - P
iS
Prob. Soc. East Asia - P

                              .8




                                                                                                                        .6
                              .7




                                                                                                                        .4




                                                               Slope = -.099 (.07)                                                                         Slope = -.131 (.19)
                              .6




                                                                                                                        .2




                                   0          .5           1                     1.5                                         0        .5               1                     1.5
                                                    iS                                                                                      iL
                                                   Q (%)                                                                                   Q (%)




Notes: This figure shows the average socialization probability of each minority group, over the
correspondent population share by region of residence (average over the time period). Source:
Condition and Social Integration of Foreign Nationals Survey (2011-2012), Italy.




                                                                                                                                                 A.9
 Figure B.5: Fitting of the Model - Gains to Marriage for Homogamous Families

                          2
                                     (a) Europe-EU15                                                                               (b) Other Europe




                                                                                                                       2
                          0




                                                                                                                       0
                          -2




                                                                                                                       -2
      Gains to Marriage




                                                                                                   Gains to Marriage
                          -4




                                                                                                                       -4
                          -6




                                                                                                                       -6
                          -8




                                                                                                                       -8
                          -10




                                                                                                                       -10
                                0      .2                        .4               .6         .8                              0       1                    2                3    4
                                                             Q (%)                                                                                    Q (%)


                                                      Observed        Predicted                                                                Observed        Predicted




                                (c) North Africa-Middle East                                                                     (d) Sub-Saharan Africa
                          2




                                                                                                                       2
                          0




                                                                                                                       0
                          -2




                                                                                                                       -2
      Gains to Marriage




                                                                                                   Gains to Marriage
                          -4




                                                                                                                       -4
                          -6




                                                                                                                       -6
                          -8




                                                                                                                       -8
                          -10




                                                                                                                       -10




                                0           .5                           1             1.5                                   0       .2                   .4               .6   .8
                                                             Q (%)                                                                                    Q (%)


                                                      Observed        Predicted                                                                Observed        Predicted




                                       (e) East Asia                                                                               (f) Latin America
                          2




                                                                                                                       2
                          0




                                                                                                                       0
                          -2




                                                                                                                       -2
      Gains to Marriage




                                                                                                   Gains to Marriage
                          -4




                                                                                                                       -4
                          -6




                                                                                                                       -6
                          -8




                                                                                                                       -8
                          -10




                                                                                                                       -10




                                0                .5                          1               1.5                             0            .5                          1         1.5
                                                             Q (%)                                                                                    Q (%)


                                                      Observed        Predicted                                                                Observed        Predicted




Notes: This figure shows predicted and observed gains to marriage for homogamous families of
ethnic group minorities over the correspondent population share by region of residence (average
over the time period). Observed moments are weighted by number of marriages per region. E:
Europe-EU15; O: Other Europe; M: North Africa and Middle-East; A: Sub-Saharan Africa; S:
East Asia; L: Latin America.




                                                                                             A.10
Figure B.6: Model Validation on Non Targeted Socialization Rates for Divorced Couples
                             (a) Italian Socialization                                                  (b) Mother Socialization

                    1




                                                                                               1
                    .8




                                                                                               .8
                    .6




                                                                                               .6
        Predicted




                                                                                   Predicted
                    .4




                                                                                               .4
                    .2




                                                                                               .2
                                                            Slope =1.12(.23)                                                           Slope =0.99(.17)
                    0




                                                                                               0
                         0      .2     .4              .6     .8               1                    0      .2     .4              .6     .8               1
                                            Observed                                                                   Observed



  Notes: This figure shows the relationship between the observed and predicted Italian and mother
  socialization frequencies for the sample of marriages ending in divorce. Red dots correspond to
  homogamous families' moments, while blue dots correspond to heterogamous families' moments.
  Slope coefficients and standard errors in parenthesis are also reported.




                                                                               A.11
Figure B.7: Model Validation on Province-level Data - Gains to Marriage for Homogeneous
Families
                    2
                               (a) Europe-EU15                                                                      (b) Other Europe




                                                                                                     2
                    0




                                                                                                     0
                    -2




                                                                                                     -2
         phi hom2




                                                                                          phi hom3
                    -4




                                                                                                     -4
                    -6




                                                                                                     -6
                    -8




                                                                                                     -8
                    -10




                                                                                                     -10
                          0               .5                         1              1.5                    0          1               2                3             4
                                                      Q (%)                                                                        Q (%)


                                               Observed       Predicted                                                    Observed        Predicted




                          (c) North Africa-Middle East                                                          (d) Sub-Saharan Africa
                    2




                                                                                                     2
                    0




                                                                                                     0
                    -2




                                                                                                     -2
         phi hom4




                                                                                          phi hom5
                    -4




                                                                                                     -4
                    -6




                                                                                                     -6
                    -8




                                                                                                     -8
                    -10




                                                                                                     -10




                          0          .5                   1               1.5       2                          .2    .4       .6            .8             1   1.2
                                                      Q (%)                                                                        Q (%)


                                               Observed       Predicted                                                    Observed        Predicted




                                     (e) East Asia                                                                  (f) Latin America
                    2




                                                                                                     2
                    0




                                                                                                     0
                    -2




                                                                                                     -2
         phi hom6




                                                                                          phi hom7
                    -4




                                                                                                     -4
                    -6




                                                                                                     -6
                    -8




                                                                                                     -8
                    -10




                                                                                                     -10




                          0     .5               1             1.5              2   2.5                    0          .5              1                1.5               2
                                                      Q (%)                                                                        Q (%)


                                               Observed       Predicted                                                    Observed        Predicted




   Notes: The figure shows out-of-sample predicted and observed gains to marriage for homogamous
   families of ethnic group minorities over the correspondent population share by province of residence
   (average over the time period). Observed moments are weighted by number of marriages per
   province. E: Europe-EU15; O: Other Europe; M: North Africa and Middle-East; A: Sub-Saharan
   Africa; S: East Asia; L: Latin America.




                                                                                    A.12
                                   Figure B.8: Cultural Intolerance Estimates and Cultural Distance Measures
                                             (a) Genetic Distance                                                           (b) Linguistic Distance
                                   100




                                                                                                                 100
                                                                                                                 80
                                   80
  Cultural Intolerance Estimates




                                                                                Cultural Intolerance Estimates

                                                                                                                 60
                                   60




                                                                                                                 40
                                   40




                                                                                                                 20
                                   20




                                                                                                                 0
                                   0




                                         0    .2     .4     .6      .8   1                                             .5    .6     .7     .8     .9   1



                                             (c) Religious Distance                                                           (d) WVS Distance
                                   100




                                                                                                                 100
                                   80




                                                                                                                 80
  Cultural Intolerance Estimates




                                                                                Cultural Intolerance Estimates
                                   60




                                                                                                                 60
                                   40




                                                                                                                 40
                                   20




                                                                                                                 20
                                   0




                                                                                                                 0




                                         0    .2     .4     .6      .8   1                                             0     .2     .4     .6     .8   1



Notes: The figure shows the relationship between different cultural distance measures and cultural
intolerance parameter estimates. We exploit four measures of cultural distance along genetics
(panel a), language (panel b), religious (panel c), and values (panel d). Data are available thanks
to Spolaore and Wacziarg (2016). Genetic distance measures the probability that two alleles
selected at random in two populations will be different: the greater the genetic distance between
two populations, the longer they have been apart from each other, and the greater would be the
difference in culture. Linguistic distance is based on the language tree classification, which groups
languages into families based on perceived similarities between them. Hence, the lower the number
of common nodes between two languages, the higher the distance between them. In a similar
vein, religious distance originates from a tree-based representation of religions. The last variable
measures distance in cultural norms, values and attitudes based on answers to the World Values
Survey. Estimates are weighted by the number of marriages per household type.




                                                                             A.13
Figure B.9: Outside Option of Singlehood by Type of Family and Cultural-Ethnic Group




                                               50
                                               40
                Outside Option of Singlehood

                                               30
                                               20
                                               10
                                               0




                                                    Italian   EU15    EUOther Mid-East SubAfrica   E.Asia L.America

                                                                     Homogamous             Heterogamous

   Notes: This figure shows parameter estimates for the outside option of singlehood, hs , by cultural-
   ethnic group and family type.




                                                                             A.14
                     Figure B.10: Long-run Dynamics of Cultural Traits



             2
             1.5
     Qi(%)
             1
             .5
             0




                 t=0                     t=1                     t=2                       t=3
         Initial Condition        Second Generation       Third Generation          Fourth Generation


                             Europe-EU15          Europe-Other               Latin America
                             Middle-East          Sub-Sah Africa             East Asia




Notes: This figure shows the long-run dynamics of the distribution of cultural traits in the pop-
ulation for minority groups, over successive generations. E: Europe-EU15; O: Other Europe; M:
North Africa and Middle-East; A: Sub-Saharan Africa; S: East Asia; L: Latin America.




                                               A.15
                                                  Figure B.11: Dynamics of Marital Matching
                                                             (a) Homogamous Marriages




                                            1
             Homogamous Marriage Rate (%)
                                            .8
                                            .6
                                            .4
                                            .2
                                            0




                                              First                      Second                         Third
                                            Generation                  Generation                    Generation


                                                         Europe-EU15      Europe-Other    Latin America
                                                         Middle-East      Africa          East Asia




                                                     (b) Heterogamous Marriages with Natives
                                            1
             Intermarriage Rate (%)
                                            .8
                                            .6
                                            .4
                                            .2
                                            0




                                              First                      Second                         Third
                                            Generation                  Generation                    Generation


                                                         Europe-EU15      Europe-Other    Latin America
                                                         Middle-East      Africa          East Asia




Notes: This figure shows the long-run dynamics of matching patterns for homogamous marriages
(Panel a.) and heterogamous marriages with natives, over successive generations. E: Europe-EU15;
O: Other Europe; M: North Africa and Middle-East; A: Sub-Saharan Africa; S: East Asia; L: Latin
America.
                                                                       A.16
                                                  Figure B.12: Dynamics of Marital Matching
                                                             (a) Homogamous Marriages



             Homogamous Marriage Rate (%)
                                            .4
                                            .3
                                            .2
                                            .1
                                            0




                                              First                      Second                         Third
                                            Generation                  Generation                    Generation


                                                         Europe-EU15      Europe-Other    Latin America
                                                         Middle-East      Africa          East Asia




                                                     (b) Heterogamous Marriages with Natives
                                            6
             Intermarriage Rate (%)
                                            4
                                            2
                                            0




                                              First                      Second                         Third
                                            Generation                  Generation                    Generation


                                                         Europe-EU15      Europe-Other    Latin America
                                                         Middle-East      Africa          East Asia




Notes: This figure shows the long-run dynamics of matching patterns for homogamous marriages
(Panel a.) and heterogamous marriages with natives, over successive generations. E: Europe-EU15;
O: Other Europe; M: North Africa and Middle-East; A: Sub-Saharan Africa; S: East Asia; L: Latin
America.
                                                                       A.17
     Figure B.13: Long-run Dynamics with Proportional Raise in Migration Inflows
                                  (a) Europe-EU15                                                                              (b) Europe Other
              .6




                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                           1.5
              .4
       Q(%)




                                                                                                    Q(%)

                                                                                                           1
              .2




                                                                                                           .5
              0




                                                                                                           0
                      t=0                 t=1                 t=2                      t=3                         t=0                  t=1                 t=2                      t=3
              Initial Condition    Second Generation   Third Generation         Fourth Generation          Initial Condition     Second Generation   Third Generation         Fourth Generation




                   (c) North Africa-Middle East                                                                        (d) Sub-Saharan Africa
              .8




                                                                                                           .8
              .6




                                                                                                           .6
       Q(%)




                                                                                                    Q(%)
              .4




                                                                                                           .4
              .2




                                                                                                           .2
              0




                                                                                                           0




                      t=0                 t=1                 t=2                      t=3                         t=0                  t=1                 t=2                      t=3
              Initial Condition    Second Generation   Third Generation         Fourth Generation          Initial Condition     Second Generation   Third Generation         Fourth Generation

                                      Baseline          Rise in Migration Inflows                                                   Baseline          Rise in Migration Inflows




                                   (e) East Asia                                                                               (f) Latin America
              .8




                                                                                                           .8
              .6




                                                                                                           .6
       Q(%)




                                                                                                    Q(%)
              .4




                                                                                                           .4
              .2




                                                                                                           .2
              0




                                                                                                           0




                      t=0                 t=1                 t=2                      t=3                         t=0                  t=1                 t=2                      t=3
              Initial Condition    Second Generation   Third Generation         Fourth Generation          Initial Condition     Second Generation   Third Generation         Fourth Generation

                                      Baseline          Rise in Migration Inflows                                                   Baseline          Rise in Migration Inflows




Notes: This figure shows the long-run dynamics of the distribution of cultural traits in the population
for minority groups, over successive generations. The solid line represents the dynamics at the baseline,
while the dash line represents the dynamics after doubling the share of second generation minorities,
proportionally for all minority groups. Black arrows highlight the exogenous rise in inflows for all second
generation minorities.




                                                                                            A.18
          Figure B.14: Long-run Dynamics with Raise in Specific Minorities Inflows
                                   (a) Europe-EU15                                                                               (b) Europe Other
               .8




                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                             1.5
               .6
       Qi(%)




                                                                                                     Qi(%)
               .4




                                                                                                             1
               .2




                                                                                                             .5
               0




                                                                                                             0
                       t=0                 t=1                 t=2                      t=3                          t=0                  t=1                 t=2                      t=3
               Initial Condition    Second Generation   Third Generation         Fourth Generation           Initial Condition     Second Generation   Third Generation         Fourth Generation

                                       Baseline          Rise in Migration Inflows                                                    Baseline          Rise in Migration Inflows




                    (c) North Africa-Middle East                                                                         (d) Sub-Saharan Africa
               .8




                                                                                                             .8
               .6




                                                                                                             .6
       Qi(%)




                                                                                                     Qi(%)
               .4




                                                                                                             .4
               .2




                                                                                                             .2
               0




                                                                                                             0




                       t=0                 t=1                 t=2                      t=3                          t=0                  t=1                 t=2                      t=3
               Initial Condition    Second Generation   Third Generation         Fourth Generation           Initial Condition     Second Generation   Third Generation         Fourth Generation

                                       Baseline          Rise in Migration Inflows                                                    Baseline          Rise in Migration Inflows




                                    (e) East Asia                                                                                (f) Latin America
               .8




                                                                                                             .8
               .6




                                                                                                             .6
       Qi(%)




                                                                                                     Qi(%)
               .4




                                                                                                             .4
               .2




                                                                                                             .2
               0




                                                                                                             0




                       t=0                 t=1                 t=2                      t=3                          t=0                  t=1                 t=2                      t=3
               Initial Condition    Second Generation   Third Generation         Fourth Generation           Initial Condition     Second Generation   Third Generation         Fourth Generation

                                       Baseline          Rise in Migration Inflows                                                    Baseline          Rise in Migration Inflows




Notes: This figure shows the long-run dynamics of the distribution of cultural traits in the population for
minority groups, over successive generations. The solid line represents the dynamics at the baseline, while
the dash line represents the dynamics after doubling the share of second generation North Africa-Middle
East, Sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia minorities. Black arrows highlight the exogenous rise in inflows
for North Africa-Middle East, Sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia second generations minorities.




                                                                                             A.19
                                                                                                           i
                                  Figure B.15: Change in Matching Patterns with Italians Fully Tolerant, Vn  =0
                                    (a) Homogamous marriages                                                                                                 (b) Intermarriages with Italians
                             .5




                                                                                                                                                        5
                             .4




                                                                                                                                                        4
                                                                                                                  Intermarriages with Italians (%)
 Homogamous Marriages (%)

                             .3




                                                                                                                                                        3
                             .2




                                                                                                                                                        2
                             .1




                                                                                                                                                        1
                             0




                                                                                                                                                        0
                                   EU15     EUOther   Mid-East     Africa       E.Asia        L.America                                                        EU15   EUOther   Mid-East     Africa       E.Asia        L.America

                                                                            DVn =0                                                                                                                    DVn =0
                                                                                 i                                                                                                                         i
                                                       Baseline                                                                                                                  Baseline


Notes: This figure shows the variation in the percentage of homogamous (panel a.) and heterogamous
marriages at the baseline and in case of complete tolerance of Italian majority towards minorities.

                                                                                                    i
                    Figure B.16: Change in Intra-household Patterns with Italians Fully Tolerant, Vn  =0
                                                 (a) Fertility
                             .6
 Fertility rate - n

                             .4
                             .2
                             0




                                    EU15    EUOther   Mid-East    Sub.Africa         E.Asia    L.America

                                                                               DVn =0
                                                                                     i
                                                       Baseline


                                          (b) Italian socialization                                                                                          (c) Foreign language socialization
                             1




                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                                   Prob. of foreign language soc. - P
                             .8




                                                                                                                                                        .8
 N
 Prob. of Italian soc. - P

                             .6




                                                                                                                                                        .6
                             .4




                                                                                                                                                        .4
                             .2




                                                                                                                                                        .2
                             0




                                                                                                                                                        0




                                    EU15    EUOther   Mid-East    Sub.Africa         E.Asia    L.America                                                       EU15   EUOther   Mid-East    Sub.Africa         E.Asia    L.America

                                                                               DVn =0                                                                                                                    DVn =0
                                                                                     i                                                                                                                         i
                                                       Baseline                                                                                                                  Baseline


Notes: This figure shows the variation in fertility rate (panel a.), Italian socialization probability (panel
b.) and foreign language socialization probability (panel c.) in intermarriages with Italians at the baseline
and in case of complete tolerance of Italian majority towards minorities.


                                                                                                           A.20
Figure B.17: Long-run Dynamics of Cultural Traits with Minorities Fully Tolerant, Vin = 0
(index=1 in t = 0)




                    1
                    .8
                    .6
               Qi
                    .4
                    .2
                    0




                         t=0                     t=1                    t=2                       t=3
                 Initial Condition        Second Generation      Third Generation          Fourth Generation


                                     Europe-EU15          Europe-Other              Latin America
                                     Middle-East          Sub-Sah Africa            East Asia




    Notes: This figure shows the long-run dynamics of the distribution of cultural traits in the popu-
    lation for minority groups, over successive generations assuming the case of complete tolerance of
    minorities towards Italian culture.




                                                       A.21
                                                                                    i
Figure B.18: Long-run Dynamics of Cultural Traits with Italians Fully Intolerant, Vn  = 100
(index=1 in t = 0)




                       1
                       .8
                       .6
               Q(%)
                       .4
                       .2
                       0




                              t=0                     t=1                    t=2                       t=3
                      Initial Condition        Second Generation      Third Generation          Fourth Generation


                                          Europe-EU15          Europe-Other              Latin America
                                          Middle-East          Sub-Sah Africa            East Asia




    Notes: This figure shows the long-run dynamics of the distribution of cultural traits in the popu-
    lation for minority groups, over successive generations assuming the case of complete intolerance
    of Italian majority towards minorities.




                                                            A.22
    Table B.1: Cultural-Ethnic Group Classification of Migrants' Countries of Origin

Cultural-Ethnic Group        (%)     Countries
                    E
Europe - EU15 - i            4.57    Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Finland, Germany, Greece, Ireland,
                                     Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, United Kingdom, Spain, Sweden

Other Europe - iO            46.29   Albania, Andorra, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cyprus,
                                     Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Iceland, Isle of Man,
                                     Liechtenstein, Latvia, Lithuania, Kosovo, Macedonia (FYROM), Malta,
                                     Poland, Republic of Moldova, Monaco, Norway, Russian Federation, San
                                     Marino, Vatican City State, Serbia and Montenegro, Romania, Switzer-
                                     land, Slovakia, Slovenia, Turkey, Ukraine, Vatican City State, United
                                     States, Canada

Middle-East - iM             17.15   Algeria, Egypt, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Marocco, Tunisia, Afghanistan,
                                     Saudi Arabia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, United Arab Emirates, Islamic Re-
                                     public Of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
                                     Qatar, Syrian Arab Republic, Palestinian Territory, Turkmenistan,
                                     Uzbekistan

Sub-Saharan Africa - iA      7.33    Angola, Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape
                                     Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo, The Demo-
                                     cratic Republic of Congo, Cote D'Ivoire, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon,
                                     Gambia, Ghana, Dijbouti, Guinea, Guinea-Bisseau, Equatorial Guinea,
                                     Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mau-
                                     ritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sao Tome and
                                     Principe, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Swazi-
                                     land, United Republic of Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, Zambia, Zimbabwe

East Asia - iS               16.47   Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, China, Democratic People's Replica of
                                     Korea, Republic of Korea, Philippines, Japan, Jordan, Indonesia, Lao
                                     Pepople's Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Mongolia, Myanmar, Singa-
                                     pore, Taiwan, Thailand, East Timor, Vietnam, Australia, Fiji, Kiribati,
                                     Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru, New Zealand,
                                     Palau, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Samoa, Tonga, Tuvalu,
                                     Vanuatu, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Georgia, India, Maldives, Nepal,
                                     Oman, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan, Yemen

Latin America - iL           8.2     Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Plurina-
                                     tional State of Bolivia, Brazil, Costa Rica, Cuba, Chile, Colombia, Do-
                                     minica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Jamaica, Grenada,
                                     Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama,
                                     Paraguay, Peru, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
                                     The Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, Venezuela

Notes: This table reports our classification of foreign countries by cultural-ethnic groups.




                                                       A.23
                        Table B.2: Data Sources and Variables of Interest

Data                Frequency (Years)   Source              Variables of Interest

Marriages           1995-2012           Municipality        Wedding: the date of marriage, the celebration cere-
                                        Vital Statistics    mony (religious or civil), the municipality of celebration,
                                        Registries          the property regime (community or separation prop-
                                                            erty). Spouses: date of birth, municipality of birth,
                                                            municipality of residence at the time of marriage, mu-
                                                            nicipality of future residence, past marital status, the
                                                            education level, the employment status, the nationality,
                                                            citizenship acquisition (Italian born, naturalized Italian
                                                            and not Italian), the country of origin if foreign

Births              1990-2012           Municipality        Newborn: gender, date and municipality of birth, cit-
                                        Births Registries   izenship, family size, presence and number of minor
                                                            members in the family. Parents: date and province of
                                                            birth, citizenship, country of origin and marital status

Separations         1995-2012           Registries    of Proceeding: judicial and appeal to legal assistance, pro-
                                        Civil      Court ceeding end, date of registration, date of separation,
                                        Chancelleries    court of reference; Marriage: date of marriage, celebra-
                                                         tion ceremony (religious or civil); Spouses: date of birth,
                                                         municipality of birth, municipality of residence at the
                                                         time of marriage, the municipality of future residence,
                                                         past marital status, the education level, the employment
                                                         status, the nationality, citizenship acquisition (Italian
                                                         born, naturalized Italian and not Italian), the country
                                                         of origin if foreign; Children: number of children born in
                                                         the marriage, number of children in the family at separa-
                                                         tion, date of birth and gender; Post-dissolution arrange-
                                                         ments (2000-2012): alimony obligations versus children
                                                         and/or spouse (yes or no), recipient subject and annual
                                                         amount of contribution to the maintenance, custody as-
                                                         signment of children.

Socialization       2011-2012           Survey: Condi-      Household Panel. Individual data: age, gender, relation-
                                        tion and Social     ship with targeted subject, marital status, year of mar-
                                        Integration  of     riage, nationality, citizenship acquisition (Italian born,
                                        Foreign Nation-     naturalized Italian and not Italian), country of origin
                                        als                 if foreign, partner/mother/father citizenship and coun-
                                                            try of origin, migratory path, educational level, employ-
                                                            ment status/ school enrolment, religious affiliation, dis-
                                                            crimination and integration perception, social networks
                                                            (at work, school, free-time). Household data: family
                                                            composition, area of residence (province), living environ-
                                                            ment conditions. Language data: first language, verbal
                                                            and written knowledge of first language, language spo-
                                                            ken at home, Italian language proficiency: lecture, writ-
                                                            ing, reading, comprehension level (good, enough, little,
                                                            nothing)

Migration records   1995-2010           Municipality        End of period data (December, 31): total population,
                                        Population          total foreign population, total male and female foreign
                                        Balance             population by municipality. Male and female foreign
                                                            population by country of origin by province.




                                                       A.24
                                    Table B.3: Marriage Distribution by Spouses Cultural-Ethnic Group

                                                                           Wife Ethnic Group:
       Husband                     Italian Europe-EU15 Other Europe Middle East Sub-Sah. Africa East Asia Latin America     Total
       Ethnic Group:
       Italian                  3,623,416        49,602      165,778     11,792          11,063    13,682        63,484 3,938,817
       Europe-EU15                 41,250         3,153        2,358        161             217       293           838    48,270
       Other Europe                46,185         1,202       25,027        253             218       307         1,197    74,389
       North Africa-Middle East    21,791           554        2,973      4,178             133       131           829    30,589
       Sub-Saharan Africa            6,043          260          421         71          10,090        41           144    17,070
       East Asia                     2,420          127          348         51              44     9,865           129    12,984
       Latin America               13,329           322          951         66              46        76        14,642    29,432
       Total                    3,754,434        55,220      197,856     16,572          21,811    24,395        81,263 4,151,551
       Notes: This table reports the bivariate marriage distribution by cultural-ethnic group of spouses (absolute numbers). Source: Marriage records from vital statistics
       (1995-2012), Italy.
A.25
                     Table B.4: Distribution of Singles by Cultural-Ethnic Group

                                                            Panel A. Adult singles over 18 Years Old
                                               Singles 2001                                          Singles 2011
                                  Male    Share (%) Female         Share (%)           Male    Share (%)     Female        Share (%)

Italian                        7947039         36.87 9914990             42.42     8961649          41.29 11038623               47.18
Europe-EU15                      84537         48.84 109512              40.05       86625          43.29   124133               46.33
Other Europe                    124875         39.18 149279              36.87      312362          35.75   549604               40.31
North Africa-Middle East         61554         35.26   32328             28.59      106598          33.91    73237               30.20
Sub-Saharan Africa               24013         34.87   23711             41.83       58857          41.78    49560               44.94
East Asia                        24819         31.54   23912             29.74       98240          34.24    84063               27.12
Latin America                    33085         46.36   55992             41.64       84751          51.68   149838               49.23
                                         Panel B. Adult singles over 90th perc. of the Age at Marriage Distribution
                                               Singles 2001                                          Singles 2011
                                  Male    Share (%) Female         Share (%)           Male    Share (%)     Female        Share (%)

Italian                        2506182         18.57 5971291             34.71     3963745          26.13     7458287            40.03
Europe-EU15                      19788         26.20   54228             32.53       43088          28.91       86383            42.11
Other Europe                     25952         20.32   72587             36.63       86893          18.97      304691            39.04
Middle-East                      16071         18.89   19940             35.37       34464          19.23       41189            36.63
Sub-Saharan Africa                5257         20.66    9641             38.54       15600          23.97       23905            42.44
East Asia                         2886         12.53    9033             25.02       13949          15.24       36504            27.03
Latin America                    11362         28.28   25875             35.86       31456          33.25       79113            43.25
Notes: This table reports the distribution of singles by gender and cultural-ethnic group, separately for 2001 and 2011. Panel a.
reports the distribution of adult singles over 18 years old. Panel B reports the distribution of adult singles over the 90th percentile
of the age at marriage distribution. Shares are computed as the total number of singles over the total number of individuals by
gender and ethnic group, for 2001 and 2011 in turn. Source: Individual Census Data (2001, 2011), Italy.




                                                               A.26
                                Table B.5: Gains to Marriage by Spouses Cultural-Ethnic Group

                                                                  Wife Ethnic Group:
       Husband                  Italian Europe-EU15 Other Europe Middle East Sub-Sah.Africa East Asia                                          Latin America
       Ethnic Group:
       Italian                   -0.425       -4.183       -3.068     -6.488         -5.992    -5.858                                                 -3.561
       Europe-EU15               -4.501       -4.865       -6.811    -10.145         -8.981    -8.576                                                 -7.471
       Other EU                  -4.994       -7.438       -2.704    -10.000         -9.673    -9.232                                                 -7.361
       North Africa-Middle East -5.803        -8.463       -6.193     -3.393         -9.647    -9.799                                                 -6.989
       Sub-Saharan Africa        -7.469       -8.864       -9.054    -10.568         -0.255   -11.666                                                 -9.752
       East Asia                 -9.555      -10.248       -9.636    -10.822        -10.268    -1.036                                                 -9.809
       Latin America             -6.335       -9.078       -8.053    -11.103        -11.359   -11.005                                                 -1.057
       Notes: This table reports estimates for gains to marriage, estimated from equation (10), by cultural-ethnic group of spouses. Source:
       Marriage records (1995-2012) and Individual Census data (2001, 2011), Italy.




               Table B.6: Gains to Marriage by Spouses Cultural-Ethnic Group - All Adults Singles

                                                                   Wife Ethnic Group:
A.27




       Husband                   Italian Europe-EU15 Other Europe Middle East Sub-Sah.Africa East Asia                                         Latin America
       Ethnic Group:
       Italian                    -1.935       -5.892       -4.630     -7.982         -7.699    -7.599                                                -5.259
       Europe-EU15                -6.263       -6.759       -8.499    -11.518        -10.703   -10.218                                                -9.181
       Other EU                   -6.886       -9.535       -4.647    -11.936        -11.787   -11.414                                                -9.473
       North Africa-Middle East -7.452        -10.099       -7.972     -5.285        -11.560   -11.694                                                -9.001
       Sub-Saharan Africa         -9.287      -10.706      -11.034    -12.561         -2.542   -14.043                                               -11.932
       East Asia                -11.487       -12.175      -11.702    -13.056        -12.424    -3.389                                               -12.097
       Latin America              -8.081      -10.862       -9.907    -13.139        -13.418   -13.105                                                -3.168
       Notes: This table reports estimates for gains to marriage, estimated from equation (10), by cultural-ethnic group of spouses. Source:
       Marriage records (1995-2012) and Individual Census data (2001, 2011), Italy.
               Table B.7: Separation Rates in Marriages With and Without Children

                                                                                  Separation Rates
                                                     Homogamous                                         Heterogamous
                                             hh (n > 0)        hh (n = 0)           hj (n > 0)                     hj (n = 0)

       Italian                                   0.054             0.095                0.051                          0.094
       Europe-EU15                               0.029             0.025                0.041                          0.061
       Other Europe                              0.016             0.040                0.049                          0.093
       North Africa-Middle East                  0.023             0.072                0.073                          0.127
       Sub-Saharan Africa                        0.017             0.037                0.063                          0.108
       East Asia                                 0.010             0.021                0.040                          0.080
       Latin America                             0.026             0.061                0.053                          0.114
       Notes: This table reports the separation rates by ethnic group of spouses in families with and without children,
       separately for homogamous and heterogamous couples. Source: Marriage and Separation records (1995-2012), Italy.



Table B.8: Marriage Distribution by Spouses Cultural-Ethnic Group - Socialization Data

                                                                                  Wife Ethnic Group:
Husband                          Italian   Europe-EU15        Other Europe       Middle East Sub-Sah. Africa           East Asia     Latin America
Ethnic Group:
Italian                              49                276                882               59                    55            74                271
Europe-EU15                         114                 27                 16                -                     1             2                  3
Other Europe                        114                  9               2826                -                     -             3                 10
North Africa-Middle East             88                  6                 25             1335                     2             -                  1
Sub-Saharan Africa                   26                  2                  1                -                   430             -                  1
East Asia                            11                  -                  2                -                     4           929                  2
Latin America                        15                  -                 10                -                     -             -                326
Notes: This table reports the marriage distribution by cultural-ethnic group of spouses (absolute numbers) of the socialization dataset. Observations:
8,007. Source: Condition and Social Integration of Foreign Nationals Survey (2011-2012), Italy.




                                                                       A.28
    Table B.9: Italian Socialization Probabilities by Ethnic Group and Marital Status

                                                         Italian Socialization Frequencies
                                             Homogamous Families               Heterogamous Families
                                             Married    Separated              Married    Separated
                                             n           n                     n           n
                                            Phh (d = 0) Phh (d = 1)           Phj (d = 0) Phj (d = 1)

            Italian                              1               1               0.936           0.736
            Europe-EU15                        0.410           0.476             0.885           0.750
            Other Europe                       0.389           0.472             0.940           0.786
            North Africa-Middle East           0.268           0.357             0.919           0.619
            Sub-Saharan Africa                 0.398           0.238             0.927           0.600
            East Asia                          0.198           0.242             0.856           0.375
            Latin America                      0.493           0.426             0.927           0.750
            Notes: This table shows Italian socialization frequencies by ethnic group of spouses and marital
            status. The outcome variable corresponds to the probability that a child speaks Italian as main
            language at home. Columns 1 and 2 report estimates for homogamous families, separately for
            married and separated unions, Columns 3 and 4 report estimates for heterogamous families, for
            married and separated respectively. The separated category comprehends both separated and
            divorced unions. Source: Condition and Social Integration of Foreign Nationals Survey (2011-
            2012), Italy.



Table B.10: Italian Language Socialization Probabilities by Age of Children for Homogamous
Families

                                                                                         n
                                                     Italian Socialization Frequencies: Phh
                                             less 5 years 6-10 years 11-15 years more 16 years
       Italian                                    1                1                1                   1
       Europe-EU15                              0.300            0.416            0.500               0.353
       Other Europe                             0.248            0.560            0.514               0.368
       North Africa-Middle East                 0.126            0.380            0.397               0.312
       Sub-Saharan Africa                       0.182            0.611            0.537               0.352
       East Asia                                0.074            0.354            0.299               0.140
       Latin America                            0.425            0.700            0.468               0.364
       Notes: This table shows Italian socialization frequencies by ethnic group of spouses, condi-
       tional on children's age. The outcome variable corresponds to the probability that a child
       speaks Italian as main language at home. Source: Condition and Social Integration of
       Foreign Nationals Survey (2011-2012), Italy.




                                                         A.29
Table B.11: Correlation Matrix: Italian Language Socialization and Integration Variables

                                                                            (1)          (2)          (3)     (4)
(1)   Language Spoken at Home                                               1
       1 Italian, 0 otherwise
(2)   Language Spoken with School Mates                                    0.176         1
      1 Italian, 0 otherwise
(3)   Language Spoken with School Friends out of School                    0.250        0.446         1
      1 Italian, 0 otherwise
(4)   Nationality of Friends out of School                                 0.177        0.155        0.144    1
      1 Only Italians and some Italians, 0 otherwise
Notes: This table shows correlation estimates between our measure of socialization and three measures of socio-
cultural integration. The outcome variable in (1) is a dummy equal to one whether the child speaks Italian as
main language at home, and zero otherwise. The variable in (2) is a dummy equal to one whether the child
speaks Italian with his school mates. The variable in (3) is a dummy equal to one whether the child speaks
Italian with his school friends but out of the school. The variable in (4) is a dummy equal to one whether the
child has at least some Italian friends out of the school. Observations 2,654. Source: Condition and Social
Integration of Foreign Nationals Survey (2011-2012), Italy.




Table B.12: Correlation Matrix: Italian Language Socialization and Integration Variables

                                                                      (1)         (2)          (3)      (4)    (5)    (6)
(1) Language Spoken at Home                                            1
       1 Italian, 0 otherwise
(2)   Proficiency in Italian reading                                0.200          1
      1 very good, 0 poor or very poor
(3)   Proficiency in Italian writing                                0.212       0.914          1
      1 very good, 0 poor or very poor
(4)   Proficiency in Italian speaking                               0.194       0.822     0.797           1
      1 very good, 0 poor or very poor
(5)   Proficiency in Italian comprehension (conversation)           0.184       0.814     0.791        .937       1
      1 very good, 0 poor or very poor
(6)   Proficiency in Italian comprehension (television)             0.170       0.761     0.736        .822    .840   1
      1 very good, 0 poor or very poor
Notes: This table shows correlation estimates between our measure of socialization and five additional measures of
socio-cultural integration concerning Italian language proficiency. The outcome variable in (1) is a dummy equal to
one whether whether the child speaks Italian as main language at home and zero otherwise. The variables from (2)
to (6) represent different measures of Italian language proficiency, in reading, writing, speaking, comprehension in
conversation and comprehension of television newscast. Observations 2,151. Source: Condition and Social Integration
of Foreign Nationals Survey (2011-2012), Italy.




                                                      A.30
