                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE IMPACTS OF MANAGERIAL AUTONOMY ON FIRM OUTCOMES

                                        Namrata Kala

                                     Working Paper 26304
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26304


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2019




I am grateful to David Atkin, Abhijit Banerjee, Nicholas Bloom, Alessandro Bonatti, Rahul Deb,
Joseph Doyle, Esther Duflo, Ray Fisman, Robert Gibbons, Ben Olken, Rohini Pande, Michael
Powell, Andrea Prat, Rafaella Sadun, Antoinette Schoar, Tavneet Suri, John Van Reenen, and
Michael Whinston for helpful comments. I'm also grateful to seminar audiences at Duke
University, the HBS Empirical Management Conference, Tufts University, Columbia University,
MIT, The World Bank, Stanford University, UVA, University of California Davis, University of
California Berkeley, the NBER Summer Institute, and Jinan University for their feedback. All
errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Namrata Kala. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Impacts of Managerial Autonomy on Firm Outcomes
Namrata Kala
NBER Working Paper No. 26304
September 2019
JEL No. D2,D23,D73,D92,M12,M38,M51,O38,O53

                                          ABSTRACT

The allocation of decision rights within organizations influences resource allocation, expansion
decisions, and ultimately outcomes. Using a newly constructed dataset, I estimate the effects of
an earned autonomy program for State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) in India. The program gave
managers (the board of directors) of profitable SOEs more autonomy over strategic decisions
such as capital expansion and the formation of joint ventures. I find that autonomy allows SOEs
to increase their capital stock and form more strategic partnerships which leads to greater sales
and profits. I also find that the likelihood that a manager subsequently joins a board of a private
firm is greater for managers of those SOEs which were granted autonomy, indicating that career
concerns is a consistent explanation for these managerial decisions. Taken together, these results
indicate that large gains in SOE performance are possible without privatization (by policies like
earned autonomy) and may occur partly through managers' career concerns.


Namrata Kala
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-517
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
kala@mit.edu
1   Introduction

The information required for critical decisions is typically dispersed within an organization. As a

result, the allocation of decision rights within organizations influences important choices like re-

source allocation, expansion decisions, and ultimately outcomes. Giving managers autonomy can

allow them to make better decisions based on their private information. Alternatively, managers'

incentives may not align with those of the organization as a whole: they may prefer to focus on

objectives that directly impact their career outcomes (but do not align with the objectives of the

firm) or they may inefficiently avoid risk altogether to shield themselves from blame in the case of

failures. In this paper, I empirically untangle these effects by using a novel data set to test the ef-

fect of an earned autonomy program that granted managers decision rights in Indian State Owned

Enterprises (SOEs).

    The economic significance and distinctive organizational structure of SOEs make them a par-

ticularly relevant setting to study the effect of managerial autonomy. First, they comprise a signif-

icant proportion of economic activity in many countries. In 2015, 98 of the Fortune 500 companies

were in China, of which only 22 were private firms (Cendrowski, 2015). In 1951, India had 5 SOEs

with an investment of about $4 million (2018 USD) - these grew to 260 SOEs with $206 billion

in investments in 2012. Second, incentives for managers in SOEs differ from incentives for man-

agers in the private sector. In SOEs, incentives are typically quite low-powered, rent-seeking may

prevent optimal decision making (Shleifer, 1998) and, given that SOEs typically have soft budget

constraints, managers may be likely to take high-risk decisions knowing that the government will

bail out the firm in the event of a disastrous outcome.

    Additionally, there is an important policy debate around whether SOEs should be privatized

since it is well-established that they are less likely to be profitable and have lower returns to cap-

ital than their private-sector counterparts (Dollar and Wei, 2007; Megginson and Netter, 2001).

Proponents justify SOEs on the grounds that these firms trade off profits with additional objec-

tives such as generating employment (Azmat et al., 2012; Boycko et al., 1996). It is hence both

natural and policy-relevant to ask whether, instead of ownership changes, firms' outcomes (such

as productivity) can be improved by improving the allocation of decision rights within the firms'

hierarchy.


                                                  2
       This paper combines a newly constructed dataset on Indian SOE financial statements with

existing data sources to estimate the effects of an earned autonomy program on these firms' deci-

sions and outcomes over an 18-year period. Specifically, the program gave the board of directors

(henceforth, referred to as managers) of profitable SOEs more autonomy over strategic decisions

such as capital expansion and the formation of joint ventures. Each SOE in India is housed in

a particular ministry. Before the program was introduced, such decisions were taken by a com-

mittee that included officials from the governing Ministry, and in some cases (depending on the

magnitude of the decision) also higher levels of government. This included decisions for which

the firm did not need any funds from the government; for instance, if a SOE wanted to use its

retained earnings to finance a capital expenditure, it was required to go through the committee

nonetheless. Earning autonomy did not explicitly change managerial incentives directly or the

set of available options for these decisions; it only meant that the board of directors no longer

needed to get committee approval when undertaking decisions that were financed out of retained

earnings or private-sector borrowing (and hence did not require government funds).1

       The program started in 1997 and gave SOEs that earned profits for three continuous years and

had a positive net worth the right to apply for autonomous status. I construct a pre-program

measure of eligibility to apply for this status: a binary variable that equals 1 if a SOE earned prof-

its for three years continuously and had a positive net worth before 1997, the year of the program

introduction, and 0 otherwise. I use this measure of program eligibility as a proxy for receiving au-

tonomy, to sidestep the endeogneity concerns around the government picking firms for autonomy

that may have the highest potential returns from this program. Using a differences-in-differences

framework, I then test whether SOEs that were eligible pre-program performed differentially af-

ter 1996 relative to SOEs that were not. I also estimate their performance relative to comparable

private firms (that earned profits for three years continuously and had a positive net worth before

1997).

       I find that earned autonomy allowed SOEs to increase profitability, productivity, and sales.

Treated firms have greater capital expansion and are more likely to form strategic partnerships

such as joint ventures or subsidiaries after the program. These effects persist for thirteen years
   1
    The size of capital expansion for a single project was capped depending on the net worth of the SOE - more details
are provided in the next section.



                                                          3
after the program was implemented (the entire length of time for which I observe SOE outcomes),

indicating that they led to a long-term shift in the way these SOEs were managed. These results

indicate that large gains in SOE profitability may be possible without privatization, by giving

well-running SOEs more autonomy over their decisions.

   Furthermore, I show that managerial autonomy leads to more hiring (though the effects are

more imprecisely estimated), indicating that greater profitability does not come at the cost of other

objectives such as employment. Put differently, this shows that a better allocation of decision

rights can lead to a Pareto improvement of SOE performance along multiple objectives. I also

show that this hiring is distributed smoothly over the electoral cycle, in contrast to the average

SOE whose hiring increases in the year before an election. Thus, while treated firms have a higher

hiring capacity, autonomy ensures that hiring decisions are not co-opted by the government for

electoral purposes.

   I show that managerial career concerns outside the firm (the desire to join the board of a private

sector firm) can explain these outcomes. Specifically, I show that the probability I match a SOE

director to a private firm board of directors increases after the SOE gets autonomy. By contrast,

there is no consistent evidence to suggest that the effects are explained by incentives within the

firm. SOE payscales are largely determined by which grade they are allocated to (A, B, C or D,

with A having the highest and D the lowest wages). I find that autonomy has a greater impact

for higher payscale SOEs, but these effects are no longer present when I control for heterogenous

effects (by pre-program sales and profits). Put differently, this evidence indicates that within-firm

payscales may have limited ability to explain the relative effects of autonomy.

   A potential concern with the baseline empirical strategy I employ is that earning profits for

three continuous years may put a firm on a differential growth trajectory (in other words, auton-

omy itself has no effect). To show that this is not driving the results, I use a second DID framework

that includes both the pre-program eligibility measure (the proxy for being treated) interacted with

the post-1996 dummy variable and the treatment dummy variable interacted with the post-1996

dummy variable (as well as sector-by-year and firm fixed effects). This is meant to test whether

pre-program eligibility has any additional effects on the outcomes of interest after controlling di-

rectly for treatment assignment. I find that controlling for the interaction of the treatment dummy

variable interacted with the post-1996 dummy variable causes the effects on the interaction be-

                                                 4
tween pre-program eligibility and the post-1996 dummy variable to be statistically insignificant

and much smaller. This indicates that pre-program eligibility is a plausible proxy for treatment,

and does not have independent effects on firm outcomes conditional on the controls included in

the regression.

       I conduct several other robustness checks. I rule out that the effects are driven by strategic

reporting of profits, or by spillovers on ineligible SOEs. I also show that the results are robust

to considering only SOEs that reported positive profits at least once during the sample period,

the inclusion of more stringent sector-by-year fixed effects, and estimating the effects relative to

comparable private firms. Finally, I show that government ownership does not change on aver-

age during the sample period, indicating that the results are not driven by privatizing firms that

received autonomy.


Related Literature

This paper builds on two literatures. The first studies the impact of within-firm decentralization

and managerial autonomy on firm decisions and outcomes.2 Decentralization within private firms

has been shown to increase firm's ability to withstand negative shocks (Aghion et al., 2017; Nagar,

2002).3 However, given that SOE managers face different career concerns and incentives than pri-

vate firm managers, and target multiple objectives in addition to profit maximization, managerial

autonomy may have very different effects in SOEs. Xu (2000) studies a combination of reforms in

China in the 1980s4 , and Groves et al. (1994) find that autonomy and incentives together increased

SOE productivity in China also in the 1980s, when SOEs produced the bulk of industrial output

in China. This paper has several differences that make it complementary to this prior work. First,

it uses a natural experiment to estimate the causal effects of managerial autonomy. Second, it con-

siders a program that provided autonomy around strategic decisions but did not explicitly change
   2
      I use the terms autonomy and firm decentralization interchangeably throughout the paper.
   3
      The literature on the determinants of firm decentralization is also quite related to this paper. For instance, Ace-
moglu et al. (2007) show that private firms closer to the technological frontier and younger firms are more likely to
decentralize decision rights. (V´ azquez, 2004) studies the determinants of delegation to shop-floor managers in the
Spanish electronics industry. Huang et al. (2017) show that greater distance to the central government in China predicts
allocation of the SOE's oversight to a more local level of government. For an excellent overview of this literature, see
Colombo and Delmastro (2008).
    4
      These were focused around increasing competition to SOEs, allowing them to sell part of their output in the open
market, and giving SOE managers discretion around wage-setting for workers along with autonomy over input sourc-
ing and several production decisions



                                                           5
within-firm incentives of SOE managers. Third, I provide additional evidence showing that SOE

managers' career concerns around seeking board memberships in private firms may explain why

they respond to autonomy.

       Autonomy programs exist in many countries and aim to promote efficiency and accountabil-

ity in publicly owned organizations across a wide variety of settings including the health sector,

school reforms, and public procurement.5 A prominent example of earned autonomy of the kind

this paper studies is the UK's earned autonomy program for the National Health Service (NHS)

(Goddard and Mannion, 2006). I am able to causally estimate the effects of earned autonomy as

well as test whether the impacts last in the longer-term.

       The second literature concerns the determinants of SOE profitability. The main focus in this

literature is the effects of changes in ownership on SOE profitability and productivity (Barberis

et al., 1996; Bartel and Harrison, 1999,?; Berkowitz et al., 2017; Gupta, 2005; Hsieh and Song, 2015;

Megginson and Netter, 2001; Musacchio and Lazzarini, 2014). This includes studies on the impacts

of the reform of Chinese SOEs in the 1990s known as "Grasp the Large, Let Go of the Small" that

focused on privatizing smaller SOEs while corporatizing larger SOEs (Berkowitz et al., 2017; Hsieh

and Song, 2015). There is much less work studying the effects of changes to organizational struc-

ture (rather than ownership), with the exceptions of Xu (2000) and Groves et al. (1994) discussed

above.

       Finally, the context of this paper is SOEs in India, which have co-existed with the private sector

since about 1950. Barring some exceptions (Alfaro and Chari, 2009; Choudhury and Khanna, 2014;

Gupta, 2005), SOEs in India are not well-studied as in other settings, such as China. However,

despite India's substantial private-sector reforms in the 1980s and early 1990s, SOEs dominate

market shares in the sectors they operate in (Alfaro and Chari, 2009) and employ tens of millions

of people. Thus, policies that impact their profitability and expansion decisions have potentially

large aggregate effects.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 details the earned autonomy program

that is the subject of this paper. Section 3 presents the data and summary statistics, and Section 4
   5
    A related though distinct literature estimates the effects of autonomy across diverse settings such as schools and
public procurement. Clark (2009) finds positive effects of school autonomy on educational achievement in the UK,
though Hanushek et al. (2013) document that the returns to school autonomy are negative in developing countries, and
positive in developed countries. Baltrunaite et al. (2018) find that giving procurement agents more discretion increases
share of contracts awarded to politically connected firms, and possibly increases misallocation.


                                                           6
details the empirical strategy. Section 5 presents the results, Section 6 presents robustness checks

and additional outcomes, and Section 7 concludes.



2    Earned Autonomy Program

The earned autonomy policy was instituted in 1997, and allowed SOE directors autonomy over

several significant strategic decisions conditional on fulfilling certain criteria. There were three

levels of autonomy in the period I study, each conditional on increasingly stringent criteria. The

least level of autonomy (called "Miniratna category-II") was given to firms that had earned pos-

itive profits for three consecutive years, and had positive net worth. The next level of autonomy

(called "Miniratna category-I") was given to firms that fulfilled all criteria for Miniratna category-

II, and also earned a profit of at least Rs.300 million in one of the three years. The final level

of autonomy (called "Navratna") was conditional on more stringent criteria which changed over

time, including finally requiring that an SOE have stayed at a a lower level of autonomy for a

certain number of years.

    Once the SOEs fulfilled these criteria, they could apply to their governing Ministry for this sta-

tus ­ once granted, in principle, they had to include at least 3 independent directors on their board

before exercising autonomy. In practice, several of these board seats remain vacant for long peri-

ods of time. If at any point they preferred to exchange this autonomous status for governmental

support once again, they could do so (so the moral hazard of taking a risky decision, knowing that

the government would bail out the firm in case of a failure was therefore a distinct possibility).6

The criteria for autonomy for the Mini-ratna categories is outlined in Table 1.

    Once the firms were granted autonomy, the board of directors could exercise autonomy over

the following decisions:


    1. Capital Expenditure: the board of directors could undertake capital expenditures (upgrad-

      ing capital or purchasing new capital) in any location, up to a cap which was an increasing

      function of firm's net worth - this would be financed out of retained earnings and commer-

      cial borrowing (the commercial borrowing was to be debt-based, since SOEs could not give
   6
     If a firm gave up its autonomy status, they would have to become eligible once again to apply for and renew their
status in the future if they wanted to do so - in practice, I do not find firms giving up their status.



                                                          7
                                               Table 1

                                          Mini-Ratna Cat-II   Mini-Ratna Cat-I

               Positive net profits for
               each of the last 3 Years

               Positive net worth

               Do not require
               budgetary support
               from the government

               Pre-Tax Profit
               of at least
               30 crore in one year



     away equity to finance capital expenditure).

  2. Labour training and retirement schemes: The SOE board could introduce human resource

     management initiatives, training, voluntary or compulsory retirement schemes. Given that

     SOEs are large employers, and laying off workers in these firms can be politically sensitive,

     this may have given them more flexibility to restructure their labor force.

  3. Ability to float joint ventures and subsidiaries: these were also subject to a value cap, about

     5% of the net worth of the SOE.


   Instead of requesting the government for permission on any of these decisions, the SOE board

was only required to notify the government of their decision. For SOEs not granted this autonomy

status, the process of approval for undertaking any of these decisions was the same as before, as

discussed in Section 1. This included requesting approval from the governing Ministry, and the

decision was taken by a committee comprising Ministry officials. In cases of projects that required

large amounts of government funds, the decision could be subject to a parliamentary vote. The

full details of the benefits conferred on firms with different types of autonomy are detailed in

Appendix B.




                                                8
3       Data

The paper combines data from several volumes of the Public Enterprise Survey Reports with exist-

ing data sources.7 These reports are published annually by the Department of Public Enterprises

in India, which is responsible for reporting information on SOE financial performance, expendi-

tures, and labor composition. I was able to access these volumes from 1994 to 2009. Since some

data is available for the past two years in a given report, for certain variables, such as those avail-

able in financial statements, the data covers the years 1992-2009. The universe of all SOEs in which

the Central Government of India has a majority stake are included in the data- in an average year,

data is available for about 220 firms.


3.1       Firm Returns, Inputs, Borrowing and Profit Division

The annual financial statements of the SOEs cover the period from 1992 to 2009. These include

information available in the profit & loss accounts and balance sheets for each SOE. To ensure that

the results I estimate are not driven by entry or exit, I restrict the sample to SOEs that report data

for at least 5 years before (starting in 1992) and at least 5 years after (until 2002) the program (this

gives a sample of about 190 firms per year).8 I have three measures of firm returns - profits, value

added, and sales, as well as two measures of productivity- sales per employee and value added

per employee.9

        The statements also include information on capital assets (the sum of fixed assets, capital works

in progress, and other long-term investments), the number of employees, and the wage bill. These

variables, along with whether a SOE participates in a joint venture or subsidiary, are intermediate

outcomes of interest via which autonomy might impact firm returns and productivity (I detail the

data collection for participation in a joint venture or subsidiary in Section 3.4). I digitize informa-

tion on total loans, as well as interest payments. For the years 1994-2009, I have information on

the level of borrowing separately by government and non-government sources.

        To test whether autonomy changes the allocation of surplus generated by a SOE, I use infor-
    7
     The data appendix presents all variables used in the analysis, the level of measurement (e.g. whether the data are
available at the firm-year level, firm-level, etc.), temporal coverage, and source.
   8
     In Appendix table A6, I present results including all firms, including those that began reporting after 1992 or
stopped reporting before 2002, to show that results are consistent with the main results.
   9
     I calculate value added by subtracting expenditures on raw material, as well as power and fuel, from sales.



                                                          9
mation on the distribution of profits into dividends and retained earnings. I use these to test how

much the government benefits from autonomy via receiving greater dividends, and how much of

their profits do SOEs are able to retain.


3.2     Autonomy Status, Compensation Grade, Labor Composition, and Spatial Pres-
        ence

The reports include information on the autonomy status of each SOE since when the program

began in 1997. This includes whether a SOE has autonomy, and if so, which category of autonomy

it has (whether it is a mini-ratna category I, mini-ratna category II, and so on). In addition, I

digitize data available from 1994-2007 on the labor composition of the SOEs. For all years except

1999, this is available as the number of managers, supervisors, workers, and casual workers. In

1999, only information on the number of managers and non-managers is available. Accordingly,

I combine data from the rest of the years into these two categories only. This will allow me to

test whether SOEs respond to autonomy by changing the labor composition of their workforce.

Thirdly, from 1999, data on each SOE's state-level employment and capital presence is available.

This allows me to test for electoral cycles in hiring decisions by SOEs, and how autonomy impacts

these decisions.

      Finally, I collect cross-sectional data on the compensation grade - defined as A, B, C, or D - of

each SOE. As mentioned in Section 1, SOEs with grade A have the highest wages for each position,

and SOEs with grade D have the lowest. SOE grades are determined by a variety of factors by

the government, including sales, profits, the strategic importance of a SOE etc. In practice, the

grades are quite static over time - each year, the Department of Public Enterprises reports include

mentions of the number of grade changes, and usually only 1-2 SOEs at most change their grade

in a year, indicating that this is unlikely to be heavily affected by the program. The data on SOE

grades is only available in 2005 and later - I use each SOE's 2005 grade as their grade throughout

the program.




                                                   10
3.3      Sectoral Codes, Board of Director Names, and Private Sector Firm Data

I combine the digitized data with the Prowess database, collected by the Centre for Monitoring the

Indian Economy (CMIE). The database includes financial statements data for about 50,000 firms

(including SOEs and private firms), as well as information on the board of directors of about 41,500

firms. I match SOEs to the Prowess database first to get information on their 5-digit National

Industrial Classification (NIC) product codes.10

       Additionally, I use information on the names of the board of directors in SOEs and private

firms to test whether SOE managers that run firms which receive autonomy are differentially more

likely to get private sector board seats after autonomy is granted. Data on SOE board members

is available only for a fraction of the SOEs - 100 SOEs report data consistently after 2002 on the

names of the Board of Directors. Coverage in the Prowess database on the board of directors

improves markedly in 2003, which is why I consider 2003-2010 for this part of the analysis. I

construct a director-year panel, that includes a binary variable that takes the value 1 if I am able to

find a match for a SOE director name amongst the director names of private firms in a given year,

and 0 otherwise. I can also test whether the propensity of the director to be present on private

sector boards varies by whether the SOE director was on the SOE board before the firm received

autonomy.

       The Prowess data also includes data on firm profits, sales, and value added for private firms

at an annual level, which allow me to estimate the effects of the autonomy program relative to

private firms.11 To ensure that I'm comparing firms that operate in similar conditions, I only

include private firms that are in the same 5-digit NIC codes as SOEs, that were in operation before

1997 and report data for at least five years after 1997 (similar to the SOE main sample).


3.4      Participation in a Subsidiary or Joint Venture Project

To construct a measure of whether a SOE had a subsidiary or participated in a joint venture, I com-

bine the CMIE database with the reports from the Department of Public Enterprises. The CMIE
  10
      Of about 230 SOEs operating before 1997, I was unable to find sector codes for only about 10 SOEs in the database.
While the Prowess database includes reliable cross-sectional information on these SOEs in the 1990s, consistent annual
financial information is not available across years, hence the need to digitize annual financial statements of these SOEs
separately.
   11
      The database does not report employment for most of the sample, so I cannot estimate the effects on productivity
(sales per employee and value added per employee).


                                                           11
database reports whether a SOE had a subsidiary. While it also reports the assets reported by a

firm in a joint venture project, the data on joint ventures is more sparse and begins only in 2000.

The annual reports from the Department of Public Enterprises include a paragraph summarizing

each SOE's activities over the course of the year. I searched all years of the report for mentions of

new joint venture projects, and construct a binary variable that equals 1 if a SOE reported a new

joint venture, and 0 otherwise. This variable is likely measured with some error, since a SOE may

not choose to report a joint venture for some reason, and it does not have a good measure of when

a joint venture ends.12 With this information, I construct a binary variable that takes the value 1

if a SOE either reported a subsidiary (from the CMIE database) or a joint venture in either of the

two data sources, and is 0 otherwise.


3.5    State Assembly Election Timing

To test for electoral cycles in SOE hiring, I collected data on the timing of the assembly elections (to

elect representatives to the state legislature) in each state between 1999-2009. This data is available

from the website of the Election Commission of India, and lists the state and year for each state's

assembly election.


3.6    Summary Statistics

The main sample comprises of data from 193 firms. 95 firms were eligible before 1997 to apply

for autonomy, of which 65 received it at some point between 1997 and 2009. In total, 73 unique

firms received autonomy during the sample period.13 Table 2 presents the summary statistics for

SOE inputs and outcomes, as well as outcomes for the private firms used in the analysis. These

summary statistics are over the entire sample period. In addition, for all outcome variables, the

regression tables report the mean for each outcome variable.
  12
      In case the SOE only reported the number of joint ventures, this variable is 1 in a given year in case the number of
joint ventures in that year exceed the number of joint ventures in previous years.
   13
      19 firms received Navratna status between 1997-2009, 50 firms received Mini-ratna category-I status, and 17 firms
Mini-ratna category-II status. These numbers include 13 firms that graduated to a higher level of autonomy during the
sample period.




                                                           12
4         Empirical Strategy

4.1        Direct Effects of Autonomy on SOEs

4.1.1       Main Specification

To identify the effects of the autonomy program on SOE decisions and outcomes, I use a difference-

in-differences (DID) framework. To sidestep the endogeneity of the timing of when a SOE gets

autonomy, I evaluate all firms post-1996, the year before the policy was first implemented.14 The

DID framework allows me to test for parallel trends in the outcomes of interest. However, it is

possible that (time-varying) factors that are observed by SOE managers or the government but

not by the econometrician are correlated with the decision to apply for or grant autonomy. There-

fore, I use the profitability and net worth criteria to generate a pre-program eligibility measure. I

construct a variable that takes the value 1 if a firm earned profits for 3 consecutive years and had

positive net worth before 1997, the year of the program implementation, and is zero otherwise. I

use this eligibility measure as a proxy for the treatment, and thus estimate:




    yijt =  + i + t j +            1(post 1996)t  1(eligible)ij + µ 1(pre 1996)t  1(eligible)ij +                    ijt

                                                                                                                       (1)


         where yijt = outcome for firm i in sector j in year t (such as sales or profits), i = firm fixed ef-

fect (FE), t j =2-digit sector by year FE, and 1(eligible)ij = 1 if firm i was eligible pre-program, and

0 otherwise.  is the parameter of interest, and µ tests for pre-trends in the outcomes of interest.

I omit interactions of 1(eligible)ij with the year 1996, to estimate effects relative to the year be-

fore the program was implemented. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-level. I additionally

present event study estimates with year by year interactions of pre-program eligibility, showing

impacts for 5 years before (when the data begins) and 10 years after 1997 (these analogously omit

the interaction of pre-program eligibility with the dummy variable that is 1 for the year 1996, the

year before program introduction, and 0 otherwise).
    14
    In Table A5, I present generalized difference in differences results, which evaluate the effects of the program after a
firm actually receives autonomy, and show that they are consistent with the main results.




                                                            13
 4.1.2    Effects on Volatility of Firm Returns

 In addition to estimating the average effects of autonomy, I test whether volatility of firm returns

 (profitability, sales, and value added) change over time. To do so, I estimate the firm-level standard

 deviation of each of these outcomes over three 5-year periods- 1992-1996 (before the program),

 1997-2001 (shortly after the program), and 2002-2006 (longer term after the program). This gives a

 firm-year panel of the standard deviation over the last 5 years of these variables (comprising three

 data points for each firm covering the years 1996, 2001, and 2006). Using this panel, I estimate:




 SDijt =  + i + t j + 1          1(Year=2001)t  1(eligible)ij + 2 1(Year=2006)t  1(eligible)ij +             ijt

                                                                                                       (2)


       where SDijt is the standard deviation of an outcome (profits, sales, and value added) for firm i

 in sector j in year t, i = firm fixed effect (FE), t j =2-digit sector by year FE, and 1(eligible)= 1 if

 a firm was eligible pre-program, and 0 otherwise. 1 tests whether the volatility of firm outcomes

 changed in the short-term relative to before the program, and 2 tests whether the volatility of

 firm outcomes changed in the longer-term.


 4.2     Direct Effects of Autonomy Relative to Comparable Private Firms

 While SOEs may increase profitability relative to other SOEs with autonomy, it is possible that

 they are still significantly less profitable or have lower sales than comparable private sector firms.

 To test how SOE performance compares to private sector firms, I use a triple difference regression:




yijt = + i + t j +         1(post-1996)t  1(eligible)ij  1(SOE)ij +  1(pre-1996)t  1(eligible)ij  1(SOE)ij

       +     1(post-1996)t  1(eligible)ij +  1(pre-1996)t  1(eligible)ij +  1(post-1996)t  1(SOE)ij

       +     1(pre-1996)t  1(SOE)ij +     ijt

                                                                                                     (3)


       where i = a firm fixed effect (FE), t j =2-digit sector by year FE, and 1(eligible)jt = a firm that



                                                     14
earned positive profits for 3 years and has a positive net worth pre-1997. As in Section 4.1.1, 1996 is

the omitted year in all interaction terms.  compares pre-program eligible SOEs with comparable

private firms after 1996, and  tests for pre-trends. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-level.


4.3      SOE Board of Directors

To test whether career concerns around getting a board seat in the private sector may be a mecha-

nism driving manager behavior, I use information on the names of SOE board members between

2003 and 2010. (As mentioned in Section 3.3, data coverage is very sparse before 2003). In 2003,

about 55% of SOEs in the main sample report board members, and from 2004, about 66-74% of

SOEs report board members.

       I create a cross-sectional director-level dataset that includes a SOE director's name, whether

they are on a SOE board that received autonomy, and if so, the year in which their SOE received

autonomy. Using this information, I create a director-year level binary variable that takes the value

1 if I am able to merge a director's name with names of the board of directors of a private firm

in a particular year. Since this data only begins after the program was announced, I estimate two

separate specifications. The first specification, which includes all the data, is as follows:




   1(SOE director matched to private board)it =  + i +  1(SOE has autonomy)it + t +                                    it

                                                                                                                        (4)


       where the variable 1(SOE has autonomy) is 1 if the director's firm has autonomy and 0 other-

wise - for firms that received autonomy before 2003, it is always 1.15 . i is the director name fixed

effect, and t is a year fixed effect. Standard errors are clustered at the director name level. While

this specification uses all the data, its limitation is that I cannot test for pre-trends. I therefore

additionally estimate the following specification, which drops firms that received autonomy prior

to 2005:
  15
       In case a director name shows up on both treated and untreated SOEs, I consider them to be treated directors.




                                                            15
 1(SOE director Matched to Private Firm Board)it =  + i +  1(post autonomy)t  1(treatment)i
+ µ (1(pre autonomy)  1(treatment)i ) + 2        1(post autonomy)t + µ2 1(pre autonomy)t + t +             it

                                                                                                     (5)


      where 1(treatment)=1 if a firm was ever granted autonomy status in 2005 or later and 0 other-

wise, i is the director name fixed effect, and t is a year fixed effect.  tests whether SOE directors

are more likely to be matched to a private sector board after autonomy, and µ tests for pre-trends.

I estimate both specifications on two different samples - all SOE directors between 2003 and 2010,

and only those who were present on SOE boards before 2005 (incumbent directors).


4.4     Electoral Cycles in Hiring

The autonomy program increases average employment by SOEs. However, it is possible that

this increased hiring capacity is co-opted by the government to coincide with electoral cycles. To

examine whether this is the case, I first test for the presence of electoral cycles by estimating the

following equation:




 1(SOE reports positive employment)ijkt =  + i +  1 (Year before a state assembly election)kt
 + t j + k +       ijkt

                                                                                                     (6)


      where the dependent variable is 1 if SOE i in sector j reports positive employment in state k in

year t, and 0 otherwise. The coefficient of interest is  , and tests whether SOEs are more likely to

hire in a state in the year before that state's assembly election. Since I have state-level estimates of

employment for each SOE each year, I can also estimate a version of this equation including firm

by year fixed effects. Furthermore, I can look at whether the year after an assembly election has

any differential employment effects, in addition to the year before.

      After showing the presence of electoral cycles in SOE hiring, I use two specifications analogous

to those in Section 4.3, to test whether autonomy further exacerbates the electoral cycle in hiring.


                                                   16
The first specification (as in Section 4.3), uses all the data, and is as follows:




1(SOE reports positive employment)ijkt =  + i + 1 1 (Year before a state assembly election)kt
+ 2 1(SOE has autonomy)ij + 3         1 (Year before a state assembly election)kt b  1(SOE has autonomy)ij

t j +  k +    ijkt

                                                                                                    (7)


   where the notation is similar to Equation 6, and 3 tests whether the autonomy program exac-

erbates electoral cycles in employment. As in the previous specification, I can additionally include

firm by year fixed effects as an additional robustness check.

   I also estimate the following specification, which drops firms that received autonomy prior to

2005, and allows me to test for pre-trends:




 1(SOE reports positive employment)ijkt =  + i + 1 1 (Year before a state assembly election)kt
+ 2    1(Treatment)ij  1 (Year before a state assembly election)kt  1 (Pre-autonomy)t
+ 3    1(Treatment)ij  1 (Year before a state assembly election)kt  1 (Post-autonomy)t
+ 4    1 (Year before a state assembly election)kt  1 (Pre-autonomy)t
+ 5    1 (Year before a state assembly election)kt  1 (Post-autonomy)t
+ 6    1(Treatment)ij  1 (Pre-autonomy)t + 7 1(Treatment)ij  1 (Post-autonomy)t
+ 8 1 (Pre-autonomy)t + 9 Post-autonomyt            t
                                                        + t j + k +   ijkt

                                                                                                    (8)


   3 tests whether autonomy worsens hiring during the electoral cycle, and 2 tests for pre-

trends. In addition to all relevant double interaction terms, the equation includes firm fixed effects

i , sector by year fixed effects t j , and state fixed effects k . As in the previous equations in this

subsection, I also show results with the inclusion of firm fixed effects, t j .




                                                   17
4.5     Heterogeneous Effects by Compensation Grade

To test whether autonomy has heterogeneous effects on profitability by the compensation grade

of the SOE, I estimate the following equation:




ijt =  + i + t j + 1          1(post 1996)t  1(eligible)ij + µ1 1(pre 1996)t  1(eligible)ij +

2 compensation gradeij  1(post 1996)t  1(eligible)ij + 3 compensation gradeij  1(post 1996)t

+ µ2 compensation gradeij  1(pre 1996)t  1(eligible)ij + µ3 compensation gradeij  1(pre 1996)t +            ijt

                                                                                                      (9)


      where ijt is profits in firm i in sector j in year t, and the compensation grade variable takes

the value 1,2,3, or 4, with 1 denoting grade A (higest wages), 2 denoting B grade, 3 denoting C

grade, and 4 denoting D grade (lowest wages). 2 < 0 would indicate that autonomy has a lower

effect for SOEs on the lower scale of wages, and µ2 tests for pre-trends. To ensure that I adequately

control for the heterogenous effects of pre-program sales and profitability that might be correlated

with compensation scales, I also report a specification where I control for the double interactions

of pre-program mean sales with 1(post 1996)t , of pre-program mean sales with 1(pre 1996)t , as

well as the triple interaction of 1(eligible)ij , pre-program sales, and 1(post 1996)t , and the triple

interaction of 1(eligible)ij , pre-program sales and 1(pre 1996)t .

      Finally, I report another specification that additionally controls for pre-program profits i.e. the

double interactions of pre-program mean profit with 1(post 1996)t , of pre-program mean profit

with 1(post 1996)t , as well as the triple interaction of 1(eligible)ij , mean pre-program profit and

1(post 1996)t , and the triple interaction of 1(eligible)ij , pre-program profit and 1(pre 1996)t .




                                                    18
5     Results

5.1     Direct Impacts on Firm Inputs and Outcomes

5.1.1    Profitability, Sales, and Productivity

Tables 3 presents the results for the three measures of firm returns- annual sales, value added, and

profits. Column 1 of Table 3 shows that firms that were eligible to apply for the program before

1997 have greater sales by about Rs. 8.82 billion after the program, a large effect in magnitude

relative to mean sales of about Rs. 28 billion. The effect before 1996 is less than 5% of that magni-

tude, negative and not statistically significant. Furthermore, firms that were eligible for autonomy

before the program was announced have higher value added by about Rs. 4.2 billion after the pro-

gram is implemented, about a 41% increase over mean value added. They also have higher profits

by about Rs. 1.05 billion, a 58% increase relative to mean profits. Pre-trends are not significantly

different from zero for any of the outcome variables.

      Table 4 presents results for both measures of labor productivity- sales per employee and value

added per employee. For both measures, I find large increases in labor productivity after the

program for pre-program eligible firms - an increase in Rs. 4.5 million for sales per worker and an

increase in Rs. 1.086 million for value added per worker. I do not find any evidence of pre-trends

in either of the measures. The results in Tables 3 and 4 indicate that the autonomy, proxied for by

pre-program eligibility, has large positive effects on profitability and sales, as well as productivity.


5.1.2    Inputs and Strategic Ventures

Table 5 presents the results on firms strategic decisions- this includes capital assets, employment

levels and wages, as well as engagement in joint ventures and subsidiaries. Capital assets are

the sum of the book value of fixed assets, capital works in progress, and investments. I find a

substantial increase in capital assets for pre-program eligible firms post-1996 - the effect size is

about Rs. 6.4 billion higher borrowing, relative to mean capital assets of Rs. 273 billion. The

wage bill also increases significantly, by about Rs. 0.9 billion. The effects on employment are very

similar in terms of magnitude relative to the mean, but are noisier (the p-value on the interaction

between the pre-program eligibility dummy-variable and the post-treatment dummy variable is



                                                  19
about 0.16). The fourth column indicates the probability that a firm reports a subsidiary or par-

ticipates in a joint venture also increases with autonomy by nearly 7 percentage points, an effect

that is about 35% relative to mean participation in such ventures. Thus, SOEs use most levers of

autonomy granted to them to increase the scale of their production and are more likely engage in

strategic partnerships such as joint ventures and subsidiaries.

       The results in Table 3 show a large increase in sales, profits, and value added. However, it

is possible that firms increase only prices, and not output, which would be consistent with this

pattern. Unfortunately, I do not have data on output prices and quantities separately, which would

allow me to test how much of the effect on sales and productivity is a function of higher prices

relative to higher quantities. While the results in Table 4 contradict the hypothesis that firms do

not increase output (by showing an expansion in capital and labor use), I can more definitively

rule this out by showing that total costs of production increase (which, if all firms did was increase

output prices with no change in output or quality, should be unchanged). Column 1 of Table 14

shows that costs of production (computed as the sum of purchase of finished goods, raw materials,

wage bill, power and fuel expenses, depreciation, interest payments, and miscellaneous expenses),

increase substantially after the program. Though the effects are slightly noisily estimated (the

double interaction of pre-program eligibility with the post-1996 dummy has a pvalue of 0.13), the

magnitude of the effect is substantial- the average increase is about Rs.6.2 billion, 25% relative to

mean costs. This, in conjunction with increased capital and labor use shown in Table 4, indicates

that the changes in profitability and productivity are not driven by increases in output prices

without any corresponding increase in output quantity or quality (where quality is defined as a

higher marginal cost).

       It is also possible that firms achieved higher sales and profits by increasing both prices and

quantity, while either keeping quality constant or lowering quality.                       16   Under the stronger as-

sumption of a constant returns to scale (CRS) production function, I can test whether the data are

consistent with higher prices with no change in quality. The ratio of net profits to sales is given by
(pQ - bQ)       (p - b)
            =           , where p is the output price, Q is the output quantity, and b is the average
    pQ             p
cost per unit (and in the case of a CRS production function, also the marginal cost). If I do not find

any changes to the profit to sales ratio as a result of the program, I can rule out that p increased but
  16
       Note that in order for this to be the case, the demand curve facing these firms must be inelastic.


                                                              20
b either did not change or decreased (quality stayed constant or deteriorated). Column 2 of Table

14 shows that while profit to sales did increase as a result of the program, the results are quite

imprecisely estimated. These results indicate that the large and statistically significant increase

in profitability and productivity shown in Tables 3 and 4 are unlikely to be completely driven by

higher prices without any change or a reduction in quality.


5.1.3   Borrowing and Surplus Division with the Government

SOEs, like private firms, retain part of their earnings and distribute the rest as dividends (which

are largely received by the government, since it is the majority shareholder). Dividend outlays are

usually heavily influenced by the government, and it is possible that they increase their surplus

allocation with increased profitability. Conversely, since retained earnings are one way to finance

capital expansion with autonomy (other than private borrowing), firms would like to retain as

much of their earnings under autonomy as possible. Table 6 tests how the allocation of profits

into retained earnings vs. dividends changes due to the program. Both dividends and retained

earnings increase- the increase in dividends is about 54% relative to the mean, and the increase

in retained earnings is about 55% relative to the mean. This indicates that the government, as the

majority shareholder in these firms, gets a substantial increase in the revenue it receives. However,

there is no substantial change in the relative allocations between the government and the SOE.

   Panel B of Table 6 presents the results for the amount and composition of borrowing- these

are available only from 1994-2009. Pre-program eligible firms increase borrowing by about Rs.

2.94 billion, about 18% relative to the mean, though the effect is not statistically significant. Gov-

ernment loans (defined as loans extended by the Central government), fall substantially, by Rs.

3.3 billion (mean government borrowing is Rs. 24.95 billion), an effect that is statistically signif-

icant at the 5% level. Non-government loans increase by Rs. 6.3 billion, though the effect is not

statistically significant. Overall, the results in Panel B indicate that SOEs re-allocate borrowing

away from the government and into non-governmental sources, which is consistent with the con-

ditions for capital expansion under the autonomy program (that the expansion be financed out

of non-governmental sources). The third column of Panel A indicates that interest payments do

not change as a result of the autonomy program - the effect is commensurate to the change in



                                                 21
total borrowing as a percent relative to the mean, indicating that firms did not use autonomy to

increase their high-interest borrowing.17


5.2      Within and Outside Firm Incentives for SOE Managers

A possible mechanism for why SOE managers use the autonomy program to increase firm returns

is that their career concerns include the possibility of private sector board memberships. Both the

information contained in receiving the autonomy status, as well as the freedom associated with

it, may thus allow them to signal their quality to the private sector. To test whether this is the

case, I use data on SOE board member names from the Prowess database, and estimate Equations

4 and 5. Results are presented in Table 7. Columns 1 and 2 present the results from estimating

Equation 4 - Column 1 includes all SOE directors, and Column 2 only incumbent directors (those

individuals who are on SOE boards before 2005). I find that the probability I match a SOE director

to a private firm board is higher by about 3-4 percentage points for firms with autonomy. Columns

3 through 6 present results after dropping firms that received autonomy before 2005, which allows

me to test for pre-trends. Columns 3 and 4 include all SOE directors, and Columns 5 and 6 only

incumbent SOE directors. Results are similar across specifications, and indicate that SOE directors

are more likely to be matched to private firm boards after receiving autonomy. They are no more

likely to be matched to private firm boards before receiving autonomy (there are no statistically

significant pre-trend effects). The magnitude of the effects is about 6-8 percentage points, about

10-13 percent relative to the mean probability of a matched name. Given these results, it seems

plausible that managers of autonomous SOEs are better able to signal their quality to the private

sector, and are rewarded with private sector board positions, which may be a mechanism for the

effects of autonomy of SOE outcomes.

       I next discuss results testing whether SOEs with higher payscales have a higher effect of au-

tonomy, presented in Table 11. Column 1 presents only the results from Equation 9. Column

2 additionally controls for the double interactions of pre-program mean sales with 1(post 1996)t

and pre-program mean sales with 1(pre 1996)t , as well as the triple interaction of 1(eligible)ij ,

pre-program sales, and 1(post 1996)t , and the triple interaction of 1(eligible)ij , pre-program sales
  17
    I also test whether interest payments per Rs. of borrowing change, by using the ratio of interest payments to total
borrowing as an outcome variable- I find similar results that this does not change. Results are omitted for brevity, and
are available upon request.


                                                          22
and 1(pre 1996)t . Column 3 estimates the same regression as in Column 2, and adds controls

for the double interactions of pre-program mean profit with 1(post 1996)t and the interaction of

pre-program mean profit with 1(post 1996)t , as well as the triple interaction of 1(eligible)ij , mean

pre-program profit and 1(post 1996)t , and the triple interaction of 1(eligible)ij , pre-program profit

and 1(pre 1996)t . While Column 1 shows that lower compensation schedules have lower effects of

autonomy on profitability (SOEs with higher wage schedules have higher effects), the results are

not statistically significant once the additional control variables are added. This indicates that the

results on wage schedules in Column 1 are either driven by the correlation of the compensation

grade with pre-program sales and profits, or that there is not enough independent variation in

compensation grades to identify heterogeneous effects.


5.3    Electoral Cycles in Hiring

In this section, I first document electoral cycles in hiring i.e. that SOEs are more likely to employ

workers in a state in the year before a state assembly election. To do so, I use data on annual state-

level employment presence for each SOE (available between 1999-2009), and estimate Equation

6. Results are presented in Table 9, and show that a SOE is 0.004 percentage points more likely

to report positive employment in a state, about 2% higher relative to the mean probability. These

results, while small on average, show that the average SOE adjusts its hiring every 5 years or so

to respond to electoral concerns. In contrast, there are no effects in the year after an election.

      Table 5 shows that autonomy increases SOE employment levels. A natural question is whether

the government is able to use the increased hiring capacity of SOEs for electoral purposes. To test

this, I estimate Equations 7 and 8. Results are presented in Table 10. Columns 1 and 2 use the entire

sample and show results from estimating Equation 7. I find that while having autonomy shows a

positive and statistically significant effect on the probability a SOE reports positive employment

in a state, the effect is not statistically significantly different from 0 for firms with autonomy in

the year before an election (the coefficient on the double interaction of whether a firm has auton-

omy with whether it is a year before an election is not statistically significantly different from 0).

Columns 3 and 4 drop firms that received autonomy before 2005, and allows me to test for pre-

trends. The results are consistent with those in columns 1 and 2, and show that the hiring capacity



                                                  23
of SOEs with autonomy is not co-opted by the government for electoral purposes, as the coeffi-

cient on the triple interaction between 1(Treatment)ij ,   1 (Year before a state assembly election)kt ,
and 1 (Post-autonomy)t is not statistically significantly different from 0.


5.4   Direct Impacts on SOE Outcomes Relative to the Private Sector

The results in Table 3 indicate that the autonomy program increases sales, value added, and prof-

itability relative to other SOEs. How does autonomy affect SOE performance to the private sector?

I test this using the estimation Equation 3, and the results are presented in Table 8. Before 1996,

pre-program eligible SOEs are not statistically different relative to comparable private sector firms,

and if anything, perform worse than these private firms. However, post-1996, the eligibility cri-

teria that conferred autonomy on some SOEs led to higher profits, value added, and sales. The

effects are substantial relative to mean sales and profits - an increase of about 3.5 times higher

sales relative to the mean, and an increase in profits over twelve years of about 45% relative to the

mean. These effects imply that not only did autonomy allow SOEs to increase profitability and

expand output relative to other SOEs, but also allowed them to perform effectively relative to the

private sector.



6     Robustness Checks and Additional Outcomes

In this section, I report robustness checks, and additional outcomes, namely, employment com-

position and the volatility of firm returns. A concern with the main empirical strategy is that

the process of becoming eligible (earning profits for three years continuously and a positive net

worth) has a direct impact on firm outcomes, and the results I find are independent of whether the

firm actually received autonomy or not. To test whether this is the case, I estimate the following

equation:




 yijt =  + i + t j + 1      1(post 1996)t  1(eligible)ij + µ1 1(pre 1996)t  1(eligible)ij +

2     1(post 1996)t  1(received autonomy)ij + µ2 1(pre 1996)t  1(received autonomy)ij +              ijt

                                                                                                   (10)


                                                 24
       Table A1 reports the results. Once autonomy status is controlled for, pre-program eligibility

has no marginal effect on firm returns or productivity - all the effects are driven by actually receiv-

ing autonomy. These results show that just the process of becoming eligible does not have effects

in absence of receiving autonomy.

       To ensure that the results are not driven by negative spillover effects on ineligible firms, Table

A2 reports results from five-digit sectors in which either all or none of the firms were eligible for

autonomy before 1997. This halves the sample size, but the results, while nosier due to the smaller

sample size, are very similar to those reported in Tables 3 and 4.18

       It is possible that firms which are due to report small losses are able to manipulate their profits

to report small positive profits instead to increase their eligibility probability. Considering firms

that were already eligible before the program as treated ensures that the results are not driven

by this behavior (if it exists). To further test that results do not change if firms around the zero

profits threshold are removed, Table 12 presents the results from a "donut" estimator - Panel A

reports results removing 10 firms around the zero profits threshold in each year (as well as all

firms reporting exactly zero profits), and Panel B reports results removing 15 firms around the

zero profits threshold in each year (as well as all firms reporting zero profits). The results are quite

similar to the results from Tables 3 and 4, and consistent across both panels.

       The main sample I consider in the paper are SOEs that were reporting data five years before

and at least five years after the program. In Table A6, I show results including all firms (as well as

entry and exit results). Results are once again similar to those reported in Tables 3 and 4, both in

statistical significance and magnitude.

       Table A5 presents results from a generalized difference in difference estimation that tests whether

firms that received autonomy performed differently after receiving autonomy. The results are pos-

itive, statistically significant, and similar to those in Tables 3 and 4, though larger in magnitude.

This is to be expected, since I am directly testing for the effects of autonomy rather than proxy-

ing for treatment status with pre-program eligibility, and estimating effects after the firm actually

receives autonomy, rather than post-1996, when the program was first implemented.

       Table 3 shows that average firms returns are higher after the program - however, it is possi-
  18
    I residualize sector by year and firm fixed effects in the whole sample before running regressions on this sample
to ensure that I'm controlling for similar sectoral-year effects as in the whole sample. Results are the same if I simply
estimate Equation 1 on this restricted sample.


                                                           25
ble that higher mean profitability is accompanied by more volatile profits. To test whether this

is the case, I estimate Equation 2, that tests whether the firm-level standard deviation of profits,

sales and value added changed in the short term (in the 5 year period immediately after the pro-

gram, between 1997 and 2001), and in the longer term (in the 5 year period between 2002 and

2006), relative to 5 years before the program (1992-1996). Results are presented in Table 13. I find

no difference in volatility in the short-term, but a much higher volatility across outcomes in the

longer-term. This shows these firms' returns, while higher on average, were also accompanied by

greater volatility.

    As an additional robustness check, I show that government ownership does not seem to have

been affected by the autonomy program. I estimate Equation 1 using the proportion of central

government's equity holdings as the outcome variable, which is available between 1994 and 2009.

I also show that the results are robust to including state government holdings in the definition

of government holdings (though state government holdings in these centrally owned SOEs is

very small, on average less than 2% of equity). Results are presented in Table A7, and show that

government equity was not changed as a result of the program.

    Table A8 reports results for three types of employees separately (available between 1994 and

2009) - managerial and supervisory, non-managerial and non-supervisory, and non-permanent

employees (which measures the propensity of the firm to outsource work, possibly to less well-

paid workers with fewer protections under labor laws). Similar to the results for overall employ-

ment, I find positive, but noisy effects on all three categories of employment. The results indicate

that both managerial and non-managerial employment increased by about 13% relative to mean

employment levels (an increase of about 239 managers on average and about 1500 non-managers

on average).

    Finally, I present event study estimates for 10 years after the program in Figures 1 through 8

and Appendix figures A1 through A11, which are consistent with the regression tables.



7    Conclusion

Autonomy may allow managers to leverage their private information better, by empowering them

to act on their knowledge to their firm's benefit. When incentives are low-powered, however,


                                                26
or the objective function of the firm multi-dimensional, how autonomy impacts firm outcomes

if at all is unclear. Autonomy may also backfire if it encourages managers to undertake high-

risk projects believing that the government will bail out the firm in the event of failure. The

existence of earned autonomy programs across a range of organizational settings indicates that

this is a common model governments employ in devolving autonomy. However, it is not clear

that giving autonomy to well-running organizations has positive effects, since these firms may be

less constrained overall, and so the gains to autonomy may be low for such firms.

   I test how an earned autonomy program for SOEs in India impacts managerial decisions and

firm outcomes. I find that autonomy increases profit, sales, and productivity significantly, and

that these outcomes may be driven partly by SOE managers' incentives to receive board seats in

the private sector. I also find that in the long-run, the volatility of firm returns increases, which

indicates that managers may be engaging in higher return and higher risk projects. Overall, the

results show that large gains in SOE performance are possible without any changes to the firms

ownership structure. These results hold for about 13 years after the program, the entire length of

the sample period.

   These results contribute to understanding how autonomy affects organizational outcomes.

However, this work has some limitations. First, I am unable to separately test the impact of

quasi-randomly or randomly giving autonomy to all firms - it is possible that consistently loss-

making SOEs lack the organizational or managerial capacity to avail of the benefits of autonomy.

Second, since the autonomy was over several important strategic decisions for the firm, I cannot

separately estimate the effects of autonomy over each decision. Third, I do not test to what extent

this program encourages SOEs that were not eligible in 1997 to work towards earning autonomy

i.e. whether it has a motivation effect on SOE managers. These and related questions, including

whether similar programs generate positive impacts in other settings, remain important questions

for future work.




                                                 27
References

Acemoglu, D., Aghion, P., Lelarge, C., Van Reenen, J., and Zilibotti, F. (2007). Technology, informa-

  tion, and the decentralization of the firm. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4):1759­1799.

Aghion, P., Bloom, N., Lucking, B., Sadun, R., and Van Reenen, J. (2017). Turbulence, firm decen-

  tralization and growth in bad times. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Alfaro, L. and Chari, A. (2009). India transformed? insights from the firm level 1988-2005. Techni-

  cal report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Azmat, G., Manning, A., and Reenen, J. V. (2012). Privatization and the decline of labour's share:

  international evidence from network industries. Economica, 79(315):470­492.

Baltrunaite, A., Giorgiantonio, C., Mocetti, S., and Orlando, T. (2018). Discretion and supplier

  selection in public procurement.

Barberis, N., Boycko, M., Shleifer, A., and Tsukanova, N. (1996). How does privatization work?

  evidence from the russian shops. Journal of Political Economy, 104(4):764­790.

Bartel, A. P. and Harrison, A. E. (1999). Ownership versus environment: Why are public sector

  firms inefficient? Technical report, National bureau of economic research.

Berkowitz, D., Ma, H., and Nishioka, S. (2017). Recasting the iron rice bowl: The reform of china's

  state-owned enterprises. Review of Economics and Statistics, 99(4):735­747.

Boycko, M., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R. W. (1996). A theory of privatisation. The Economic Journal,

  106(435):309­319.

Cendrowski, S. (2015). Chinas global 500 companies are bigger than ever­and mostly state-owned.

  Fortune Magazine. It can be retrieved at http://fortune. com/2015/07/22/china-global-500-government-

  owned.

Choudhury, P. and Khanna, T. (2014). Toward resource independence­why state-owned entities

  become multinationals: An empirical study of indias public r&d laboratories. Journal of Interna-

  tional Business Studies, 45(8):943­960.


                                                 28
Clark, D. (2009). The performance and competitive effects of school autonomy. Journal of political

  Economy, 117(4):745­783.

Colombo, M. G. and Delmastro, M. (2008). The Economics of Organizational Design. Palgrave

  Macmillan.

Dollar, D. and Wei, S.-J. (2007). Das (wasted) kapital: firm ownership and investment efficiency in

  china.

Goddard, M. and Mannion, R. (2006). Decentralising the nhs: rhetoric, reality and paradox. Journal

  of health organization and management, 20(1):67­73.

Groves, T., Hong, Y., McMillan, J., and Naughton, B. (1994). Autonomy and incentives in chinese

  state enterprises. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(1):183­209.

Gupta, N. (2005). Partial privatization and firm performance. The Journal of Finance, 60(2):987­1015.

Hanushek, E. A., Link, S., and Woessmann, L. (2013). Does school autonomy make sense every-

  where? panel estimates from pisa. Journal of Development Economics, 104:212­232.

Hsieh, C.-T. and Song, Z. M. (2015). Grasp the large, let go of the small: the transformation of the

  state sector in china. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Huang, Z., Li, L., Ma, G., and Xu, L. C. (2017). Hayek, local information, and commanding heights:

  Decentralizing state-owned enterprises in china. American Economic Review, 107(8):2455­78.

Megginson, W. L. and Netter, J. M. (2001). From state to market: A survey of empirical studies on

  privatization. Journal of economic literature, 39(2):321­389.

Musacchio, A. and Lazzarini, S. G. (2014). Reinventing state capitalism. Harvard University Press.

Nagar, V. (2002). Delegation and incentive compensation. The Accounting Review, 77(2):379­395.

Shleifer, A. (1998). State versus private ownership. Journal of economic perspectives, 12(4):133­150.

V´
 azquez, X. H. (2004). Allocating decision rights on the shop floor: A perspective from transaction

  cost economics and organization theory. Organization Science, 15(4):463­480.



                                                  29
Xu, L. C. (2000). Control, incentives and competition: The impact of reform on chinese state-owned

  enterprises. Economics of Transition, 8(1):151­173.




                                                 30
                                                       Table 2: Summary Statistics




                                                (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)         (7)           (8)            (9)
                                                         WholeSample                          FirmsWithAutononomy                         PreProgramEligible
NumberofSOEs                                                   193                                        73                                      95
                                                N           Mean             SD           N           Mean             SD          N           Mean            SD
TotalLoans(00,000Rs.)                          3,342      16,963.45      89,298.44       1,303      29,953.92      130,059.30    1,679       23,575.83    117,448.70
InterestPayments(00,000Rs.)                    3,342      11,994.68      37,691.79       1,303      17,645.75       46,497.23    1,679       15,324.83     44,196.68
NetProfit(00,000Rs.)                           3,342      18,090.33      101,533.20      1,303      50,643.46      150,170.00    1,679       37,285.52    134,685.00
GrossSales(00,000Rs.)                          3,342     282,763.90     1,432,490.00     1,303     621,153.40     2,206,133.00   1,679       487,473.30   1,960,220.00
ValueAdded(00,000Rs.)                          3,342      99,627.92      375,939.40      1,303     218,157.40      570,131.20    1,679       171,327.10   511,355.80
SalesPerEmployee(00,000Rs.)                    3,301        58.56          202.67        1,291       102.98          263.85      1,641         95.54        261.24
ValueAddedPerEmployee(00,000Rs.)               3,264        17.47           48.71        1,277        31.16           64.75      1,619         28.98         64.53
RetainedProfit(00,000Rs.)                      3,341      10,934.56      65,708.59       1,302      32,936.25       90,620.45    1,678       24,134.37     83,105.16
DividendPaid(00,000Rs.)                        3,341      6,312.73       36,057.27       1,302      15,675.13       56,421.10    1,678       11,597.86     49,349.76
CapitalAssets(00,000Rs.)                       3,338     273,303.10     1,066,236.00     1,300     573,913.00     1,614,447.00   1,675       458,874.00   1,455,359.00
NumberofEmployees(000s)                        3,338      8,459.91       21,106.89       1,301      12,936.53       25,096.83    1,676        9,353.59     21,747.74
WageBill(00,000Rs.)                            3,342      17,986.60      51,863.87       1,303      32,053.38       70,353.95    1,679       24,486.10     63,692.94

                                                           PrivateSectorFirms                                                    PreProgramEligiblePrivateFirms

NumberofPrivateFirmsintheSame5
                                                              1,426                                                                               993
digitSectorsasSOEs
                                                N           Mean             SD                                                    N           Mean            SD
NetProfit(00,000Rs.)                          23,208      1,776.96       26,045.53                                               17,550       2,324.84     29,890.11
GrossSales(00,000Rs.)                         20,555      25,468.16      258,928.60                                              15,878      31,015.50    294,084.20
ValueAdded(00,000Rs.)                         15,928      14,733.21      102,882.00                                              12,550      17,641.54    115,601.50

 Notes:Preprogrameligiblefirmsarethosethatearnedpositiveprofitsforthreeconsecutiveyearsandhadapositivenetworthbefore1997.




                                                                            31
                                        Table 3: Sales, Value Added, and Profit



                                                              (1)                            (2)                             (3)

                                                      Sales(Rs.00,000)           ValueAdded(Rs.00,000)               Profit(Rs,00,000)



 1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year<1996)                         4,118                           5,193                          2,358
                                                           (14,353)                         (5,543)                        (2,035)
 1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year>1996)                        88,115**                       42,017***                       10,561**
                                                           (44,400)                        (15,812)                        (5,320)


                 Controls                                                    FirmFE,NIC2digitXYearFE


           Observations                                     3,342                          3,342                           3,342
            RSquared                                        0.863                           0.832                          0.726
      MeanofDependentVariable                              282,764                         99,628                          18,090
Notes:Standarderrorsclusteredatthefirmlevelinparentheses(***p<0.01,**p<0.05,*p<0.1).1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=1996)istheomittedcategory.




                                                                    32
                                        Table 4: Labor Productivity

                                                               (1)                                 (2)

                                                   SalesPerEmployee(Rs.              ValueAddedPerEmployee
                                                          00,000)                          (Rs.00,000)


 1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year<1996)                           1.622                              2.444*
                                                             (5.570)                             (1.457)
 1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year>1996)                           45.20                              10.86*
                                                             (28.22)                             (5.724)


                 Controls                                        FirmFE,NIC2digitXYearFE


           Observations                                       3,301                               3,264
            RSquared                                          0.678                               0.767
      MeanofDependentVariable                                 58.56                               17.47
Notes:Standarderrorsclusteredatthefirmlevelinparentheses(***p<0.01,**p<0.05,*p<0.1).1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=1996)
istheomittedcategory.Salesperemployeeandprofitperemployeearetrimmedatthe1stand99thpercentile.




                                                       33
                Table 5: Capital, Labor and Participation in Joint Ventures/Subsidiaries




                                                       (1)                      (2)                       (3)                      (4)
                                                                                                                          1(SOEReporteda
                                                CapitalAssets               WageBill                 Numberof
                                                                                                                         SubsidiaryoraJoint
                                                 (Rs.00,000)               (Rs.00,000)               Employees
                                                                                                                              Venture)
                    
1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year<1996)                   15,999                   917.1                    368.5                    0.0130
                                                    (13,250)                  (1,157)                  (364.2)                  (0.0435)
1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year>1996)                  64,001**                  9,119*                    1,554                   0.0686*
                                                    (28,878)                  (4,727)                  (1,109)                  (0.0401)


               Controls                                                      FirmFE,NIC2digitXYearFE


         Observations                                3,338                    3,342                     3,338                    3,342
          RSquared                                   0.849                    0.834                     0.976                    0.717
    MeanofDependentVariable                         273303                    17,987                    8,460                    0.193
Notes:Standarderrorsclusteredatthefirmlevelinparentheses(***p<0.01,**p<0.05,*p<0.1).1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=1996)istheomittedcategory.
Capitalassetsincludethebookvalueoffixedassets,investments,andcapitalworksinprogress.




                                                                    34
                                            Table 6: Borrowings and Profit Utilization

                                                                 (1)                                    (2)                                     (3)

                 PanelA                            RetainedProfits(Rs.00,000)                Dividends(Rs.00,000)                InterestPayments(Rs.00,000)



 1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year<1996)                             1,497                                 957.0**                                  52.44
                                                               (1,753)                                (468.6)                                 (1,468)
 1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year>1996)                             6,118                                 3,592**                                  2,191
                                                               (3,874)                                (1,587)                                 (4,432)



                 Controls                                                                FirmFE,NIC2digitXYearFE


           Observations                                        3,341                                   3,341                                  3,342
            RSquared                                           0.698                                   0.690                                  0.807
      MeanofDependentVariable                                  10,935                                  6,313                                  11,995
                                                                                                                                 NonGovernmentLoans(Rs.
                 PanelB                              TotalLoans(Rs.00,000)               GovernmentLoans(Rs.00,000)
                                                                                                                                        00,000)


 1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year<1996)                            9,226                                   2,759                                  6,467
                                                               (6,587)                                (2,639)                                 (5,825)
 1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year>1996)                            29,462                                33,142**                                 62,604
                                                              (70,737)                               (16,794)                                (75,060)


                 Controls                                                                FirmFE,NIC2digitXYearFE


              Observations                                     2,685                                   2,685                                  2,685
                RSquared                                       0.765                                   0.718                                  0.734
      MeanofDependentVariable                                 166,295                                 24,946                                 141,350
Notes:Standarderrorsclusteredatthefirmlevelinparentheses(***p<0.01,**p<0.05,*p<0.1).1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=1996)istheomittedcategory.VariablesinPanelBare
availableonlyfrom19942009.




                                                                              35
                            Table 7: SOE Board of Directors Matched to Private Firm Boards


                                                              (1)                   (2)                   (3)                     (4)                  (5)                    (6)
                                                                                  1(MatchedtoaPrivateFirmBoardofDirectors)


             1(FirmHasAutonomy)                           0.0425***              0.0336**
                                                           (0.0142)              (0.0156)
   1(Treatment)*1(Year<YearBeforewhich
           AutonomyReceived)                                                                            0.0106                0.00327               0.000404               0.00253
                                                                                                        (0.0122)              (0.0139)              (0.0161)               (0.0198)
1(Treatment)*1(Year>=YearinwhichAutonomy
                  Received)                                                                            0.0794***              0.0655***             0.0657***             0.0619***
                                                                                                        (0.0153)              (0.0168)               (0.0173)              (0.0221)


                                                                                                                DirectorNameFE

                    Controls                                                                                            1(Preautonomy),                              1(Preautonomy),
                                                                                                  1(Preautonomy),                              1(Preautonomy),
                                                                      YearFE                                            1(Postautonomy),                             1(Postautonomy),
                                                                                                  1(Postautonomy)                              1(Postautonomy)
                                                                                                                             YearFE                                       YearFE

                     Sample                                             Full                                       DroppingFirmsthatreceivedautonomybefore2005


                                                                           OnlySOEDirectors
                     Sample                           AllSOEDirectors                                           AllSOEDirectors                    OnlySOEDirectorsBefore2005
                                                                              Before2005

                  Observations                              56,709                34,437                 25,516                25,516                16,397                 16,397
                   RSquared                                  0.78                  0.811                 0.781                  0.787                  0.81                 0.811
          MeanofDependentVariable                           0.681                  0.683                 0.576                  0.576                 0.594                 0.594
 Notes:Standarderrorsclusteredatthedirectornamelevelinparentheses(***p<0.01,**p<0.05,*p<0.1).1(Treatment)*1(Year=OneYearBeforeAutonomyReceived)istheomittedcategoryincolumns3and4.Forthe
 controlgroup,theomittedyearis2005.ThedataforwhetheraSOEdirectorismatchedtoaprivatefirmboardisavailablefrom20032010.




                                                                                      36
                         Table 8: Sales and Profits Effects Relative to the Private Sector




                                                                     (1)                              (2)                               (3)
                                                             Sales(Rs.00,000)            ValueAdded(Rs.00,000)               NetProfit(Rs.00,000)


1(SOE)*1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year<1996)                         41,720                            10,819                           3,449*
                                                                  (32,249)                          (7,317)                          (1,833)
1(SOE)*1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year>1996)                        222,436**                          59,100*                          17,146*
                                                                  (96,771)                         (30,730)                          (8,853)
              1(SOE)*1(Year<1996)                                 19,908*                           5,850                             142.2
                                                                  (10,993)                          (3,702)                          (1,018)
              1(SOE)*1(Year<1996)                                  39,135                            143.6                            3,135
                                                                  (25,060)                          (8,461)                          (3,162)
    1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year<1996)                            7,123***                         4,323***                           337.2
                                                                   (2,599)                          (1,165)                          (364.6)
    1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year>1996)                             5,217                            7,300**                          1,889**
                                                                   (8,912)                          (3,390)                          (950.2)


                                                                                                   FirmFE
                     Controls
                                                                                           NIC2digitXYearFE


                  Observations                                     23,785                           19,158                            26,438
                   RSquared                                        0.729                             0.753                            0.591
         MeanofDependentVariable                                   59173                             29624                            3843
Notes:Standarderrorsclusteredatthefirmlevelinparentheses(***p<0.01,**p<0.05,*p<0.1).1(SOE)*1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=1996),1(SOE)*1(Year=1996),and
1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=1996)aretheomittedcategories.




                                                                           37
                                   Table 9: Electoral Cycles in Hiring Decisions




                                                      (1)                     (2)                     (3)                     (4)

                                                                   1(SOEreportspositiveemploymentinastate)


1(YearBeforeAStateAssemblyElection)               0.00438***              0.00438***              0.00448***              0.00448***
                                                  (0.00154)               (0.00156)               (0.00150)               (0.00152)
1(YearAfterAStateAssemblyElection)                                                                 0.000425                0.000425
                                                                                                  (0.00136)               (0.00137)



                                               FirmFE,StateFE              StateFE            FirmFE,StateFE               StateFE
                Controls
                                              NIC2digitXYear                                 NIC2digitXYear
                                                                       FirmXYearFE                                     FirmXYearFE
                                                   FE                                             FE

          Observations                              61,149                  61,149                  61,149                  61,149
           RSquared                                  0.428                   0.455                   0.428                   0.455
     MeanofDependentVariable                         0.238                   0.238                   0.238                   0.238
Notes:Standarderrorsclusteredatthefirmlevelinparentheses(***p<0.01,**p<0.05,*p<0.1).ThedataonSOEemploymentpresenceinastateeachyearavailable
from19992009.




                                                                 38
                  Table 10: Autonomy Effects on Electoral Cycles in Hiring Decisions


                                                                                (1)                     (2)                      (3)                     (4)
                                                                                              1(SOEreportspositiveemploymentinastate)
                     1(FirmHasAutonomy)                                      0.0772**
                                                                              (0.0350)
                   1(YearBeforeAnElection)                                  0.00497***               0.00487***               0.00992                 0.00990
                                                                             (0.00176)               (0.00178)               (0.00961)                (0.00971)
      1(FirmHasAutonomy)*1(YearBeforeAnElection)                             0.00200                  0.00165
                                                                             (0.00447)               (0.00454)
      1(Treatment)*1(Year<YearBeforewhichAutonomy
             Received)*1(YearBeforeAnElection)                                                                                 0.0123                  0.0152
                                                                                                                              (0.0417)                (0.0433)
1(Treatment)*1(Year>YearinwhichAutonomyReceived)*1(Year
                     BeforeAnElection)                                                                                        0.00690                  0.0135
                                                                                                                              (0.0528)                (0.0569)
1(Year<YearBeforewhichAutonomyReceived)*1(YearBeforeAn
                       Election)                                                                                               0.0152                  0.0147
                                                                                                                              (0.0105)                (0.0105)
1(Year>YearBeforewhichAutonomyReceived)*1(YearBeforeAn
                       Election)                                                                                               0.0139                  0.0149
                                                                                                                              (0.0108)                (0.0110)
            1(Treatment)*1(YearBeforeAnElection)                                                                               0.0154                  0.0203
                                                                                                                              (0.0400)                (0.0418)
 1(Treatment)*1(Year<YearBeforewhichAutonomyReceived)                                                                         0.120***
                                                                                                                              (0.0452)
 1(Treatment)*1(Year>YearBeforewhichAutonomyReceived)                                                                         0.00233
                                                                                                                              (0.0183)
                                                                        FirmFE,StateFE                StateFE            FirmFE,StateFE               StateFE
                             Controls
                                                                      NIC2digitXYearFE             FirmXYearFE        NIC2digitXYearFE            FirmXYearFE

                                                                                                                         DroppingFirmsthatreceivedautonomy
                             Sample                                                         Full
                                                                                                                                     before2005
                          Observations                                         61,149                  61,149                  43,491                  43,491
                            RSquared                                           0.428                   0.455                    0.37                    0.402
                  MeanofDependentVariable                                      0.238                   0.238                   0.188                    0.188
Notes:Standarderrorsclusteredatthedirectornamelevelinparentheses(***p<0.01,**p<0.05,*p<0.1).Interactionswith1(Year=OneYearBeforeAutonomyReceived)istheomittedcategoryin
columns3and4.Forthecontrolgroup,interactionswithadummyvariablethatis1ifyearis2005and0otherwisearetheomittedcategories.ThedataonSOEemploymentpresenceinastateeach
yearavailablefrom19992009.Columns3and4additionallyincludethecontrolvariables1(Year<YearBeforewhichAutonomyReceived),1(Year>YearBeforewhichAutonomyReceived).




                                                                          39
                                   Table 11: Heterogeneous Effects by Compensation Schedule


                                                                             (1)                                           (2)                                           (3)

                                                                                                                NetProfit(Rs.00,000)


      1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year<1996)                                   6,543                                        10,829                                         2,834
                                                                           (7,571)                                       (8,091)                                      (11,208)
      1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year>1996)                                  55,235**                                     58,489***                                       54,047
                                                                          (23,193)                                      (21,474)                                      (36,696)
      CompensationSchedule*1(Year<1996)                                     1,315                                        4,672*                                        4,000*
                                                                           (2,197)                                       (2,739)                                       (2,054)
      CompensationSchedule*1(Year>1996)                                    9,031                                         6,646                                         5,799
                                                                           (5,809)                                       (5,335)                                       (4,447)
               1(EligiblePre
Program)*1(Year<1996)*CompensationSchedule                                  1,980                                        3,590                                         3,570
                                                                           (2,755)                                       (3,609)                                       (3,214)
               1(EligiblePre
Program)*1(Year<1996)*CompensationSchedule                                23,897**                                        611.4                                        2,314
                                                                          (10,408)                                      (13,435)                                      (14,173)


                                                                                                           FirmFE,NIC2digitXYearFE
                                                                                                        Doubleinteractionsofi)preprogramsaleswithpre1996,andii)preprogram
                                                                                                       saleswithpost1996,Tripleinteractionsofi)preprogramsaleswithpre1996and
                                                                                                        preprogrameligibility,andii)interactionsofpreprogramsaleswithpost1996
                                                                                                                                andpreprogrameligibility

                                                                                                                                                     Doubleinteractionsofi)preprogram
                      Controls                                                                                                                          profitswithpre1996,andii)pre
                                                                                                                                                     programprofitswithpost1996,Triple
                                                                                                                                                      interactionsofi)preprogramprofits
                                                                                                                                                         withpre1996andpreprogram
                                                                                                                                                      eligibility,andii)interactionsofpre
                                                                                                                                                    programprofitswithpost1996andpre
                                                                                                                                                                programeligibility

                    Observations                                            3,000                                         2,701                                        2,701
                     RSquared                                               0.738                                         0.756                                         0.76
              MeanofDependentVariable                                      19,629                                        15685                                         15,685
Notes:Standarderrorsclusteredatthefirmlevelinparentheses(***p<0.01,**p<0.05,*p<0.1).Interactionswith1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=1996)and1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=1996)aretheomitted
categories.




                                                                                            40
                        Table 12: Firm Returns and Productivity Using a "Donut" Estimator


                                                       (1)                       (2)                        (3)                      (4)              (5)
                                                                          ValueAdded(Rs.                                     SalesPerEmployee  ValueAddedPer
                PanelA                         Sales(Rs.00,000)                                     Profits(Rs.00,000)
                                                                               00,000)                                           (Rs.00,000)  Employee(Rs.00,000)


1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year<1996)
                                                      9,783                     8,510                      2,673                     2.443                     2.061
                                                    (25,881)                    (5,752)                   (2,666)                   (6.661)                    (1.389)

1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year>1996)
                                                   105,764***                 45,924***                   11,786**                  53.49**                   13.04**
                                                    (36,216)                   (17,080)                   (5,904)                   (26.30)                    (6.085)


                Controls                                                                    FirmFE,NIC2digitXYearFE

          SampleRestriction                                          Dropping10FirmsEachAroundZeroProfitsandFirmsWithZeroProfits

             Observations                             2,935                      2,935                     2,935                     2,894                     2,858
               RSquared                               0.864                      0.839                     0.729                     0.719                     0.781
     MeanofDependentVariable                         305686                   110,331                      20602                    64.69            19.32
                                                                          ValueAdded(Rs.                                     SalesPerEmployee  ValueAddedPer
                PanelB                         Sales(Rs.00,000)                                     Profits(Rs.00,000)
                                                                               00,000)                                           (Rs.00,000)  Employee(Rs.00,000)


1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year<1996)                    5,624                     8,096                      2,467                     10.40                     1.740
                                                    (20,581)                    (6,814)                   (3,025)                   (11.73)                    (1.534)
1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year>1996)                 110,028***                 48,419***                   12,595**                  60.40**                   13.47**
                                                    (36,853)                   (17,076)                   (5,988)                   (27.86)                    (6.506)


                Controls                                                                    FirmFE,NIC2digitXYearFE

          SampleRestriction                                          Dropping15FirmsEachAroundZeroProfitsandFirmsWithZeroProfits

             Observations                             2,756                      2,756                     2,935                     2,715                     2,679
               RSquared                               0.865                      0.840                     0.729                     0.741                     0.787
     MeanofDependentVariable                         324,373                    117208                     20,602                    67.52                     20.34
Notes:Standarderrorsclusteredatthefirmlevelinparentheses(***p<0.01,**p<0.05,*p<0.1).1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=1996)istheomittedcategory.Valueaddedperemployeeandsalesper
employeearetrimmedatthe1stand99thpercentile.




                                                                                    41
                                 Table 13: Variability of Firm Returns Over Time

                                                       (1)                    (2)                                         (3)
                                           StandardDeviationofSales StandardDeviationofValue                    StandardDeviationof
                                                  (Rs.,00,000)          Added(Rs.,00,000)                         Profits(Rs.,00,000)


1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=2001)                      2,429                            3,453                           2,626
                                                       (4,762)                          (3,756)                         (2,008)
1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=2006)                    40,159**                         15,037*                           5,289
                                                      (19,880)                          (9,049)                         (5,388)


               Controls                                                   FirmFE,NIC2digitXYearFE
         SampleRestriction                                                              None
            Observations                                 554                              554                             554
              RSquared                                  0.914                            0.849                           0.781
    MeanofDependentVariable                            56,684                           20370                            8,171
Notes:Standarderrorsclusteredatthefirmlevelinparentheses(***p<0.01,**p<0.05,*p<0.1).Therearethreedatapointsperfirm.Standarddeviationofsales
forafirmcomprisesthestandarddeviationofsalesbetween19921996,19972001,and20022007.Similarly,thestandarddeviationofprofitscomprisesthe
standarddeviationofprofitsbetween19921996,19972001,and20022007.Standarddeviationofvalueaddedcomprisesthestandarddeviationofvalueadded
between19921996,19972001,and20022007.1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=1996)istheomittedcategory.




                                                                  42
                       Table 14: Costs of Production and Net Profit Over Sales




                                                                (1)                                 (2)
                                                     CostsofProduction                   NetProfit/TotalSales


 1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=2001)                           1,326                               0.345
                                                              (12,393)                           (0.397)
 1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=2006)                           61,865                              0.666
                                                              (41,274)                           (0.633)


                 Controls                                          FirmFE,NIC2digitXYearFE
           SampleRestriction                                                    None


              Observations                                     3,342                              3,206
                RSquared                                       0.869                              0.628
     MeanofDependentVariable                                  239,817                             0.788
Notes:Standarderrorsclusteredatthefirmlevelinparentheses(***p<0.01,**p<0.05,*p<0.1).NetProfit/TotalSalesistrimmedatthe
1stand99thpercentile.1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=1996)istheomittedcategory.CostofProductionisthesumofpurchaseof
finishedgoods,rawmaterials,wagebill,powerandfuelexpenses,depreciation,interestpayments,andmiscellaneousexpenses.




                                                         43
                                                      Figure 1: Sales (Rs. 00,000)




      300000
      200000
      100000
      0
      -100000




                1992 1993 1994 1995 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
                                                   Year
                Note: 90% CI Reported. 1996 is omitted year. Firm and NIC 2-digit X year fixed effects included.




This figure plots the interaction coefficients of the pre-program eligibility dummy variable with year dummy variables.
The interaction of pre-program eligibility with the 1996 year dummy variable is omitted.




                                              Figure 2: Value Added (Rs. 00,000)
      150000
      100000
      50000
      0
      -50000




                1992 1993 1994 1995 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
                                                   Year
                Note: 90% CI Reported. 1996 is omitted year. Firm and NIC 2-digit X year fixed effects included.




This figure plots the interaction coefficients of the pre-program eligibility dummy variable with year dummy variables.
The interaction of pre-program eligibility with the 1996 year dummy variable is omitted.
                                                                            44
                                                 Figure 3: Net Profit (Rs. 00,000)




      60000
      40000
      20000
      0
      -20000




               1992 1993 1994 1995 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
                                                  Year
               Note: 90% CI Reported. 1996 is omitted year. Firm and NIC 2-digit X year fixed effects included.




This figure plots the interaction coefficients of the pre-program eligibility dummy variable with year dummy variables.
The interaction of pre-program eligibility with the 1996 year dummy variable is omitted.




                                        Figure 4: Sales Per Employee (Rs. 00,000)
      200
      150
      100
      50
      0
      -50




               1992 1993 1994 1995 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
                                                  Year
               Note: 90% CI Reported. 1996 is omitted year. Firm and NIC 2-digit X year fixed effects included.




This figure plots the interaction coefficients of the pre-program eligibility dummy variable with year dummy variables.
The interaction of pre-program eligibility with the 1996 year dummy variable is omitted.
                                                                           45
                             Figure 5: Value Added Per Employee (Rs. 00,000)
      30
      20
      10
      0
      -10




            1992 1993 1994 1995 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
                                               Year
            Note: 90% CI Reported. 1996 is omitted year. Firm and NIC 2-digit X year fixed effects included.




This figure plots the interaction coefficients of the pre-program eligibility dummy variable with year dummy variables.
The interaction of pre-program eligibility with the 1996 year dummy variable is omitted.




                                                                        46
    Figure 6: Sales (Rs. 00,000) for Eligible SOEs Relative to Comparable Private Firms




       80000
       60000
       40000
       20000
       0
       -20000




                              1992 1993 1994 1995 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
                              Note: 90% CI Reported. 1996 is omitted year. Firm and NIC 2-digit X year fixed effects included.




 This figure plots the interaction coefficients of the pre-program eligibility dummy variable with year dummy variables
 and whether the firm is a SOE. The interaction of pre-program eligibility, whether the firm is a SOE, and the 1996 year
 dummy variable is omitted.




Figure 7: Value Added (Rs. 00,000) for Eligible SOEs Relative to Comparable Private Firms
       100000 150000 200000
       50000
       0
       -50000




                              1992 1993 1994 1995 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
                              Note: 90% CI Reported. 1996 is omitted year. Firm and NIC 2-digit X year fixed effects included.




 This figure plots the interaction coefficients of the pre-program eligibility dummy variable with year dummy variables
 and whether the firm is a SOE. The interaction of pre-program47 eligibility, whether the firm is a SOE, and the 1996 year
 dummy variable is omitted.
  Figure 8: Profits (Rs. 00,000) for Eligible SOEs Relative to Comparable Private Firms
      80000
      60000
      40000
      20000
      0
      -20000




               1992 1993 1994 1995 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
               Note: 90% CI Reported. 1996 is omitted year. Firm and NIC 2-digit X year fixed effects included.




This figure plots the interaction coefficients of the pre-program eligibility dummy variable with year dummy variables
and whether the firm is a SOE. The interaction of pre-program eligibility, whether the firm is a SOE, and the 1996 year
dummy variable is omitted.




                                                                           48
Appendix A




    49
  Table A1: Testing Whether Pre-Program Eligibility Affected SOE Outcomes Independent of
                                       Autonomy




                                                       (1)                     (2)                    (3)                    (4)                   (5)
                                                                                                                                             ValueAddedPer
                                                     Sales               ValueAdded              NetProfits SalesPerEmployee
                                                                                                                                                Employee
                                                  (Rs.00,000)             (Rs.00,000)            (Rs.00,000)    (Rs.00,000)
                                                                                                                                               (Rs.00,000)


 1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year<1996)                  24,996                   6,849                  3,083                  0.763                   2.025
                                                    (23,161)                 (6,966)                (2,685)                (4.577)                 (1.471)
 1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year>1996)                  35,409                  19,157                 15,463                  8.771                   0.593
                                                    (58,177)                (28,337)               (10,441)                (22.60)                 (6.010)
1(SOEReceivedAutonomy)*1(Year<1996)                  49,824                20,610***               9,311***                 0.786                  0.897
                                                    (30,926)                (7,738)                 (3,001)                (6.332)                 (1.797)
1(SOEReceivedAutonomy)*1(Year>1996)                210,306***              104,165**               44,310***               61.37*                 17.29**
                                                    (78,837)                (42,767)               (15,906)                (32.72)                 (7.756)



                Controls                                                               FirmFE,NIC2digitXYearFE


          Observations                                3,342                   3,342                  3,342                  3,301                  3,264
           RSquared                                   0.864                   0.834                  0.732                   0.68                   0.77
     MeanofDependentVariable                         282,764                 99,628                 18,090                  58.56                  17.47
Notes:Standarderrorsclusteredatthefirmlevelinparentheses(***p<0.01,**p<0.05,*p<0.1).1(SOEReceivedAutonomy)*1(Year=1996)and1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=1996)arethe
omittedcategories.Salesperemployeeandprofitperemployeearetrimmedatthe1stand99thpercentile.




                                                                          50
 Table A2: SOEs in Five-Digit Sectors Where All Firms or No Firms Were Eligible Pre-Program



                                                    (1)                       (2)                       (3)                      (4)                      (5)
                                                                        ValueAdded                                      SalesPerEmployee           ValueAddedPer
                                            Sales(Rs.,00,000)                                   Profits(Rs.,00,000)
                                                                         (Rs.,00,000)                                        (Rs.00,000)          Employee(Rs.00,000)


1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year<1996)                 3,813                    3,794                      0.378                     3.039                    3.812*
                                                  (31,390)                 (10,870)                   (2,657)                   (2.648)                   (1.975)
1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year>1996)                82,204                    39,755*                   13,776                     49.25                    10.36***
                                                  (81,550)                 (20,128)                   (8,306)                   (40.15)                   (3.668)


              Controls                                                                   FirmFE,NIC2digitXYearFE

         SampleRestriction                                                            Onlysectorswithallornoeligiblefirms

            Observations                           1,781                     1,781                     1,781                     1,766                     1,755
   MeanofDependentVariable                        406,144                   121,622                   28,423                     59.75                     15.81
Notes:Standarderrorsclusteredatthefirmlevelinparentheses(***p<0.01,**p<0.05,*p<0.1).1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=1996)istheomittedcategory.Valueaddedperemployeeandsales
peremployeearetrimmedatthe1stand99thpercentile.




                                                                                 51
                             Table A3: Including Three-Digit Sector by Year Fixed Effects




                                                     (1)                        (2)                     (3)                    (4)              (5)
                                                                          ValueAdded                                   SalesPerEmployee  ValueAddedPer
                                              Sales(Rs.,00,000)                                Profits(Rs.,00,000)
                                                                           (Rs.,00,000)                                    (Rs.00,000)  Employee(Rs.00,000)


1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year<1996)                 12,685                     7,788                   3,522                    3.442                    1.322
                                                   (8,442)                   (4,803)                 (2,445)                  (6.843)                   (1.523)
1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year>1996)                104,337***                41,469**                  9,019                   53.21*                    10.47
                                                   (34,541)                  (16,676)                (5,586)                  (28.51)                   (7.114)


               Controls                                                                 FirmFE,NIC3digitXYearFE
            Observations                            3,342                     3,342                   3,342                    3,301                    3,264
              RSquared                              0.867                     0.840                    0.74                    0.75                     0.787
    MeanofDependentVariable                        282,764                    99628                   18,090                   58.56                    17.47
Notes:Standarderrorsclusteredatthefirmlevelinparentheses(***p<0.01,**p<0.05,*p<0.1).1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=1996)istheomittedcategory.Valueaddedperemployeeandsales
peremployeearetrimmedatthe1stand99thpercentile.




                                                                                52
   Table A4: Sample of Firms That Earned Positive Profits At Least Once Between 1992-2009



                                                    (1)                       (2)                       (3)                      (4)              (5)
                                                                        ValueAdded                                       SalesPerEmployee  ValueAddedPer
                                            Sales(Rs.,00,000)                                   Profits(Rs.,00,000)
                                                                         (Rs.,00,000)                                        (Rs.00,000)  Employee(Rs.00,000)


1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year<1996)                2,129                     4,929                      2,360                     1.122                     0.205
                                                  (16,149)                  (6,133)                   (2,219)                   (4.956)                   (0.942)
1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year>1996)                82,705*                  42,091**                   9,239*                     36.75                     3.521
                                                  (48,092)                 (16,497)                   (5,555)                   (27.44)                   (2.674)


              Controls                                                                   FirmFE,NIC2digitXYearFE

         SampleRestriction                                       OnlyFirmsThatEarnedPositiveProfitsAtLeastOnceBetween19922009

            Observations                           3,064                     3,064                     3,064                     3,023                     3,000
             RSquared                              0.863                     0.831                     0.727                     0.683                     0.747
   MeanofDependentVariable                        308,175                   108601                    20,314                     63.55                     4.352
Notes:Standarderrorsclusteredatthefirmlevelinparentheses(***p<0.01,**p<0.05,*p<0.1).1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=1996)istheomittedcategory.Valueaddedperemployeeandsales
peremployeearetrimmedatthe1stand99thpercentile.




                                                                                 53
                            Table A5: Generalized Difference-in-Difference Results


                                                       (1)                     (2)                     (3)                     (4)                   (5)
                                                                                                                                               ValueAddedPer
                                                      Sales               ValueAdded              NetProfits SalesPerEmployee
                 PanelA                                                                                                                           Employee
                                                   (Rs.00,000)             (Rs.00,000)            (Rs.00,000)    (Rs.00,000)
                                                                                                                                                 (Rs.00,000)


1(SOEReceivedAutonomy)*1(Year<Year
     BeforeAutonomyReceived)                         10,769                  10,178                  6,415                   10.000                  5.390
                                                     (27,773)                (13,380)                (6,522)                 (12.41)                 (3.460)
1(SOEReceivedAutonomy)*1(Year>Year
     BeforeAutonomyReceived)                        242,890***              113,436***              38,974***                88.41**                20.54**
                                                     (80,340)                (40,118)               (14,463)                 (42.16)                 (9.045)


                                                 FirmFE,NIC2digitXYearFE,1(Year<YearBeforeAutonomyReceived),1(Year>YearBeforeAutonomy
                 Controls
                                                                                      Received)


              Observations                            3,342                   3,342                   3,342                   3,301                  3,264
               RSquared                               0.864                   0.834                   0.731                   0.681                  0.774
      MeanofDependentVariable                        282,764                  99628                  18090                    58.56                 17.47
                                                                                                                                               ValueAddedPer
                                                      Sales               ValueAdded              NetProfits SalesPerEmployee
                 PanelB                                                                                                                           Employee
                                                   (Rs.00,000)             (Rs.00,000)            (Rs.00,000)    (Rs.00,000)
                                                                                                                                                 (Rs.00,000)

1(SOEReceivedAutonomy)*1(Year<Year
     BeforeAutonomyReceived)                         10,769                  10,178                  6,415                   10.000                  5.390
                                                     (27,773)                (13,380)                (6,522)                 (12.41)                 (3.460)
1(SOEReceivedAutonomy)*1(Year>Year
     BeforeAutonomyReceived)                        242,890***              113,436***              38,974***                88.41**                20.54**
                                                     (80,340)                (40,118)               (14,463)                 (42.16)                 (9.045)


                                                 FirmFE,NIC3digitXYearFE,1(Year<YearBeforeAutonomyReceived),1(Year>YearBeforeAutonomy
                 Controls
                                                                                      Received)

           Observations                               3,342                   3,342                   3,342                   3,301                  3,264
            RSquared                                  0.864                   0.834                   0.731                   0.681                  0.774
      MeanofDependentVariable                        282,764                 99,628                  18,090                   58.56                  17.47
Notes:Standarderrorsclusteredatthefirmlevelinparentheses(***p<0.01,**p<0.05,*p<0.1).1(SOEReceivedAutonomy)*1(Year=YearBeforeAutonomyReceived)and1(Year=YearBefore
AutonomyReceived)aretheomittedcategories.Salesperemployeeandprofitperemployeearetrimmedatthe1stand99thpercentile.




                                                                       54
Table A6: All Firms, Including Those That Began Reporting Data After 1992 or Stopped Before
                                            2002




                                                      (1)                           (2)                           (3)                         (4)
                                                                                                                                    SalesPerEmployee(Rs.
                                              Sales(Rs.,00,000)         ValueAdded(Rs.,00,000)           Profits(Rs.,00,000)
                                                                                                                                            00,000)


1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year<1996)                  12,221                        7,073                         3,065*                         1.701
                                                   (16,894)                       (4,837)                       (1,637)                       (4.980)
1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year>1996)                 79,725**                      37,125***                      8,601*                         41.14
                                                   (40,005)                      (14,079)                       (4,917)                       (25.20)


              Controls                                                              FirmFE,NIC2digitXYearFE
            Observations                             3,728                         3,728                         3,728                         3,686
             RSquared                                0.863                         0.832                         0.723                         0.674
   MeanofDependentVariable                        257,092                          91545                        16,447                         54.56
                                             ValueAddedPer
                                                                                 1(Entry)                       1(Exit)                  1(EntryorExit)
                                            Employee(Rs.00,000)


1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year<1996)                  2.709*                        0.00440                       0.0135                        0.0179
                                                    (1.453)                      (0.00862)                     (0.0142)                      (0.0167)
1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year>1996)                  9.355*                        0.00890                      0.00874                       0.000157
                                                    (5.289)                      (0.00948)                     (0.0171)                      (0.0196)


              Controls                                                              FirmFE,NIC2digitXYearFE
            Observations                             3,650                         3,728                         3,728                         3,728
             RSquared                                0.76                          0.209                         0.392                         0.382
   MeanofDependentVariable                           16.59                       0.000805                        0.02                          0.02
Notes:Standarderrorsclusteredatthefirmlevelinparentheses(***p<0.01,**p<0.05,*p<0.1).1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=1996)istheomittedcategory.Valueaddedperemployee
andsalesperemployeearetrimmedatthe1stand99thpercentile.Entryisabinaryvariablethattakesthevalue1ifthefirmstartedreportingdatathatyear(itis0forallfirmsinthe
firstyearofdata).Exitisabinaryvariablethattakesthevalue1ifthefirmstoppedreportingdatathatyear(itis0forallfirmsinthelastyearofdata).1(EntryorExit)isabinary
variablethattakesthevalue1ifthefirmstartedorstoppedreportingdatathatyear.




                                                                            55
                                  Table A7: Impact on Government Ownership


                                                                        (1)                                             (2)
                                                      ProportionofGovernmentEquity                    ProportionofGovernmentEquity
                                                   (ExcludingStateGovernmentHoldings)              (IncludingStateGovernmentHoldings)


   1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year<1996)                                0.00740*                                        0.00697
                                                                     (0.00430)                                      (0.00423)
   1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year>1996)                                0.00900                                         0.00764
                                                                     (0.00866)                                      (0.00938)


                   Controls                                                      FirmFE,NIC2digitXYearFE


                 Observations                                         2,871                                            2,871
                  RSquared                                            0.855                                            0.887
        MeanofDependentVariable                                        0.91                                             0.93
Notes:Standarderrorsclusteredatthefirmlevelinparentheses(***p<0.01,**p<0.05,*p<0.1).1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=1996)istheomittedcategory.




                                                                56
                                Table A8: Effects on Employment Composition



                                                               (1)                               (2)                               (3)
                                                 NumberofManageraland             NumberofNonManageral               NumberofNonPermanent
                                                  SupervisoryEmployees            andSupervisoryEmployees                  Employees


 1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year<1996)                          47.58                             160.1                             183.5
                                                            (137.1)                           (196.1)                           (234.4)
 1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year>1996)                          239.0                             1,516                             271.3
                                                            (283.2)                           (1,107)                           (349.8)


                 Controls                                                        FirmFE,NIC2digitXYearFE


               Observations                                  2,872                             2,872                             2,685
                RSquared                                     0.845                             0.959                             0.379
      MeanofDependentVariable                                1,853                             7,105                              543
Notes:Standarderrorsclusteredatthefirmlevelinparentheses(***p<0.01,**p<0.05,*p<0.1).1(EligiblePreProgram)*1(Year=1996)istheomittedcategory.




                                                                57
                                            Figure A1: Capital Assets (Rs. 00,000)
      300000
      200000
      100000
      0
      -100000




                1992 1993 1994 1995 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
                                                   Year
                Note: 90% CI Reported. 1996 is omitted year. Firm and NIC 2-digit X year fixed effects included.




This figure plots the interaction coefficients of the pre-program eligibility dummy variable with year dummy variables.
The interaction of pre-program eligibility with the 1996 year dummy variable is omitted.




                                                                            58
                                               Figure A2: Wage Bill (Rs. 00,000)




      40000
      30000
      20000
      10000
      0
      -10000




               1992 1993 1994 1995 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
                                                  Year
               Note: 90% CI Reported. 1996 is omitted year. Firm and NIC 2-digit X year fixed effects included.




This figure plots the interaction coefficients of the pre-program eligibility dummy variable with year dummy variables.
The interaction of pre-program eligibility with the 1996 year dummy variable is omitted.




                                              Figure A3: Number of Employees
      6000
      4000
      2000
      0
      -2000




               1992 1993 1994 1995 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
                                                  Year
               Note: 90% CI Reported. 1996 is omitted year. Firm and NIC 2-digit X year fixed effects included.




This figure plots the interaction coefficients of the pre-program eligibility dummy variable with year dummy variables.
The interaction of pre-program eligibility with the 1996 year dummy variable is omitted.
                                                                           59
                                         Figure A4: Retained Profits (Rs. 00,000)




      40000
      30000
      20000
      10000
      0
      -10000




               1992 1993 1994 1995 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
                                                  Year
               Note: 90% CI Reported. 1996 is omitted year. Firm and NIC 2-digit X year fixed effects included.




This figure plots the interaction coefficients of the pre-program eligibility dummy variable with year dummy variables.
The interaction of pre-program eligibility with the 1996 year dummy variable is omitted.




                                               Figure A5: Dividend (Rs. 00,000)
      15000
      10000
      5000
      0
      -5000




               1992 1993 1994 1995 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
                                                  Year
               Note: 90% CI Reported. 1996 is omitted year. Firm and NIC 2-digit X year fixed effects included.




This figure plots the interaction coefficients of the pre-program eligibility dummy variable with year dummy variables.
The interaction of pre-program eligibility with the 1996 year dummy variable is omitted.
                                                                           60
                                         Figure A6: Interest Payments (Rs. 00,000)




      20000
      10000
      0
      -10000




                1992 1993 1994 1995 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
                                                   Year
                Note: 90% CI Reported. 1996 is omitted year. Firm and NIC 2-digit X year fixed effects included.




This figure plots the interaction coefficients of the pre-program eligibility dummy variable with year dummy variables.
The interaction of pre-program eligibility with the 1996 year dummy variable is omitted.




                                              Figure A7: Total Loans (Rs. 00,000)
      200000
      100000
      0
      -100000
      -200000




                1994 1995 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
                                              Year
                Note: 90% CI Reported. 1996 is omitted year. Firm and NIC 2-digit X year fixed effects included.




This figure plots the interaction coefficients of the pre-program eligibility dummy variable with year dummy variables.
The interaction of pre-program eligibility with the 1996 year dummy variable is omitted.
                                                                            61
                                                Figure A8: Government Borrowing (Rs. 00,000)




      20000
      0
      -20000
      -40000
      -60000




                             1994 1995 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
                                                           Year
                             Note: 90% CI Reported. 1996 is omitted year. Firm and NIC 2-digit X year fixed effects included.




This figure plots the interaction coefficients of the pre-program eligibility dummy variable with year dummy variables.
The interaction of pre-program eligibility with the 1996 year dummy variable is omitted.




                                           Figure A9: Non-Government Borrowing (Rs. 00,000)
      100000 200000 300000
      0
      -200000 -100000




                             1994 1995 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
                                                           Year
                             Note: 90% CI Reported. 1996 is omitted year. Firm and NIC 2-digit X year fixed effects included.




This figure plots the interaction coefficients of the pre-program eligibility dummy variable with year dummy variables.
The interaction of pre-program eligibility with the 1996 year dummy variable is omitted.
                                                                                         62
       Appendix B: Details of the Autonomy Program Benefits Between 1997-2009


1. Capital Expenditure: Between 1997-2005, Mini-Ratna category-I enterprises could undertake

  capital expenditure on new projects, modernization or purchase of equipment without gov-

  ernment approval up to Rs. 3 billion, or equal to their net worth, whichever was lower. This

  expenditure was for each project, not each year (so a firm could undertake multiple projects

  each year). For Mini-Ratna category-II enterprises, this amount was Rs. 1.5 billion, or up to

  50% of their net worth. In 2005, these amounts were revised upward. Between 2005-2009,

  Mini-Ratna category-I enterprises could spend up to Rs. 5 billion per project, or up to their

  net worth, whichever was lower. Mini-Ratna category-II enterprises could spend up to Rs.

  2.5 billion per project, or up to 50% of their net worth, whichever was lower. Throughout

  this period, Navratna enterprises could undertake capital expenditure without any ceiling.

  They could also (unlike the Mini-ratna enterprises) establish offices abroad without the gov-

  ernment's permission.

2. Labor Restructuring: All firms with autonomy could implement initiatives around personnel

  training, and voluntary or compulsory retirement schemes to restructure their labor force.

  Navratna enteprises could additionally create and fill vacancies in the firm without any gov-

  ernment involvement, up to the level of the board of directors (not including the directors

  themselves).

3. Joint Ventures and Subsidiaries: Between 1997-2005, Mini-Ratna category-I enterprises could

  establish joint ventures and subsidiaries (in India) as long as the equity investment of the

  firm was capped at Rs. 1 billion or 5% of the firms net worth , whichever was lower. For

  Mini-Ratna category-II enterprises, this amount was Rs. 0.5 billion, or up to 5% of the firms

  net worth per project, whichever was lower. For Navratna enterprises, this amount was Rs.

  2 billion, or up to 5% of the firms net worth per project, whichever was lower. The total

  equity investment could not exceed 15% of the firms net worth across all joint ventures or

  subsidiaries in any firm with autonomy (regardless of the type of autonomy).

  In 2005, the cap on the value of these projects was increased - Mini-Ratna category-I enter-

  prises could now invest equity up to Rs. 5 billion or 15% of the firms net worth per project,


                                            63
  Mini-Ratna category-II enterprises could now invest equity up to Rs. 2.5 billion or 15% of

  the firms net worth per project, and Navratna enterprises could now invest equity up to

  Rs. 10 billion or 15% of the firms net worth per project. Across all types of autonomy, total

  investment in such ventures was capped at 30% of the firms net worth. In 2005, all firms

  with autonomy were also allowed to enter into mergers and acquisitions subject to the same

  value caps, and subject to these activties being in the SOE's core area of functioning.

4. All firms with autonomy were encouraged into strategic alliances such as technology joint

  ventures, though there were no specific guidelines around this.




                                             64
Appendix C: Online Data Appendix




               65
Variable                          Years Available    Frequency                  Source

                                                                   Financial Statements,
Net Profit                          1992-2009        Firm-year
                                                                   Dept. of Public Enterprises (DPE)

Sales                               1992-2009        Firm-year         Financial Statements, DPE

Value Added                         1992-2009        Firm-year         Financial Statements, DPE

Sales Per Employee                  1992-2009        Firm-year         Financial Statements, DPE

Value Added Per Employee            1992-2009        Firm-year         Financial Statements, DPE

Capital Assets                      1992-2009        Firm-year         Financial Statements, DPE

Wage Bill                           1992-2009        Firm-year         Financial Statements, DPE

Number of (Permanent) Employees     1992-2009        Firm-year         Financial Statements, DPE

Retained Profit                     1992-2009        Firm-year         Financial Statements, DPE

Dividends                           1992-2009        Firm-year         Financial Statements, DPE

Interest Payments                   1992-2009        Firm-year         Financial Statements, DPE

Total Loans                         1992-2009        Firm-year         Financial Statements, DPE

Government Loans                    1994-2009        Firm-year            DPE Annual Report

Non-Government Loans                1994-2009        Firm-year            DPE Annual Report

 Number of Managerial
                                    1994-2009        Firm-year            DPE Annual Report
 and Supervisory Employees

 Number of non-Managerial
                                    1994-2009        Firm-year            DPE Annual Report
 and Supervisory Employees

 No. of Non-Permanent
                                    1994-2009        Firm-year            DPE Annual Report
 Workers

Pre-Program Eligibility             1992-2009          Firm      Constructed from Financial Statements

Autonomy Status                     1992-2009        Firm-year            DPE Annual Report

Government Equity Holdings          1994-2009        Firm-year            DPE Annual Report



                                                66
Variable                               Years Available      Frequency                   Source

 Participation in Joint                                                     Center for Monitoring the Indian
                                          1992-2009         Firm-year
 Venture/Subsidiary                                                         Economy/ DPE Annual Report

Sector Codes                              1992-2009         Firm-year                    CMIE

Private Sector Profit                     1992-2009         Firm-year                    CMIE

Private Sector Value Added                1992-2009         Firm-year                    CMIE

Private Sector Sales                      1992-2009            Firm                      CMIE

SOE Board of Director Names               2003-2010       Director-level                 CMIE

Private Firm Board of Director Names      2003-2010       Director-level                 CMIE

SOE State-level Employment                1999-2009       Firm-state-year         DPE Annual Report

Compensation Schedule                       2005               Firm               DPE Annual Report

Costs of Production                       1992-2009         Firm-year          Financial Statements, DPE

 Standard Deviation of Profits,                                                Calculated from Financial
                                       1996, 2001, 2006     Firm-year
 Sales, and Value Added                                                        Statements, DPE

State Election Timing                     1992-2009         State-Year       Election Commission of India




                                                   67
