                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           LABOR MARKET TRENDS AND THE CHANGING VALUE OF TIME

                                          Job Boerma
                                      Loukas Karabarbounis

                                       Working Paper 26301
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26301


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26301.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Job Boerma and Loukas Karabarbounis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Labor Market Trends and the Changing Value of Time
Job Boerma and Loukas Karabarbounis
NBER Working Paper No. 26301
September 2019
JEL No. D10,E21,J22

                                         ABSTRACT

During the past two decades, households experienced increases in their average wages and
expenditures alongside with divergent trends in their wages, expenditures, and time allocation.
We develop a model with incomplete asset markets and household heterogeneity in market and
home technologies and preferences to account for these labor market trends and assess their
welfare consequences. Using micro data on expenditures and time use, we identify the sources of
heterogeneity across households, document how these sources have changed over time, and
perform counterfactual analyses. Given the observed increase in leisure expenditures relative to
leisure time and the complementarity of these inputs in leisure technology, we infer a significant
increase in the average productivity of time spent on leisure. The increasing productivity of
leisure time generates significant welfare gains for the average household and moderates negative
welfare effects from the rising dispersion of expenditures and time allocation across households.


Job Boerma
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
United States
boerm002@umn.edu

Loukas Karabarbounis
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
Hanson Hall
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
loukas@umn.edu
1         Introduction

Wages and expenditures increased substantially for the average household during the past two
decades. At the same time, these gains were not distributed equally across households.1 The

purpose of this paper is to develop a tractable framework that accounts quantitatively for both
average and divergent trends in labor market outcomes and that allows us to assess the welfare
consequences of the drivers that underlie these trends.

        Our framework is a general equilibrium model with incomplete asset markets and household
heterogeneity in market and home technologies and preferences. Households have access to var-

ious home technologies that, following Ghez and Becker (1975), combine expenditures and time

as inputs to produce final consumption goods. In the home sector, households are heterogeneous

with respect to their preferences across goods and their productivity of time. Home production is

not tradeable and storable, meaning that in every instance home production must be consumed,

and not insurable, meaning there are no assets that households can purchase to explicitly insure

against differences that originate in the home sector. In the market sector, households are also het-

erogeneous with respect to their productivity. Following the approach of Heathcote, Storesletten,

and Violante (2014), the structure of asset markets allows households to insure against transitory

shocks in their market productivity but not against permanent productivity differences.

        We apply our framework to married households surveyed by the Consumer Expenditure Survey

(CEX) and the American Time Use Survey (ATUS) between 1995 and 2016. We split the home
sector into a non-market sector in which expenditures and time are substitutes in production
and a leisure sector in which expenditures and time are complements in production. The non-

market sector includes expenditures such as food and household services and time uses such as
housework and child care. The leisure sector includes expenditures such as telecommunication
and entertainment and time uses such as television watching and other recreational activities.

        A major advantage of the framework is the transparency and generality of the identification of
    1
    A large literature has documented the rise of the dispersion of wages, expenditures, and time allocation
across households. For example, Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2008), Heathcote, Perri, and Violante (2010), and
Attanasio, Hurst, and Pistaferri (2015) discuss several empirical facts underlying the evolution of heterogeneity in
labor market outcomes.




                                                         1
the sources of heterogeneity across households. The model retains tractability because it features
a no-trade result with respect to certain assets. Therefore, we can characterize the allocations
of expenditures and time across sectors in closed form. Following the same approach as in our

earlier work (Boerma and Karabarbounis, 2019), we use the analytical solutions to invert the
equilibrium allocations and identify the sources of heterogeneity across households that perfectly
account for the household-level data in any given point of time. Our exercise is to then shut

off particular aspects of the evolution of the sources of heterogeneity over time. This allows
us to assess the drivers of trends in sectoral expenditures and time allocation for the average
household, the drivers of trends in the dispersion of sectoral expenditures and time allocation

across households, and the welfare consequences of these trends.

   We reach two main conclusions regarding the sources of heterogeneity that characterize house-

holds and their evolution of time. First, we infer that mean productivity of leisure time more

than doubles between the beginning and the end of the sample. The key feature of the data

leading to this inference is the dramatic increase in leisure expenditures relative to leisure time

for the average household. The increase in expenditures relative to time is larger than the one

predicted only by the decline in the relative price of leisure goods. Given that expenditures and

time are complements in the production of leisure goods, we infer that the productivity of leisure

time must have been increasing.

   Second, the dispersion of the productivity of non-market and leisure time is larger than the
dispersion of market productivity across households. Our inference of large uninsurable differences

in home productivity follows from the observation that in the cross-section of households time
spent either on the non-market or the leisure sector is weakly correlated with sectoral expenditures
and market productivity. As a result, home productivity needs to be significantly dispersed in

order to rationalize the variation of these three observables. We document that the dispersion
of the productivity of time inputs in home production has increased, paralleling the well-known
increase in the dispersion of market productivity (wages) over time.

   Our counterfactual analyses demonstrate the importance of market and home productivity and
prices for the evolution of mean expenditures and market hours. Given the relative stability of



                                                 2
market hours over time, the increase in mean market productivity accounts for most of the increase
in mean expenditures over time. The increase in the relative price of non-market goods induces
households to substitute away from non-market expenditures toward non-market time and the

decline in the relative price of leisure goods induces households to complement leisure expenditures
with rising leisure time. Changes in relative prices generate roughly 11 log points decline in market
hours, with the majority of this decline accounted for by the increase in the relative price of non-

market goods. This decline is offset by the rise of market and leisure productivities, which induce
households to reallocate hours in the market sector.
       To assess the welfare effects of trends in labor market outcomes, we calculate consumption

equivalent changes that arise from changes in mean consumption and changes in the dispersion of

consumption across households. By consumption we mean the final aggregator of the production

process that involves aggregating sectoral goods produced with expenditures and time. A novel

finding of our paper is to demonstrate that the rise of mean leisure productivity is quantitatively

the most important driver of welfare changes over time. The increase in mean leisure productivity

generates more than 30 log points increase in mean consumption over time, whereas the increase

in mean market productivity generates less than 10 log points increase. At the same time, the

increase in mean leisure productivity, which affects all households equally, moderates the rise of

consumption dispersion across households induced by changes in the variance of market and home

productivities over time. The contribution of mean leisure productivity to welfare through the
dispersion channel is roughly 10 log points of the consumption equivalent.

       It is important to contrast our approach of assessing welfare effects through an equilibrium
model to more descriptive approaches on the evolution of the dispersion of expenditures and time
inputs.2 Similar to the distinction emphasized by Aguiar and Hurst (2005), in developing our
   2
    For example, Krueger and Perri (2006) and Aguiar and Bils (2015) measure the evolution of dispersion of
expenditures over time, Aguiar and Hurst (2007b) document the rise of leisure inequality between the 1965
and the early 2000s, and Attanasio, Hurst, and Pistaferri (2015) and Han, Meyer, and Sullivan (2018) provide
statistics of the evolution of dispersion of expenditures jointly with dispersion of time use. In their study of
increasing inequality, Krueger and Perri (2003) conduct welfare experiments by essentially varying allocations
that enter directly into the utility function. The difference with our approach is that we develop an equilibrium
model that solves for arguments of the utility function as a function of more primitive productivity shifters,
preference shifters, and policy parameters and, therefore, our counterfactuals account for equilibrium responses
when conducting welfare analyses.




                                                       3
welfare metric we distinguish between expenditures that serve as an input in the production of
final goods and consumption which is the result of a production process involving expenditures,
time, and productivity. This distinction matters for our conclusions. For example, we find that the

increase in the variance of the permanent component of market productivity is the most important
factor accounting for the increase in the dispersion of total expenditures over time. However, this
factor contributes significantly less to the welfare costs of dispersion once we recognize that these

welfare costs are linked more closely to the consumption aggregator than to total expenditures.
   We examine trends in labor market outcomes through the lens of a structural model, comple-
menting earlier attempts to measure welfare effects from changes in the dispersion of observables.

Attanasio and Davis (1996) is an early study that links the divergence of group wages to the diver-

gence of group expenditures and argues that this departure from full insurance carries significant

welfare costs. Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2013) discuss the merits of structural ap-

proaches relative to statistical approaches when calculating welfare effects and estimate that, in

response to the observed changes in the structure of wages, the welfare gains in terms of average

consumption and leisure dominate the losses arising from increased dispersion. Relative to these

papers, our paper incorporates multiple time uses and highlights the primary role of changes in

leisure productivity in terms of understanding the welfare effects of recent labor market trends.

   An emerging literature examines the role of shifts originating in the leisure sector for labor

supply trends. Vandenbroucke (2009) adopts a quantitative Beckerian framework to study the
driving forces behind the decline in working hours and their increased concentration over the first

half of the 20th century. Accounting for the decline in market hours, he finds a primary role
for increasing skilled wages and a limited role for the declining price of leisure goods. Bridgman
(2016) develops a model with non-separable preferences that is able to accommodate the rise of

average leisure and leisure inequality during the second half of the 20th century and Boppart and
Ngai (2019) lay out conditions under which these trends are consistent with a balanced growth
path. Like these papers, we are also interested in accounting for the evolution of the allocation

of time. An important point of departure from this literature is that we incorporate micro-level
data into our analysis of the heterogeneity in labor market trends across households.



                                                 4
        Closest to our conclusions, Aguiar, Bils, Charles, and Hurst (2018) infer a significant increase
in the technological progress of recreational time of young men. Their inference comes from
the observed increase in recreational computer time in excess of the predicted increase along a

leisure demand system. Similar to them, we find a significant increase in leisure productivity over
time. Under our maintained assumption that expenditures and time are complements in leisure
technology, our inference comes from the observed increase in leisure expenditures relative to time

in excess of the increase predicted by the decline in the relative price of leisure goods. Aguiar,
Bils, Charles, and Hurst (2018) do not map changes in leisure productivity to changes in welfare,
whereas we uncover significant welfare effects from the rise of mean leisure productivity reflecting

both an increase in average consumption and a moderation of consumption inequality.


2         Model

Our model of time allocation and expenditures is Beckerian (Becker, 1965; Ghez and Becker,

1975) in the sense that expenditures and time combine as inputs to produce final utility. We

embed the Beckerian household production model into the tractable framework of incomplete

asset markets and household heterogeneity developed by Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante

(2014).3 We first present the model and characterize its equilibrium in closed form. We then

show how to infer the sources of heterogeneity across households such that the model accounts

perfectly for cross-sectional data on sectoral expenditures and the allocation of time.

2.1        Environment

Demographics. The economy features perpetual youth demographics. We denote by t the
calendar year and by j the birth year of a household. Households face a constant probability of
survival  in each period. Each period a cohort of mass 1 -  is born, keeping the population size

constant with a mass of one.
    3
     In Boerma and Karabarbounis (2019) we also extended the framework of Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante
(2014) to a model with home production. The difference is that here we use the Beckerian framework in which
expenditures and time are inputs in the production of goods that enter directly into utility whereas in Boerma
and Karabarbounis (2019) time spent working at the market and at home enters directly into utility as in Gronau
(1986). While the two versions of the household production model share many predictions, in this paper we prefer
the former because it allows us to model more directly changes in the price of leisure expenditures and returns to
leisure time.


                                                        5
Household Technologies. Vector c collects goods, x collects (real) expenditure inputs, and h
collects time inputs. We denote the market good by cM and home produced goods by cK where K
indexes different home goods. The difference between market and home goods is that the former

are intensive in expenditures and do not use time as an input, cM = xM , whereas the latter use
both expenditures and time to produce output, cK = cK (xK , hK ).
   A household's technology in the market sector is characterized by its pre-tax earnings y =

zM hM , where zM denotes exogenous market productivity (wage) that varies across households
and hM denotes hours worked in the market sector. A household's after-tax earnings are given
                1-1
   ~ = (1 - 0 )zM
by y                hM , where parameter 0 governs the level and parameter 1 governs the

progressivity of the tax system. A higher 1 introduces more progressivity into the tax system as

it compresses after-tax earnings relative to pre-tax earnings.

   Home goods cK are produced by combining expenditures xK and time hK inputs according

to CES aggregators:
                                     K
          K -1                K -1   K -1
          K
 cK =    xK      + (zK hK )   K
                                            ,                                                             (1)

where parameter K  0 denotes the elasticity of substitution between expenditures and time

in the K th home production technology and zK denotes exogenous productivity of time use K

(relative to expenditures) that varies across households. Home goods are consumed every period

and cannot be stored or traded in a market. Households are endowed with one unit of time,

hM +     hK = 1.
                                                                                 
Household Preferences. Households order sequences of goods by Ej                       ( )t-j U (ct ), where 
                                                                                 t=j
is the discount factor and c denotes a CES aggregator of goods. The period utility function is:
                                                                            
                                                                    K -1    -1
                    -1                  K -1                 K -1   K -1 
                                        K
 U (c) = log M xM +              K     xK       + (zK hK )   K
                                                                                 ,                        (2)

where parameter   0 denotes the elasticity of substitution across goods and M and K govern
preferences for goods that vary across households. We normalize the preference shifters such that

M +      K = 1 for each household and henceforth carry over in our notation only the K 's.

Sources of Heterogeneity. Households are heterogeneous with respect to their market pro-

                                                      6
ductivity zM , home productivities zK , and preferences over goods K . Following Heathcote,
Storesletten, and Violante (2014), we impose a random walk structure for market productivity
that is important for obtaining the no-trade result underlying the analytical solutions. House-

holds' log market productivity log zM is the sum of a permanent component  and a more tran-
sitory component :
      j     j
 log zM,t = t + j
                t .                                                                              (3)
                                               j   j      
The permanent component follows a random walk, t = t -1 + t . The more transitory com-

ponent, j   j                                                  j   j     
        t = t + t , equals the sum of a random walk component, t = t-1 + t , and an
            . For any random walk, we use  to denote innovations and  to denote distribu-
innovation t                                                         t

tions of innovations. We allow distributions of innovations to vary over time t.

    Given the log preferences in equation (2), we are able to obtain the no-trade result with

minimal structure on the processes that govern productivity and preferences in the home sectors.
                            j
Home productivities follow zK,t  j                            j    j
                                 zK ,t and preferences follow K,t  K ,t , where again we
                                                         j       j
allow distributions to vary over time t. We assume that zK,t and K,t are orthogonal to the
              ,   ,   } and that all innovations are drawn independently from each other. The
innovations {t  t   t
                                       j      j     j j
distribution of initial conditions of (K,j , zK,j , j , j ) can be non-degenerate across households

born at j and can vary by birth year j . From now on, we identify a household  by a sequence
  j   j
{zK , K , j , j ,   }.

Asset Markets. We describe restrictions on asset markets using the definition of an island in
the spirit of Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2014). Islands capture insurance mechanisms

available to households for smoothing more transitory shocks in the market sector. Households are

partitioned into islands, with each island consisting of a continuum of households that are identical
in terms of their productivity at home zK , preferences K , permanent component of market
                                                                            j   j
productivity , and the initial condition of . More formally, household  = {zK , K , j , j ,   }
                                                                  j     j     j j
lives on island      consisting of 's with common initial state (zK,j , K,j , j , j ) and sequences
  j     j     j 
{zK,t , K,t , t }t=j +1 .

    The structure of asset markets is as follows. Households cannot trade assets contingent on
 j       j
zK,t and K,t , but can trade one-period bonds b (sj
                                                  t+1 ) that pay one unit of market consumption

                                                  7
contingent on sj   j j 
               t  (t , t , t ) with households that live on their island . Across islands, house-
                                                j
holds can trade economy-wide one-period bonds a(t +1 ) that pay one unit of market consumption
              j
contingent on t  (j   
                  t , t ).

      As we discuss more formally below, differences in (zK , K , ) across households remain unin-
                                                j
surable by the no-trade result that generates a(t +1 ) = 0 in equilibrium. The more transitory

component of productivity j
                          t becomes fully insurable because households on an island are only
                              j                                         j
heterogeneous with respect to t and can trade state-contingent bonds b (t +1 ). As a result,

the island structure generates partial insurance with respect to market productivity differences.
Anticipating these results, henceforth we call  the uninsurable permanent component of market

productivity and  =  +   the insurable transitory component of market productivity.4

Household Optimization. We now describe the optimization problem of a particular house-

hold  born in period j . The household chooses {ct , xt , ht , b (sj        j     
                                                                   t+1 ), a(t+1 )}t=j to maximize the

expected value of discounted flows of utilities in equation (2), subject to the home production

technologies in equation (1), the time endowment hM +                         hK = 1, and the sequential budget

constraints:


 xM,t +        pK,t xK,t +          qb (sj        j      j
                                         t+1 )b (st+1 )dst+1 +
                                                                            j
                                                                        qa (t       j     j
                                                                                                ~t
                                                                              +1 )a(t+1 )dt+1 = y
                                                                                                  j
                                                                                                    + b (sj      j
                                                                                                          t )+ a(t ) .
                             sj
                              t+1
                                                                 j
                                                                 t +1

                                                                                                                  (4)

The market good xM is the numeraire good with a price of one in all periods. Denoting by pK the

price of good xK relative to market good, the left-hand side of the budget constraint equals total
expenditures on goods (px)t = xM,t +                pK,t xK,t , island-level bonds b (sj                    j
                                                                                       t+1 ) at prices qb (st+1 ),
                         j                    j
and economy-wide bonds a(t +1 ) at prices qa (t+1 ). The right-hand side of the budget constraint
                                     j
consists of after-tax labor income y
                                   ~t  and bond payouts.

Government. The government taxes labor income to finance public expenditures G. Its budget
constraint is G =        zM,t () - (1 - 0 )zM,t ()1-1 hM,t ()d(), where  denotes the distribution

function of households.
  4
    The framework accommodates implicit insurance against  differences because households can substitute
expenditures and time across sectors. Apart from explicit asset markets, some examples of mechanisms that
insure  shocks include family and government transfers.


                                                           8
Production. Aggregate production is given by Y =                  zM ()hM ()d().         The markets for labor
and goods are perfectly competitive and the wage per efficiency unit of labor is one. Production
Y is transformed at a rate of one into market goods,               xM ()d()       + G, and at rates A- 1
                                                                                                     K into

expenditures of home goods xK . Therefore, relative prices equal pK = A- 1
                                                                       K .


Equilibrium. Given a tax function (0 , 1 ), an equilibrium consists of a sequence of allocations

{ct , xt , ht , b (sj        j                                                  j                j
                    t+1 ), a(t+1 )},t and a sequence of prices {pK,t }t , {qb (st+1 )} ,t , {qa (t+1 )}t such that:

(i) the allocations solve households' problems; (ii) asset markets clear:

         b (sj                  j
             t+1 ; )d() = 0  , st+1 ,        and            j
                                                          a(t               j
                                                              +1 ; )d() = 0 t+1 ;                               (5)
                                                       

(iii) goods market clears:

         xM,t () +     pK,t xK,t () d() + G =             zM,t ()hM,t ()d(),                                    (6)
                                                       

(iv) the government budget constraint holds G =                  zM,t () - (1 - 0 )zM,t ()1-1 hM,t ()d(),

and (v) relative prices are pinned down by the relative efficiency of transforming production

pK,t = A- 1 5
        K,t .


2.2       Equilibrium Allocations

The model retains tractability because it features a no-trade result. This section explains the logic

and usefulness of this result and Appendix A presents the proof. Our proof follows closely the

proof presented by Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2014) in an incomplete markets model

with labor supply and further extended by Boerma and Karabarbounis (2019) to an incomplete
markets model with multiple time uses.
                                                                                             j
       We begin by guessing that the equilibrium features no trade across islands, that is a(t +1 ; ) =
     j
0, , t +1 . Further, we postulate that an equilibrium allocation {ct (), xt (), ht ()} solves a se-

quence of static planning problems. The planner problems consist of maximizing average utility
                                             j
within each island,      j
                         t   U (ct (); ) dt (t ), subject to households' home production technologies
   5
    We allow relative prices pK,t to vary over time. For the no-trade theorem, we do not need to impose restrictions
on the stochastic processes of AK,t . Henceforth, we treat the prices pK,t as exogenous with the understanding that
there is a unique mapping from sectoral productivity to prices pK,t = A-      1
                                                                            K,t that we could use to rationalize any
path of prices we observe in the data. We also note that productivity changes in the market sector are implicitly
subsumed into a common time component of zM,t across households.

                                                          9
in equation (1), households' time endowment hM,t () +                    hK,t () = 1, and the island-level re-
                                                           j                        j
source constraint     j
                      t   xM,t () +       pK,t xK,t () dt (t )=        j
                                                                       t   ~t ()dt (t
                                                                           y          ). We verify our guess by
demonstrating that, at the postulated allocations, households solve their optimization problems

and all asset and goods markets clear.
       To understand the no-trade result, we observe that households on each island have the same
marginal utility of market consumption because they are identical in terms of (zK , K , ) and

trade in state-contingent bonds allows them to perfectly insure against (,   ). The island-level
marginal utility of market consumption µ( ) in the no-trade equilibrium is:

                            1                          1                1
 µ( ) =                                         =            =                   ,                                (7)
             xM +      p K xK + z
                                ~M        hK         z
                                                     ~M d( )   exp ((1 - 1 ))) C

where for simplicity we have dropped the time subscript from all variables and the constant

C=        (1 - 0 ) exp ((1 - 1 )()) d( )       does not depend on and is common across all households.
                                                                                j
The no-trade result states that households do not trade bonds across islands, a(t +1 ) = 0. Given

the random walk assumption on , equation (7) implies that the growth in marginal utility,
                                                 j     j     j
µt+1 /µt , does not depend on the state vector (zK,t , K,t , t ) that differentiates islands . As a

result, all households value bonds traded across islands identically in equilibrium and hence there
                                      j      6
are no mutual benefits from trading a(t +1 ).

       Solutions to standard general equilibrium models with uninsurable risk and self-insurance via

a risk-free bond, such as Huggett (1993) and Aiyagari (1994), are obtained numerically. While
                                                                                 j
the present model also allows households to trade a risk-free bond (by setting a(t ) = 1 for all
       j
states t ), the assumptions on asset markets, stochastic processes, and preferences allow us to

characterize equilibrium allocations in closed form without solving simultaneously for the wealth
distribution. Dropping the time index for notational simplicity, we summarize the equilibrium
   6
    For this result we note the importance of log preferences with respect to the consumption aggregator. Log
preferences generate a separability between the marginal utility of market consumption and zK and K and, thus,
the no-trade result holds irrespective of the value of the elasticity of substitution across sectors , the elasticity
of substitution within sector K , and further stochastic properties of zK and K . In Boerma and Karabarbounis
(2019) we show that the no-trade result holds in the Gronau (1986) version of the home production model when
the disutility of total hours enter additively into the utility function and sectoral hours are perfect substitutes in
the disutility.




                                                         10
allocations in equations (8)-(11):

                                                        1
 xM = exp ((1 - 1 ))) C                                                       -1     ,                                  (8)
                                          K  1-                 zK pK K -1    K -1
                               1+         M pK          1+       z
                                                                 ~M
                                                                          -K
                                            K           zK pK K -1
                                    p-                                    K -1
                                     K      M      1+    z
                                                         ~M
  xK = exp ((1 - 1 ))) C                                                      -1     ,                                  (9)
                                          K  1-                 zK pK K -1    K -1
                               1+         M pK          1+       z
                                                                 ~M
                                                                                         -K
                                   pK K K -1 -      K                   zK pK K -1       K -1
                                   z
                                   ~M  zK pK        M            1+      z
                                                                         ~M
 hK = exp ((1 - 1 ))) C                                                            -1           ,                      (10)
                                            K                         zK pK K -1   K -1
                                   1+       M  pK 1-            1+     z
                                                                       ~M

 hM = 1 -         hK ,                                                                                                 (11)

where all allocations and sources of heterogeneity (zK , K , , ) are household-specific, prices pK

are common across households, and the constant C =                    (1 - 0 ) exp ((1 - 1 )()) d( )           is common

across households.

   Starting with expenditures in equations (8) and (9), we first note that, holding constant
                            zK
relative productivities     ~M ,
                            z      an increase in the permanent uninsurable component  of market

productivity increases both xM and xK because all goods are normal. Holding constant relative
                 zK
productivities   ~M ,
                 z      expenditures do not depend on the transitory component of market produc-

tivity  because state-contingent assets insure against variation in .

   Dividing equation (9) with equation (8) sheds light on the allocation of expenditures across

sectors:
                                                   -K
                                            K -1   K -1
 xK              K                  zK pK
    = p-
       K
         
                            1+                              .                                                          (12)
 xM              M                   z
                                     ~M
                                                                                                    zK
An increase in home productivity relative to the opportunity cost of time,                          ~M ,
                                                                                                    z      has two effects

on the allocation of expenditures. First, it makes good cK cheaper to produce relative to good

cM , which tends to increase xK relative to xM . This effect is parameterized by the elasticity of
substitution across goods . Second, it makes input xK more expensive relative to input hK in

the production of good cK , which tends to decrease xK . This effect is parameterized by the home
                                                                                            xK                         zK
production elasticity K . When  > K , the first effect dominates and                        xM      is increasing in   ~M .
                                                                                                                       z

By contrast, the effect of an increase in the price pK is unambiguously negative because both the

                                                        11
substitution away from good cK toward good cM and the substitution away from expenditures
xK toward time hK work in the same direction.7

        For the allocation of time relative to spending, we use equations (9) and (10) to obtain:
                        K
    hK           pK           K -1
       =                     zK    .                                                                                     (13)
    xK           z
                 ~M

The first term shows that an increase in the price of expenditures pK relative to the opportunity
cost of time z
             ~M unambiguously increases time relative to expenditures in the production of good
cK . The second term shows that an increase in the relative productivity of time zK increases

time relative to expenditures when the two inputs are substitutes (K > 1).

2.3         Identification of Sources of Heterogeneity

Building on the methodology introduced by Boerma and Karabarbounis (2019), in this section

we infer the sources of heterogeneity across households, {zK , K , , } , such that the model

accounts perfectly for any given cross-sectional data {xM , xK , hM , hK , zM } in any period. Given

parameters (, K , 0 , 1 ), prices pK , and cross-sectional data {xM , xK , hM , hK , zM } , we invert

the equilibrium allocations presented in equations (8)-(11) and the decomposition of market

productivity into a permanent and transitory component, log zM =  + , to obtain unique

inferred sources of heterogeneity up to a constant (see Appendix B for more details):
                          1                     K
                 xK     1-K
                                      z
                                      ~M        K -1
    zK =                                               ,                                                                 (14)
                 hK                   pK
                                                 1
    M =                                                             1 K -
                                                                            ,                                            (15)
                                          1
                              xK                       zK pK K -1    K -1
                1+      pK    xM
                                          
                                               1+       z
                                                        ~M
                                                               1 K -
                                  1
                        xK                       zK pK K -1     K -1
                  pK    xM
                                  
                                        1+        z
                                                  ~M
    K =                                                             1 K -
                                                                            ,                                            (16)
                                          1
                              xK                       zK pK K -1    K -1
                1+      pK    xM
                                          
                                               1+       z
                                                        ~M
               1
        =           log(xM +     p K xK + z
                                          ~M     hK ) - log C ,                                                          (17)
            1 - 1
                        1
          = log zM -        log(xM +      p K xK + z
                                                   ~M      hK ) - log C .                                                (18)
                      1 - 1
    7                        xK
        The elasticity of    xM       with respect to pK is a weighted average of the two substitution elasticities and equals
                                  zK pK       K -1
            1                      z
                                   ~M
-        zK pK   K -1   -          zK pK       K -1   K .
    1+    z
          ~M                 1+     z
                                    ~M




                                                                       12
    The solution for zK in equation (14) comes from inverting equation (13) for the optimal allo-
cation of expenditures and time inputs in the production of good K . Intuitively, when household
expenditures xK increase relative to the time input hK and the two inputs are complements in

production (K < 1), it must be that household's time becomes more productive in the produc-
tion of good K . Given an inferred zK , equations (15) and (16) show how relative preferences
for goods are pinned down by relative expenditures, prices, and productivities. Up to a constant

which is common across households in a given period, the permanent component of log market
productivity  in equation (17) equals the market value of total consumption which consists of
the sum of expenditures px = xM +        pK xK and the market value of time allocated to home

production z
           ~M     hK . Finally, the transitory component of market productivity  equals the gap

between log market productivity and its permanent component.


3     Data

For our baseline analyses we combine data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX), the

American Time Use Survey (ATUS), and the national income and product accounts (NIPA). We

consider married and cohabiting households with heads between 25 and 65 years old who are

not students. We drop observations with market productivity below 3 dollars per hour in 2010

dollars, with market productivity above 300 dollars but working less than 20 hours per week, with

expenditures at the top and bottom one percent, and with more than 105 reported hours per week

in any of the time use categories we consider. In the ATUS we drop respondents during weekends
and in the CEX we keep households that completed all four interviews. The final sample from

CEX/ATUS contains 34,775 households between 1995 and 2016. In all our results, we weight
households with the sample weights provided by the surveys.
    For our quantitative results, we specialize the general model with K + 1 goods to three goods.

The market good cM = xM is produced only with expenditures. The non-market good cN is
produced with non-market time hN and non-market expenditures xN . Finally, the leisure good
cL is produced with leisure time hL and leisure expenditures xL .

    Data on expenditures come from CEX interview surveys. Our definition of expenditures is


                                                13
closest to the one in Krueger and Perri (2006). It covers both expenditures on non-durables and
expenditures on durables such as housing, vehicles, and furniture. Our measure of consumption
reflects the flow of services in a given period. For housing services we use rent paid if the household

rents and a self-reported imputed rent for households that own. For services generated by vehicles
and furnishings, we use the imputation approach of Cutler and Katz (1991) since there is no direct
information on the value of the stock of vehicles and furniture.8

       We split total expenditures px between market expenditures xM , non-market expenditures
pN xN , and leisure expenditures pL xL by mapping expenditures in 20 spending categories from
the CEX to our three baskets. The logic underpinning our choice is to classify expenditures

complementary to time as leisure (such as communication, entertainment, and reading), expen-

ditures substitutable to time as non-market production (such as food, household services, and

personal care), and expenditures that do not use a significant amount of time in the production

of commodities as market goods.9

       To obtain quantities xM , xN , and xL , we deflate expenditures in each category with their

corresponding price index. We construct the Fisher price index for each basket using the price

indices and aggregate spending for the 20 CEX spending categories as provided in NIPA Table

2.5.10 For durable goods, we create corresponding price and spending series using user costs.11
       From the CEX, we measure income as wage and salary income earned over the past 12 months

and wages as income divided by hours usually worked in a year (the product of weeks worked with
   8
      For households that report spending on vehicles or furniture, we regress their durables spending on a quadratic
in household expenditures (excluding vehicles and furniture), income, age, sex, and education of the household
head. The imputed expenditure of vehicles or furniture is the predicted value of spending from this regression
multiplied by the user cost of each durable (for vehicles we also multiply by the number of vehicles owned).
    9
      Market expenditures xM include clothing and footwear, utilities and fuels, health, vehicles, public transport,
motor vehicle operations, education, insurance, tobacco, and professional services. Non-market expenditures pN xN
include food and beverages (home and away), household services, and personal care. Leisure expenditures pL xL
include communication, entertainment, reading, and personal items. Housing, furniture and household equipment
are allocated proportional to the expenditure shares of the three types of goods.
   10
      Table 2.5.4 provides the price indices and Table 2.5.5 gives the corresponding aggregate spending levels. To
illustrate our approach, we use the price index for communication in Table 2.5.4 as the price for the CEX category
communication. In constructing the price index for leisure goods, we weight the price index for communication by
aggregate spending on communication as documented in Table 2.5.5.
   11
      To calculate the user cost for durable consumption goods we use the price index for the spending category
from Table 2.5, the interest rate on the five-year constant maturity Treasury for the cost of capital, and NIPA fixed
assets accounts to construct the depreciation rate. We calculate the depreciation rate as current-cost depreciation
over the current-cost net stock plus half of investments using Tables 8.1, 8.4, and 8.7.




                                                         14
usual hours worked per week). Because we focus on married or cohabiting households, we define
household market hours hM as the sum of hours worked by spouses and market productivity zM
as the average of wages of individual members weighted by their market hours.

       The market good is the numeraire good and we deflate the price of non-market goods pN , the
price of leisure goods pL , and market productivity zM with the price index for market goods. For
consistency with the model in which aggregate expenditures                 xM,t () +      pK,t xK,t () d()+ G

equal aggregate income          zM,t ()hM,t ()d(), for each household in the CEX we scale their
quantities by a time-varying factor that aligns aggregate expenditures with aggregate income
reported in the survey.

       Data for non-market hours hN come from the ATUS waves between 2003 and 2017. Our defini-

tion of time spent on non-market production follows the one in Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis

(2013) and includes housework, cooking, shopping, home and car maintenance, gardening, child

care, and care for other household members. The CEX does not contain information on time

spent on non-market production. To overcome this difficulty, we follow Boerma and Karabarbou-

nis (2019) and impute time use data from the ATUS into the CEX. Our imputation procedure is

to allocate to individuals in the CEX the mean non-market hours of matched individuals from the

ATUS based on group characteristics that include work status, race, gender, age, family status,

education, disability status, geography, hours worked, and wages. We first impute non-market

hours to individuals and, similarly to market hours, then sum up these hours at the household
level. Finally, we measure leisure residually as total disposable time, which we set to 105 hours

per week, minus market hours and time spent on non-market production, hL = 105 - hM - hN .12

       In Figure 1 we present the time evolution of relative prices, pN and pL , and means and
variances of expenditure inputs xM , xN , and xL , time inputs hM , hN , and hL , total expenditures

px = xM + pN xN + pL xL , and market productivity zM . To obtain the time profiles for the means

of variables, we regress each variable at the household level on age and time fixed effects. The
  12
     We define leisure residually to ensure that all households have the same endowment of time. The cross-sectional
correlation between this definition of leisure and the direct ATUS measure of leisure defined in Aguiar, Hurst, and
Karabarbounis (2013) is 0.5. Given the imperfect correlation, in our sensitivity analyses we reverse the definitions
by using leisure directly from the ATUS and defining non-market hours residually as hN = 105 - hM - hL . As
reported in Section 6, our inferences on the role of leisure productivity and counterfactuals are not sensitive to
this alternative measurement of time uses.


                                                        15
                                                1.05




                                                                                                                                                         1.4
                                                                                                                Relative price of leisure expenditures
          Relative price of home expenditures




                                                                                                                                                         1.3
                                                1
                                                .95




                                                                                                                                                         1.2
                                                .9




                                                                                                                                                         1.1
                                                .85




                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                .8




                                                                                                                                                         .9
                                                       1995   2000        2005         2010         2015                                                        1995   2000           2005         2010              2015




                                                                                                                                                         200
                                                1




                                                                                                                                                         100
                                                .8
          Mean of Inputs




                                                                                                                Mean of Inputs
                                                .6




                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                         -100
                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                         -200
                                                .2




                                                                                                                                                         -300
                                                0




                                                       1995   2000        2005         2010         2015                                                        1995   2000           2005         2010              2015

                                                              log(xM)        log(xN)          log(xL)                                                                            hM          hN           hL
                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                         .4
          Mean of Log Expenditures




                                                                                                                                                         .3
                                                .3




                                                                                                                Mean of Log Wages
                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                .2




                                                                                                                                                         .1
                                                .1




                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                0




                                                       1995   2000        2005         2010         2015                                                        1995   2000           2005         2010              2015
                                                .45




                                                                                                                                                         .5
                                                                                                                                                         .4
          Variance of Inputs




                                                                                                                Variance of Inputs
                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                         .3
                                                .35




                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                .3




                                                                                                                                                         .1
                                                .25




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                       1995   2000        2005         2010         2015                                                        1995   2000           2005         2010              2015

                                                              log(xM)        log(xN)          log(xL)                                                                  log(hM)           log(hN)               log(hL)
                                                .32




                                                                                                                                                         .36
          Variance of Log Expenditures




                                                                                                                Variance of Log Wages
                                                                                                                                                         .34
                                                .3
                                                .28




                                                                                                                                                         .32
                                                .26




                                                                                                                                                         .3
                                                .24




                                                                                                                                                         .28




                                                       1995   2000        2005         2010         2015                                                        1995   2000           2005         2010              2015




                                                                        Figure 1: Means and Variances of Observables
Figure 1 plots the evolution of the relative prices pN , and pL , means and variances of expenditure inputs xM , xN ,
and xL , time inputs hM , hN , and hL , total expenditures px = xM + pN xN + pL xL , and market productivity zM .



                                                                                                           16
plotted means are the coefficients on the time dummies and, therefore, correspond to the mean
value of each variable using within-age variation over time. The variances refer to the variances
of the residuals in a given year from these regressions and, similarly, reflect changes in within-age

variances over time.
       The top panel of Figure 1 shows that the relative prices of non-market and leisure goods move
in opposite direction over time, with the relative price of non-market goods increasing by roughly

20 percent and the relative price of leisure falling by roughly 45 percent. The second row shows
that while expenditures have increased for all three goods since the mid 1990s, the increase has
been significantly larger in the leisure sector. Leisure time declines by almost 300 hours per year

until the early 2000s, with this decline being offset by increases in both market and non-market

hours. Since the 2000s, non-market time has declined whereas leisure time has returned to its

1995 level. These changes in the allocation of expenditures and time have been accompanied by

a roughly 35 percent increase in average market productivity over time.

       In the bottom rows of Figure 1, we document an increase in the variance of expenditures across

households by roughly 5 log points over time. The increase in the dispersion of expenditures is

apparent in all three expenditure categories. The variation in leisure hours has been stable over

our sample period, while the variation in non-market hours doubled over the same period.13 The

variation in market hours has been relatively constant, with the exception of the period following

the Great Recession. Finally, the variance of market productivity increases by roughly 4 log
points over time.

       Table 1 displays unconditional cross-sectional correlations between observables. These corre-
lations are obtained after we absorb time and age fixed effects by regressing each observable on
both age and time dummies. Market productivity is positively correlated with expenditures (with

a correlation of 0.5) but uncorrelated with all time inputs. Households with high levels of total
expenditures also tend to spend more in each sector. By contrast, within sector K expenditures
  13
    This result is sensitive to identifying leisure time as the residual time given observed market and non-market
hours. The direct measure of leisure from the ATUS (that includes activities such as television watching, socializing,
exercising, playing sports, reading, computer time, and listening to music) displays an increasing dispersion over
time. However, as reported in Section 6, our inferences on the role of leisure productivity and counterfactuals are
not sensitive to this discrepancy.




                                                         17
                    Table 1: Unconditional Correlations Between Observables


                    log zM   log(px)   log xM   log xN   log xL   log hM   log hN   log hL
          log zM     1.00       .         .        .       .        .        .        .
          log(px)    0.53     1.00        .        .       .        .        .        .
          log xM     0.54     0.96      1.00       .       .        .        .        .
          log xN     0.46     0.95      0.85     1.00      .        .        .        .
          log xL     0.49     0.91      0.82     0.82    1.00       .        .        .
          log hM    -0.07     0.23      0.27     0.18    0.17      1.00      .        .
          log hN     0.04     -0.06    -0.08    -0.04    -0.04    -0.39     1.00      .
          log hL     0.02     -0.18    -0.20    -0.15    -0.15    -0.47    -0.37    1.00



xK and time hK are weakly correlated in the cross-section of households. Finally, higher time

spent working in the market sector is offset by lower time in both the non-market and the leisure

sector.


4     Quantitative Results

We begin by discussing the parameterization of the model. We estimate a progressivity parameter

of 1 = 0.12 based on a regression of log after-tax market productivity on log pre-tax market

progressivity from the Current Population Survey between 2005 and 2015. We set the level

parameter to 0 = -0.34 such that the average tax rate on labor income equals 0.10 which
is the average ratio of personal current taxes to income from the national income and product

accounts. For our baseline analyses, we set the elasticity of substitution across goods to  = 1, the

elasticity of substitution between expenditures and time in non-market technology to N = 2.5,
and the elasticity of substitution between expenditures and time in leisure technology to L = 0.5.

Our choice of N = 2.5 is motivated by previous estimates in the literature. For example, most

estimates of Rupert, Rogerson, and Wright (1995) for couples fall between roughly 2 and 4, Aguiar
and Hurst (2007a) obtain estimates of 1.8, and Boerma and Karabarbounis (2019) estimate a value

of 2.3. The literature offers little guidance about the values of  and L . Consistent with our

classification of expenditures and time in the three goods, we choose  = 1 and L = 0.5 such


                                                18
that the elasticity of substitution across goods is larger than the elasticity of substitution between
expenditures and time in leisure technology and smaller than the elasticity of substitution in non-
market technology. Some of our quantitative results are sensitive to these values of elasticities,

so in Section 6 we present several analyses under alternative values.
       Given parameter values, we identify the sources of heterogeneity using equations (14) to (18).
Figure 2 presents the evolution of means and variances for each source of heterogeneity. Similarly

to the means of observables discussed previously in Figure 1, in the upper four panels the plotted
means are the coefficients on the time dummies from a regression of each source of heterogeneity
on age and time fixed effects and the variances refer to the variances of the residuals in a given

year from these regressions.

       Beginning in the first panel, mean leisure productivity log zL increases substantially over

time and by the end of the sample reaches a level roughly 110 log points higher than its 1995

level. To understand this pattern, equation (14) shows that leisure productivity zL increases

in leisure expenditures relative to time xL /hL and decreases in the relative input price z
                                                                                          ~M /pL

when expenditures and time are complements (L < 1). Quantitatively, the substantial increase

in xL /hL over time dominates the increase in z
                                              ~M /pL and accounts for the increase in leisure

productivity over time.14 Mean non-market productivity log zN tracks mean market productivity

log zM until the mid 2000s, reflecting the growth of the relative input price z
                                                                              ~M /pN and the fact

that expenditures and time are substitutes in the non-market technology (N > 1). After the
mid 2000s, mean non-market productivity starts to decline, reflecting the increase in non-market

expenditures relative to time xN /hN and the flattening of z
                                                           ~M /pN .
       The second panel documents a decline in the mean preference for market goods M relative
to non-market and leisure goods. Given our choice of an elasticity of substitution  = 1 across

goods, preference weights equal the cost share of each good in the market value of total consump-
                 pj xj +~  zM h j
tion, j =                              for each good j, j = {M, N, L}. The decline in mean M , therefore,
                  j (pj xj +~
                            zM h j )

reflects the decline in market expenditures xM relative to the market value of total consumption

  j (pj xj   +z
              ~M hj ). Finally, the third and fourth panels show an increase in the mean value of
  14
    The inferred increase in mean leisure productivity becomes larger as L increases toward one. For L = 0, zL
equals xL /hL and grows by roughly 90 log points.


                                                          19
                                                  1.5




                                                                                                                                                          .02
                                                                                                                Mean of Preference Weights
         Mean of Log Productivities




                                                                                                                                                          .01
                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                          -.01
                                                  .5




                                                                                                                                                          -.02
                                                                                                                                                          -.03
                                                  0




                                                        1995    2000      2005         2010         2015                                                         1995   2000       2005       2010       2015

                                                                log(zM)      log(zN)          log(zL)                                                                          M          N          L
                                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                          .2
         Mean of Permanent Log Productivity




                                                                                                                Mean of Transitory Log Productivity
                                                  .15




                                                                                                                                                          .15
                                                  .1




                                                                                                                                                          .1
                                                  .05




                                                                                                                                                          .05
                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                          0


                                                        1995    2000      2005         2010         2015                                                         1995   2000       2005       2010       2015
                                                                                                                                                          .012
                                                  2




                                                                                                                Variance of Preference Weights
         Variance of Log Productivities




                                                                                                                                                          .01
                                                  1.5




                                                                                                                                                          .008
                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                          .006
                                                  .5




                                                                                                                                                          .004
                                                                                                                                                          .002
                                                  0




                                                        1995    2000      2005         2010         2015                                                         1995   2000       2005       2010       2015

                                                                log(zM)      log(zN)          log(zL)                                                                          M          N          L
                                                                                                                                                          .045
         Variance of Permanent Log Productivity




                                                                                                                Variance of Transitory Log Productivity
                                                  .3




                                                                                                                                                          .04
                                                  .28




                                                                                                                                                          .035
                                                  .26




                                                                                                                                                          .03
                                                                                                                                                          .025
                                                  .24




                                                        1995    2000      2005         2010         2015                                                         1995   2000       2005       2010       2015




                                                               Figure 2: Means and Variances of Sources of Heterogeneity
Figure 2 plots the evolution of means and variances of productivities zM , zN , and zL , preference weights M , N ,
and L , the uninsurable permanent component of market productivity , and the insurable transitory component
of market productivity .




                                                                                                           20
the uninsurable permanent component of log productivity  and the mean value of the insur-
able transitory component of productivity  over time. These increases reflect the growth of the
market value of total consumption and market productivity over time.15

       Moving to the bottom panels, we first observe that the (within-age) cross-sectional variances
of non-market and leisure productivity are significantly larger than the variance of market pro-
ductivity.16 To understand this result it is useful to once more refer to equation (14) that relates

log zK to log z
              ~M , log xK , and log hK . As discussed in Table 1, time inputs are relatively uncor-
related with market productivity and expenditures in the cross-section of households and, as a

result, the variance of log zK cumulates the variances of these three observables and exceeds the

variance of market productivity. The variance of market productivity rises somewhat over time.

The variances of non-market and leisure productivity rise even more over time which, in addition

to the increase in the variance of market productivity, reflects the increases in the variances of

non-market production time log hN and leisure expenditures log xL .

       As Figure 2 shows, the cross-sectional variances of preference weights are relatively stable over

time. The cross-sectional variance of the permanent component of market productivity  is large

relative to the variance of the transitory component of market productivity . This reflects the

fact that the cross-sectional variance of the market value of consumption is roughly equal to the

variance of market productivity. The variance of  rises over time which reflects the increase in

the cross-sectional variance of the market value of total consumption. By contrast, the variance
of  is stable over time.

       In Table 2 we present the cross-sectional correlations between sources of heterogeneity. Similar
to the correlations of observables in Table 1, these correlations are obtained after absorbing
time and age fixed effects in regressions of each source of heterogeneity on age and time fixed

effects. We obtain a high and positive correlation between market productivity zM and non-
  15
     In equation (17), (1 - 1 ) equals the difference between the market value of total consumption and a moment
of the transitory component of productivity exp() and, in equation (18),  equals the difference between market
productivity log zM and . As a result, the plotted means depend on an arbitrary choice of means in some initial
period. We choose to attribute half of the level of log zM to  and half to  and, so, both rise by roughly the same
amount over time. Our inferences of the other sources of heterogeneity, welfare effects, and our counterfactuals
are not sensitive to this normalization.
  16
     A similar finding is documented by Boerma and Karabarbounis (2019) in the context of a model with a
non-market technology only.


                                                       21
                Table 2: Unconditional Correlations Between Sources of Heterogeneity


                            log zM    log zN    log zL        M      N       L              
                   log zM    1.00        .        .            .       .      .      .      .
                   log zN    0.80      1.00       .            .       .      .      .      .
                   log zL    0.08      -0.17    1.00           .       .      .      .      .
                   M         -0.33     -0.59    0.60          1.00     .      .      .      .
                   N         -0.06     0.26     0.27      -0.03      1.00     .      .      .
                   L         0.23      0.10     -0.56     -0.52      -0.84   1.00    .      .
                             0.95      0.71     0.23      -0.21      0.02    0.10   1.00    .
                             0.38      0.42     -0.40     -0.43      -0.25   0.44   0.06   1.00



market productivity zN which, quantitatively, reflects the fact that expenditures and time are

substitutes in the non-market technology (N > 1). Market productivity is relatively uncorrelated

with leisure productivity zL , reflecting roughly offsetting effects from a strong correlation between

zM and xL in the cross-section of households and the complementarity between expenditures

and time in leisure technology (L < 1). The correlation between preference weights K and

productivities zK are negative for the market and the leisure sector and positive for the non-

market sector. Finally, the correlation between the two components of market productivity, 

and , is essentially zero.

       We conclude this section by presenting the evolution of welfare over time. Our measure of

welfare is the consumption equivalent t that leaves utilitarian welfare unchanged between the
two allocations:

        t () log((1 - t )ct ()) =      0 () log(c0 ()),                                                    (19)

where t () denote survey weights, the flow utility log(ct ()) is given by equation (2), and the
right-hand side of the equation denotes the baseline allocation in some period 0. A positive value

for t denotes an increase in welfare in period t relative to period 0.17
       Following Benabou (2002) and Floden (2001) who have emphasized that total welfare effects
  17
   We have confirmed that all our conclusions are similar if we consider a consumption equivalent that leaves an
unborn household indifferent over its life-cycle between two allocations. The difference between the two welfare
measures is that the life-cycle measure discounts future utilities more than the utilitarian measure.

                                                         22
                                     .5




                                                                                                                         .06
                                                                                         D
                                                                                         Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
                                     .4
          L




                                                                                                                         .04
          Welfare, Level Effect 




                                                                                                                         .02
                                     .3
                                     .2




                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                         -.02
                                     .1




                                                                                                                         -.04
                                     0




                                          1995    2000     2005    2010      2015                                               1995   2000       2005        2010   2015




                                                                                                                         1.2
                                     .8




                                                                                           Variance of Log Consumption
           Mean of Log Consumption




                                                                                                                         1.15
                                     .6




                                                                                                                         1.1
                                     .4




                                                                                                                         1.05
                                     .2
                                     0




                                                                                                                         1
                                          1995    2000     2005    2010      2015                                               1995   2000       2005        2010   2015




                                                                          Figure 3: Welfare
Figure 3 plots the evolution of the level component of the consumption equivalent L , the dispersion component
of the consumption equivalent D , the mean of log c, and variance of log c.


arise from level effects when aggregate allocations change and effects capturing changes in the

dispersion of allocations across households, we break t into a level component L
                                                                               t and a dispersion

component D
          t . We define the level component as:

                                             0 ()c0 ()
 L
 t =1-                                                 .                                                                                                                    (20)
                                             t ()ct ()

When the level component is positive, mean consumption is higher in the current allocation in

period t than in the baseline allocation in period 0. Given this definition of L
                                                                               t we obtain the

decomposition log(1 - t ) = log(1 - L             D
                                    t ) + log(1 - t ), where the dispersion component is given

by:

                                                                  c0 ()                                                                       ct ()
 log(1 - D
         t )=                                      0 () log                     -                                        t () log                         .                 (21)
                                                                  0 ()c0 ()                                                                   t ()ct ()

When the dispersion component is negative, the consumption dispersion around its mean in the

current allocation in period t is higher than the consumption dispersion around its mean in the

baseline allocation in period 0. As a result, dispersion contributes negatively to welfare.
      The first panel of Figure 3 shows that the level component of welfare (relative to 1995) grows

                                                                                    23
by roughly 40 log points until the mid 2000s and then stabilizes. In the second panel, we observe
a roughly 4 log points decline in welfare due to the dispersion component D until 2000. After
2000, D starts to rise and by the end of the sample it roughly goes back to its 1995 level. The

lower panels of the figure demonstrate that changes in welfare due to level and dispersion effects
are closely related to the mean of log ct and the variance of log ct over time.18


5      Counterfactuals

In this section we present counterfactual exercises in which we shut off the evolution of driving
forces and assess their contribution to the evolution of observables and welfare. We begin in

Table 3 by assessing the contribution of driving forces, presented in rows, to the mean values

of observables, presented in columns. The first row documents the change of means between

the end of the sample (2012-2016) and the beginning of the sample (1995-1999) in the baseline

model which replicates the data perfectly. For example, the change in mean total expenditures

px = xM + pN xN + pL xL over that period is 24.6 log points. Each other row represents a different

experiment in which we shut off either the evolution of the mean or the evolution of the variance

of driving forces.19 As an example, the second row shows that keeping the price of non-market

goods pN constant at their lower initial level would generate an increase of 31.1 log points in

mean total expenditures. Because mean total expenditures increased by 24.6 log points in the

baseline model which replicates the data perfectly, we conclude that the increase in pN over time
  18
      We drop from the sample an additional 0.1 percent of observations (34 observations) with extreme levels of
consumption ct to improve the visibility of this figure. The mean of log ct deviates slightly from the level effect
L t since the mean of log ct reflects within-age variation over time, whereas the level effect does not correct for
differences in the age structure over time. We also observe a close (negative) association between the dispersion
effect D                                                                                                   D
         t and the variance of log consumption. If log consumption follows a normal distribution, then t and the
                                                        D
variance of log consumption are related by log(1 - t ) = -Var(log ct )/2. While log consumption is not exactly
normally distributed in our economy, this equation still provides a useful approximation in thinking about the
dispersion effect.
   19
      Let xt () be the log of a source of heterogeneity in the baseline and xct () be the counterfactual which keeps
either the mean or the variance of the source of heterogeneity constant at its 1995 value. When we shut off the
evolution of the mean of a source of heterogeneity, we set xc  t () = xt () - Ext () + Ex95 (), so that in all periods
we retain the same dispersion across households as in the baseline. When we shut off the evolution of the variance
of a source of heterogeneity, we set xc           0    1                      0        1
                                         t () = t + t xt () and solve for t and t such that in all periods the
variance equals its 1995 value and in all periods we retain the same mean across households as in the baseline. In
conducting counterfactuals with a particular preference weight, we adjust the other weights such that the weights
sum up to one. For example, when we shut off the decline in the mean value of M , we allocate proportionally to
N and L the difference relative to the baseline path of M .



                                                         24
                                     Table 3: Means: Counterfactuals


                                    100 × Difference between 2012-2016 and 1995-1999
             Case               log(px)    log xM     log xN    log xL   log hM     log hN    log hL
             Baseline             24.6       5.1       16.5      78.2      -1.8      -7.4      2.1
             Mean pN              31.1       5.1       50.7      78.2      6.1       -21.3     2.1
             Mean pL              27.0       5.1       16.5      62.9      1.2       -7.4      0.4
             Mean  +              -9.7      -22.4     -35.5      62.8      -9.3       9.3      0.5
             Variance             26.4       6.5       18.9      79.0      -1.3      -8.6      2.2
             Variance             24.6       5.0       16.4      78.2      -1.7      -7.2      2.2
             Mean log zN          23.2       5.1       12.9      78.2      -3.8      -4.4      2.1
             Variance log zN      23.3       5.1       13.5      78.2      -3.5      -2.7      2.1
             Mean log zL          18.2       5.1       16.5      35.1      -9.1      -7.4      6.3
             Variance log zL      24.8       5.1       16.5      79.0      -1.6      -7.4      2.1
             Mean M               33.7       30.8      12.7      74.5      8.1       -11.1     -1.6
             Variance M           23.2       1.1       16.4      78.1      -2.4      -7.4      2.0
             Mean N               24.4       5.4       15.7      78.5      -2.1      -8.1      2.4
             Variance N           24.8       5.2       16.8      78.4      -1.6      -7.0      2.3
             Mean L               29.4       12.0      23.4      72.5      4.0       -0.5      -3.6
             Variance L           24.5       5.0       16.4      78.2      -1.8      -7.4      2.1



causes a 6.5 log points decline in total expenditures.

       The most important driver of the rise of total expenditures px is the increase in mean log
market productivity (row "Mean  + "). The rise of market productivity is quantitatively

important for the evolution of each expenditure input, xM , xN , and xL . Among other driving

forces, we note the role of the growth in the mean leisure productivity log zL , which accounts

for a significant fraction of the increase in px and xL over time.20 The increase in the relative
price of non-market goods pN significantly depresses the quantity of non-market expenditures xN

and the decrease in the relative price of leisure goods pL contributes modestly to the increase

in the quantity of leisure expenditures xL over time. The decline in the preference weight for
  20
    As can be seen from equations (9) and (10), with unitary elasticity  = 1 across goods cross-price effects are
zero and zK and pK do not affect x-K and h-K .




                                                       25
market goods M offsets the increase in market productivity and moderates the rise of market
expenditures xM over time.
       Market hours log hM fall moderately between the beginning and the end of the sample. Move-

ments in the relative prices of goods, pN and pL , generate a significant decline in market hours
over time. To understand this result, we refer to equation (10) which shows that an increase in pN
leads to an increase in hN since expenditures and time are substitutes in non-market production

and a decline in pL leads to an increase in hL since expenditures and time are complements in
leisure production. The increase in the relative price of non-market goods generates 8 log points

decline in market hours, whereas the decline in the relative price of leisure goods generates 3 log

points decline in the market hours.21 The other significant contributor to the decline in mean

hours is the decline in the preference for market goods M relative to non-market and leisure

goods. As Table 3 shows, the decline in market hours generated by changes in relative prices and

preference weights is offset by the rise of mean market productivity,  + , and leisure productivity,

log zL .

       Next, Figure 4 assesses the welfare effects of shutting off the evolution of driving forces. In

the left panels, we plot the time path of the level component L in the baseline model and

in various counterfactual exercises. In the right panels, we plot the time paths of the dispersion

component D . The main takeaway from Figure 4 is that the growth in mean leisure productivity

is the most important driver for welfare and this influence is apparent in both the level and the
dispersion components of welfare. The rise of mean leisure productivity generates more than 30

log points welfare gain in terms of mean consumption. To set a benchmark for comparisons, the
rise of mean market productivity generates less than 10 log points gain. Further, mean leisure
productivity moderates the rise of inequality over time. The increase of mean leisure productivity

generates additional 10 log points of welfare gain in terms of lower consumption dispersion and
offsets the negative welfare effects that arise from increases in the variances of market and leisure
productivity over time.

       To understand the importance of the rise of mean leisure productivity for welfare, we use the
  21
   Vandenbroucke (2009) emphasizes the small effects of the decline in leisure prices between 1900 and 1950 on
market hours.


                                                     26
                                  .5




                                                                                                                                                     .06
                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                      Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
         L
         Welfare, Level Effect 
                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                     .04
                                  .3




                                                                                                                                                     .02
                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                     -.02
                                  .1




                                                                                                                                                     -.04
                                  0




                                       1995          2000              2005              2010         2015                                                  1995          2000              2005              2010         2015
                                                         Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL                                                                       Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL
                            .5




                                                                                                                                              .1
                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                      Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
         L
         Welfare, Level Effect 
                            .4




                                                                                                                                              .05
                            .3




                                                                                                                                              0
                            .2




                                                                                                                                              -.05
                            .1




                                                                                                                                              -.1
                            0




                                   1995             2000               2005             2010          2015                                             1995              2000               2005             2010          2015
                                              Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)                                                     Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)
                                  .5




                                                                                                                                                    .1
                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                      Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
         L
         Welfare, Level Effect 
                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                    .05
                                  .3
                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                    0
                                  .1




                                                                                                                                                    -.05
                                  0




                                       1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                 1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                               Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L                                                          Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L
                                  .5




                                                                                                                                                    .1
                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                      Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
         L
         Welfare, Level Effect 
                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                    .05
                                  .3
                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                    0
                                  .1




                                                                                                                                                    -.05
                                  0




                                       1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                 1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                               Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)                                                      Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)
                                  .5




                                                                                                                                                    .1
                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                      Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
         L
         Welfare, Level Effect 
                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                    .05
                                  .3
                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                    0
                                  .1




                                                                                                                                                    -.05
                                  0




                                       1995          2000              2005             2010          2015                                                 1995           2000              2005             2010          2015
                                                Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L                                                          Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L




                                                                              Figure 4: Welfare: Counterfactuals
Figure 4 plots the evolution of the level component of the consumption equivalent L (left panels) and the
dispersion component of the consumption equivalent D (right panels). In each panel we present the evolution
in the baseline path (solid line) together with the evolution in counterfactuals (dashed lines) in which we shut off
particular aspects of the evolution of the heterogeneity across households.


                                                                                                                 27
close relationship between L and D and the mean and variance of log consumption in Figure 3.
Using our analytical solutions under the parametric restriction  = 1, we express log consumption
for every household  as a function of the primitive sources of heterogeneity:

 log c       =    (1 - 1 ) + log C + M log(M )                                                                       (22)
                                                                                   K -1
                               K           1                          zK pK
            +       K log             +         log 1 +                                      .
                               pK         K - 1                        z
                                                                       ~M

In the first two terms, a higher permanent component of market productivity  or aggregate

transitory productivity encoded in the function C =                          (1   - 0 ) exp ((1 - 1 )()) d( ) raise the
consumption of all three goods, cM , cN , and cL , and lead to higher log c. As expected, higher price

of expenditures pK lowers log c and higher productivity of time zK increase log c. Given this result

and the significant growth of mean zL over time, it is not surprising that the level component of

welfare L increases significantly in response to the increase in mean leisure productivity.

       To understand the result that higher mean leisure productivity lowers the welfare cost of

dispersion, we parameterize leisure productivity as zL = L z
                                                           ^L where L is the common component

of zL across households in each period and z
                                           ^L is the idiosyncratic component. Next, we express

the variance of log consumption in equation (22) as the sum of the variance of the term that

involves L , and other variances and covariances:
                               2                                             L -1
                        1                         L -1              z
                                                                    ^L pL
 Var(log c) =                      Var log    1 + L                                       + Var(.) + ... + Cov(.).   (23)
                     1 - L                                           z
                                                                     ~M

In Appendix C we prove that, holding constant the other variances and covariances in equation
(23), the variance of log consumption is decreasing in mean leisure productivity L if and only
                                                             L -1
                             L -1              z
                                               ~L pL
if L < 1.22 The key term 1 + L                  z~M                 that appears in equation (23) is related to the

consumption of the leisure good cL after factoring out the contribution of leisure expenditures
xL which is already accounted for through terms that involve (1 - 1 ) + log C, L , and pL in
equation (22). This key term equals the constant 1 and a term that denotes the contribution of

the time input hL to consumption cL . When mean leisure productivity L increases, the relative
  22                                                                                     L -1
       To gain some insight of why this is true, consider a function f (x; L ) = log(1 + L    x). To a first-order
                                                    -1
                                               LL        x
                                                         ¯
approximation, we obtain Var(f (x; L )) =        -1            Var(x/x
                                                                     ¯), where x
                                                                               ¯ is an approximation point. This formula
                                              1+LL x¯
shows that the variance is decreasing in L if and only if L < 1. Our proof in the appendix does not rely on
approximations.

                                                               28
contribution of the time input to the sum becomes smaller given that L < 1, the key term
approaches the constant, and the variance of log consumption across households declines.
    Before concluding this section, it is worth contrasting our welfare costs of dispersion to al-

ternative approaches we discussed in the introduction that describe the dispersion of observables
and its evolution over time. Figure 5 evaluates the effects of shutting off the evolution of driving
forces on the variance of total expenditures log(px) (in the left panels) and the variance of market

hours log hM (in the right panels). An important difference between the welfare-based measures
of dispersion shown in the right panels of Figure 4 and the variances of observables shown in
Figure 5 is that the latter fail to capture the welfare effects of an increase in mean leisure produc-

tivity in terms of lowering consumption dispersion. In Figure 5, the increase in variance of the

permanent component of market productivity  generates most of the increase in the variance of

total expenditures and the decline in the mean preference for market goods M generates most

of the increase in the variance of market hours. However, as Figure 4 shows these factors are less

important quantitatively than mean leisure productivity for the evolution of the welfare costs of

dispersion. The welfare costs of dispersion are associated more closely with the dispersion of the

consumption aggregator and less with the dispersion of expenditures or market hours.


6     Sensitivity Analyses

In this section we discuss sensitivity analyses. Here we summarize the most important results
and present the detailed tables and figures underlying our analyses in Appendix D. For each

sensitivity analysis, we repeat the identification of the sources of heterogeneity as in Section 4

and then perform the same counterfactuals as in Section 5.
    We begin by varying the elasticities of substitution between expenditures and time in each

sector. Increasing N from 2.5 in the baseline to 3.5 magnifies the negative impact of the price

of non-market goods pN on market hours hM from 8 log points to 13 log points. Lowering N to
1.5 mitigates the negative impact of pN to 3 log points. Similarly, lowering L from 0.5 in the

baseline to 0.2 magnifies the negative impact of the price of leisure goods pL on market hours to
5 log points and increasing L to 0.8 mitigates the negative impact of pL to 1 log point.


                                                 29
                                         .32




                                                                                                                                                              .35
                                                                                                                              Variance of Log Market Hours
         Variance of Log Expenditures




                                                                                                                                                              .3
                                         .3




                                                                                                                                                              .25
                                         .28




                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                         .26




                                                                                                                                                              .15
                                         .24




                                                                                                                                                              .1
                                               1995          2000              2005              2010         2015                                                  1995          2000              2005              2010         2015
                                                                 Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL                                                                       Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL




                                                                                                                                                        .35
                                   .32




                                                                                                                              Variance of Log Market Hours
         Variance of Log Expenditures




                                                                                                                                                        .3
                                   .3




                                                                                                                                                        .25
                                   .28




                                                                                                                                                        .2
                                   .26




                                                                                                                                                        .15
                                   .24




                                          1995              2000               2005             2010          2015                                             1995              2000               2005             2010          2015
                                                      Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)                                                     Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)
                                        .32




                                                                                                                                                             .35
                                                                                                                              Variance of Log Market Hours
         Variance of Log Expenditures




                                                                                                                                                             .3
                                        .3




                                                                                                                                                             .25
                                        .28




                                                                                                                                                             .2
                                        .26




                                                                                                                                                             .15
                                        .24




                                                                                                                                                             .1




                                              1995          2000               2005             2010          2015                                                 1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                                       Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L                                                          Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L
                                        .32




                                                                                                                                                             .35
                                                                                                                              Variance of Log Market Hours
         Variance of Log Expenditures
                                        .3




                                                                                                                                                             .3
                                        .28




                                                                                                                                                             .25
                                        .26




                                                                                                                                                             .2
                                        .24




                                                                                                                                                             .15




                                              1995          2000               2005             2010          2015                                                 1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                                       Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)                                                      Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)
                                                                                                                                                             .35
                                        .32




                                                                                                                              Variance of Log Market Hours
         Variance of Log Expenditures




                                                                                                                                                             .3
                                        .3




                                                                                                                                                             .25
                                        .28




                                                                                                                                                             .2
                                        .26




                                                                                                                                                             .15
                                        .24




                                              1995           2000              2005             2010          2015                                                 1995           2000              2005             2010          2015
                                                        Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L                                                          Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L




                                                                                     Figure 5: Variances: Counterfactuals
Figure 5 plots the evolution of the variance of log expenditures px (left panels) and the variance of log market
hours hM (right panels). In each panel we present the evolution in the baseline path (solid line) together with
the evolution in counterfactuals (dashed lines) in which we shut off particular aspects of the evolution of the
heterogeneity across households.


                                                                                                                         30
       The impact of the increase in mean leisure productivity on welfare remains relatively robust
across all these parameterizations. In the baseline parameterization, the increase in mean leisure
productivity contributes to welfare 35 log points through an increase in mean consumption and 9

log points through a decline in consumption dispersion. Under N = 3.5, we obtain contributions
of 35 and 9 log points and under N = 1.5 we obtain contributions of 36 and 10 log points.
Under L = 0.2, we obtain contributions of 31 and 5 log points and under L = 0.8 we obtain

contributions of 51 and 27 log points. In all cases mean leisure productivity is the most important
factor driving welfare trends over time.23

       Our quantitative results on the role of mean leisure productivity in increasing mean consump-

tion and decreasing consumption dispersion are not sensitive to perturbations of the progressivity

parameter 1 to 0.06 and to 0.18. By contrast, the results are sensitive to the value of the elasticity

of substitution across goods . We have experimented with many values of  and concluded that

 changes in a non-monotonic way the contributions of mean leisure productivity. In all cases,

however, the contributions are positive both in terms of the level and the dispersion components

of welfare.24

       Next, we perform sensitivity analyses with respect to the measurement of key variables un-

derlying our analysis. To address potential measurement error in expenditures in the CEX, for

each of the 20 spending categories underlying the construction of our three baskets we use the

estimated expenditure elasticity in Aguiar and Bils (2015) together with households' spending

share in the cross section and construct an alternative measure of household spending.25 Our

results are almost unchanged using this alternative measure of expenditures. For example, the
increase in the mean leisure productivity contributes to welfare 33 log points through an increase

in mean consumption and 9 log points through a decline in consumption dispersion.
  23
     It may appear surprising that mean leisure productivity becomes more important as L approaches closer to
one. Equation (14) shows that, for a given increase in leisure expenditures relative to time, the inferred increase
in mean leisure productivity is larger as L approaches one.
  24
     For values of  = {0.2, 0.5, 0.7, 1.0, 1.3, 2.0, 3.0} the contribution of mean leisure productivity to welfare through
an increase in mean consumption is {57, 30, 21, 35, 20, 35, 67} log points. The contribution to welfare through a
decline in consumption dispersion is {1, 1, 2, 9, 3, 6, 14} log points.
  25
     Let K be the estimated elasticity in Aguiar and Bils (2015), px          ¯ be mean total expenditures in the cross
section, and px() be total expenditures of household . We allocate total spending in each category to households
                                                        px() K
                                                       (   ¯ )
                                                          px
in proportion to their spending share pK xK () =           px()      pK XK , where pK XK is a cross-sectional measure of
                                                         (   ¯ )
                                                            px
                                                                 K

expenditures in category K .

                                                           31
    In our baseline analyses, we define non-market hours directly from the survey data and leisure
residually as total disposable time minus market hours and time spent on non-market production,
hL = 105 - hM - hN . We examine the sensitivity of this choice by repeating our analyses

when defining leisure hours directly from the survey data and non-market hours residually as
hN = 105 - hM - hL . We find that our welfare results and counterfactuals are robust to the
measurements of non-market and leisure time. For example, using this alternative definition of

leisure, the increase in the mean leisure productivity contributes to welfare 27 log points through
an increase in mean consumption and 8 log points through a decline in consumption dispersion.


7     Conclusion

The purpose of this paper is to account for recent trends in labor market outcomes and understand

their welfare consequences. To do so, we develop a model with incomplete asset markets and

household heterogeneity in market and home technologies and preferences. Using micro data on

expenditures and time use, we identify the sources of heterogeneity across households, document

how these sources have changed over time, and perform counterfactual analyses.

    Our most important finding is to document the substantial increase of leisure productivity

over time. This follows from the observation that, for the average household, leisure expenditures

relative to leisure time increases dramatically more than predicted from the decline in the relative

price of leisure goods. We demonstrate that the increasing productivity of leisure time is associ-
ated with significant welfare gains. The increase in mean productivity of leisure time generates

significantly larger gains in terms of mean consumption than the increase in mean wages. Ad-

ditionally, the increase in mean leisure productivity induces significant welfare gains by lowering
the dispersion of consumption across households.

    Finally, we wish to highlight the importance of taking into account the allocation of time

and expenditures across sectors in evaluating welfare effects of trends in labor market outcomes.
We demonstrate that the distinction between expenditures and consumption matters for the

conclusions one draws from trends in labor market outcomes. While the increase in the variance

of the permanent component of wages is the most important factor accounting for the increase


                                                32
in the dispersion of expenditures over time, this factor contributes significantly less than leisure
productivity to the welfare costs of dispersion. This is because these welfare costs are linked more
closely to consumption than to expenditures.



References
Aguiar, M., and M. Bils (2015): "Has Consumption Inequality Mirrored Income Inequality?,"
  American Economic Review, 105(9), 2725­2756.

Aguiar, M., M. Bils, K. Charles, and E. Hurst (2018): "Leisure Luxuries and the Labor
  Supply of Young Men," NBER Working Paper No. 23552.

Aguiar, M., and E. Hurst (2005): "Consumption versus Expenditure," Journal of Political
  Economy, 113(5), 919­948.

          (2007a): "Life-Cycle Prices and Production," American Economic Review, 97(5), 1533­
  1559.

          (2007b): "Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time over Five Decades,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 969­1006.

Aguiar, M., E. Hurst, and L. Karabarbounis (2013): "Time Use During the Great Re-
  cession," American Economic Review, 103(5), 1664­1696.

Aiyagari, R. (1994): "Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Savings," Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 109(3), 659­684.

Attanasio, O., and S. Davis (1996): "Relative Wage Movements and the Distribution of
  Consumption," Journal of Political Economy, 104, 1227­1262.

Attanasio, O., E. Hurst, and L. Pistaferri (2015): "The Evolution of Income, Consump-
  tion, and Leisure Inequality in the United States, 1980-2010," in Improving the Measurement
  of Consumer Expenditures, pp. 100­140. NBER Chapters.

Autor, D., L. Katz, and M. Kearney (2008): "Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality: Revising
  the Revisionists," Review of Economics and Statistics, 90, 300­323.

Becker, G. S. (1965): "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," Economic Journal, 75(299),
  493­517.

                                                33
Benabou, R. (2002): "Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogeneous-Agent Economy: What
  Levels of Redistribution Maximize Growth and Efficiency?," Econometrica, 70(2), 481­517.

Boerma, J., and L. Karabarbounis (2019): "Inferring Inequality with Home Production,"
  NBER Working Paper No. 24166.

Boppart, T., and R. Ngai (2019): "Rising Inequality and Trends in Leisure," London School
  of Economics Working Paper.

Bridgman, B. (2016): "Engines of Leisure," Bureau of Economic Analysis Working Paper.

Cutler, D. M., and L. F. Katz (1991): "Macroeconomic Performance and the Disadvan-
  taged," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1991(2), 1­74.

Floden, M. (2001): "The Effectiveness of Government Debt and Transfers as Insurance," Jour-
  nal of Monetary Economics, 48(1), 81­108.

Ghez, G., and G. S. Becker (1975): The Allocation of Time and Goods Over the Life Cycle.
  New York: Columbia University Press.

Gronau, R. (1986): "Home Production: A Survey," in Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. by
  O. Ashenfelter, and R. Layard, pp. 274­304. Elsevier.

Han, J., B. Meyer, and Sullivan (2018): "Inequality in the Joint Distribution of Consump-
  tion and Time Use," NBER Working Paper No. 25199.

Heathcote, J., F. Perri, and G. L. Violante (2010): "Unequal We Stand: An Empir-
  ical Analysis of Economic Inequality in the United States, 1967­2006," Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 13, 15­51.

Heathcote, J., K. Storesletten, and G. Violante (2013): ""From Wages to Welfare:
  Decomposing Gains and Losses from Rising Inequality," Advances in Economics and Econo-
  metrics: Tenth World Congress, 2, 235­280.

Heathcote, J., K. Storesletten, and G. L. Violante (2014): "Consumption and La-
  bor Supply with Partial Insurance: An Analytical Framework," American Economic Review,
  104(7), 2075­2126.

Huggett, M. (1993): "The Risk Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agents Incomplete-Insurance
  Economies," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17(5­6), 953­969.


                                               34
Krueger, D., and F. Perri (2003): "On the Welfare Consequences of the Increase in Inequality
  in the United States," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 18, 83­123.

         (2006): "Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption Inequality? Evidence and
  Theory," Review of Economic Studies, 73(1), 163­193.

Rupert, P., R. Rogerson, and R. Wright (1995): "Estimating Substitution Elasticities in
  Household Production Models," Economic Theory, 6(1), 179­193.

Vandenbroucke, G. (2009): "Trends in Hours: The U.S. from 1900 to 1950," Journal of
  Economic Dynamics and Control, 33, 237­249.




                                            35
               Labor Market Trends and the Changing Value of Time
                                            Online Appendix
                             Job Boerma and Loukas Karabarbounis



A        Equilibrium Allocations

In this appendix, we derive the equilibrium allocations presented in Section 2. We proceed in
three steps. First, in anticipation of the no-trade result, we solve the planner problems. Second,

we postulate equilibrium allocations and prices using the solutions to the planner problems.

Third, we establish that the postulated equilibrium allocations and prices indeed constitute an

equilibrium as defined in Section 2.

A.1        Preliminaries

In what follows, we define the following state vectors. The idiosyncratic shifters that differentiate

households within each island         is given by the vector  j :

  j
  t = (j         j
       t , t )  Zt .                                                                           (A.1)

Households can trade bonds within each island contingent on the vector sj :

  sj    j j 
   t = (t , t , t ).                                                                           (A.2)

We define a household  by a sequence of all dimensions of heterogeneity:

       j   j
   = {zK , K , j , j ,   }.                                                                    (A.3)

Finally, we denote the history of all sources of heterogeneity up to period t with the vector:

  j     j     j     j j               j     j     j j 
  t = (zK,t , K,t , t , t , t , ..., zK,j , K,j , j , j , j ).                                 (A.4)

                                                                                                 j
We denote conditional probabilities by f t,j (.|.). For example, the probability that we observe t
               j        t,j j j                                         j                 j
conditional on t -1 is f (t |t-1 ) and the probability that we observe st conditional on st-1 is

f t,j (sj   j
        t |st-1 ).

                                                         1
   We use  to denote innovations to the processes and  to denote the distribution of the inno-
                                                                               j      j
vation. We allow the distributions of innovations to vary over time, {t
                                                                      ,  ,  , 
                                                                        t  t   zK,t , K,t },

and the initial distributions to vary over cohorts j , {j    j                     j       j
                                                        ,j , ,j }. We assume that zK,t and K,t are
                                ,   ,   } and that these innovations are drawn independently
orthogonal to the innovations {t  t   t

from each other.

A.2      Planner Problem

In every period t and in every island , the planner solves a static problem that consists of
finding the allocations that maximize average utility for households on the island subject to a

resource constraint and household-specific home production technologies. We omit t and                  from

the notation for convenience. The planner chooses {xM () , hM () , xK () , hK ()} to maximize:
                                                                                               
                                                                                   K -1        -1
                        -1                         K -1                     K -1   K -1 
       log M () xM ()        +    K () xK ()       K
                                                          + (zK () hK ())   K
                                                                                                    d ( ) ,
   Z

subject to an island resource constraint for market goods:

        xM () +    pK xK () d ( ) =             z
                                                ~M () hM () d ( ),                                      (A.5)
  Z                                         Z

and individual-specific time constraints:

 1=       hK () + hM () .                                                                               (A.6)

   Denoting by µ(zK , K , ) the multiplier on the island resource constraint and by () the

multipliers on the household's time constraint, the solution to this problem is characterized by

the following first-order conditions (for every household ):
                               1              1
 [xM ()] : µ(zK , K , ) =         M () xM ()-                                                           (A.7)
                             C ()
                                                                                   K (-1)
                            1 K ()      K -1              K -1                            -1
                                                                                   (K -1)            - 1
 [xK ()] : µ(zK , K , ) =          xK () K + (zK () hK ()) K                                   xK ()    K
                          C () pK
                                                                                                        (A.8)

 [hM ()] :  () = z
                 ~M () µ(zK , K , )                                                                     (A.9)
                                                                       K -1
                 zK ()           K -1              K -1                      -1
                                                                       K -1                            - 1
 [hK ()] :  () =       K () xK () K + (zK () hK ()) K                                (zK () hK ())          K
                  C ()
                                                                                                       (A.10)


                                                   2
where
                                                                                                K -1
                          -1                              K -1                          K -1    K -1 
 C () = M () xM ()             +     K () xK ()           K
                                                                  + (zK () hK ())       K
                                                                                                        .

   Combining (A.7) to (A.10), we obtain effective labor input relative to expenditures for each

home sector:
                                    K
 zK () hK ()          zK () pK
             =                           .                                                                  (A.11)
    xK ()              z
                       ~M ()

Using this equation, we note that the home production aggregator simplifies to:
                                                                                        K -1
         K -1                      K -1                K -1
                                                                           zK () pK
 xK ()   K
                + (zK () hK ())    K
                                             = xK ()   K
                                                                  1+                                .
                                                                            z
                                                                            ~M ()

Using this expression, we relate home production expenditures to market expenditures by (A.7)

and (A.8):
                            
                ~ K ()
 xK () =                       xM () ,                                                                      (A.12)
                M () pK

where the transformed preference shifter on good k is
                                                       K -1
                                              K -1     K -1 
                                                             -1
                               zK () pK
 ~ K ()  K () 1 +
                                                                       .
                                z
                                ~M ()

   Substituting into equation (A.7), we derive:

                   1                                          1
 xM () =                                                                                 -1     .           (A.13)
             µ(zK , K , )                                                        K -1    K -1
                                        K ()           -               zK ()pK
                            1+          M ()        p1
                                                     K   1+             z
                                                                        ~M ()

This expression, combined with the relation between home production and market expenditures

(A.12), the relation between effective labor inputs and home production expenditures (A.11), and

the household time constraint (A.6), yield solutions for {xM () , hM () , xK () , hK ()} given a
multiplier µ(zK , K , ).

   The multiplier is equal to the inverse of the market value of consumption:

                                                               1
 xM () +         pK xK () + z
                            ~M ()             hK () =                 ,                                     (A.14)
                                                         µ(zK , K , )

which is derived by substituting the solutions given a multiplier µ(zK , K , ) into the expression
on the left-hand side.

                                                              3
   Substituting the individuals' time constraint into the island resource constraint to eliminate
market hours, we write:

      xM () +       pK xK () + z
                               ~M ()        hK () d ( ) =                 z
                                                                          ~M () d ( ) ,
  Z                                                                   Z

which by substitution of the expression for the multiplier µ(zK , K , ) in (A.14) yields a closed-
form characterization of this multiplier:
                                       -1
 µ(zK , K , ) =          z
                         ~M () d ( )                                                                         (A.15)
                     Z

The denominator is an expected value independent of  . Thus µ is independent of  . Note that

µ(zK , K , ) = µ(). The marginal utility from market spending is independent of non-market

productivity and preference shifters. Given this solution for µ(zK , K , ), we obtain the solutions

                                                                1
 xM () =          z
                  ~M () d ( )                                                               -1               (A.16)
              Z                                                                      K -1   K -1
                                            K ()                          zK ()pK
                                1+          M ()       pK 1- 1 +           z
                                                                           ~M ()
                                                                                        -K
                                                                               K -1     K -1
                                       K ()                         zK ()pK
                                       M ()        pK 1- 1 +         z
                                                                     ~M ()                          1
 xK () =          z
                  ~M () d ( )                                                               -1               (A.17)
              Z                                                                      K -1   K -1   pK
                                            K ()                          zK ()pK
                                1+          M ()       pK 1- 1 +           z
                                                                           ~M ()
                                                                                                 -K
                                            K                                           K -1     K -1
                                 zK ()pK           K ()                       zK ()pK
                                  z
                                  ~M ()            M ()       pK - 1 +         z
                                                                               ~M ()
             Zz
              ~M () d ( )                                                                                1
 hK () =                                                                                       -1
                zK ()                                                                K -1      K -1     pK
                                            K ()                           zK ()pK
                                 1+         M ()          pK 1- 1 +         z
                                                                            ~M ()

                                                                                                             (A.18)

 hM () = 1 -        hK ()                                                                                    (A.19)

A.3     Postulating Equilibrium Allocations and Prices

We postulate an equilibrium in four steps.

                                                                            j
  1. We postulate that the equilibrium features no trade between islands, a(t ; ) = 0.

  2. We postulate that the solutions {xM () , hM () , xK () , hK ()} to the planner problem in

      Section A.2 constitute components of the equilibrium.

                                                     4
   3. We use the sequential budget constraints to postulate equilibrium holdings for the bonds
         b (sj
             t ; ) that are traded within islands:

                                                j
                                          µt+n (t +n )
          b   (sj
                t ; )   =E         ( )n         j
                                                         xM,t+n () +   pK xK,t+n () - y
                                                                                      ~t+n ()   (A.20)
                             n=0            µt (t )

                                  1-1
         where y ~M hM = (1 - 0 )zM
               ~=z                    hM denotes after-tax labor income.

   4. We use the intertemporal marginal rates of substitution implied by the planner solutions to
         postulate asset prices for b (sj             j
                                        t+1 ; ) and a(t+1 ; ):


          qb (sj                       
               t+1 ) =  exp - (1 - 1 ) t+1

                                     exp (At  ) d  (  )
                                                  t t
           ×                                                       )
                                                                     f t+1,j (st+1,j |st,j )    (A.21)
                  exp At +1        dt
                                     (
                                      +1 t+1 )  exp A  t+1 d   ( 
                                                            t+1 t+1

                                                          
          qa (Zt+1 ) =          exp - (1 - 1 ) t +1 dt
                                                     
                                                       +1
                                                          t +1

                                     exp (At  ) d  (  )
                                                  t t                         
           ×                                                       )
                                                                     P t +1 , t+1  Zt+1         (A.22)
                  exp At +1        dt
                                     (
                                      +1 t+1 )  exp A  t+1 d   ( 
                                                            t+1 t+1

         where A  1 - 1 .

A.4        Verifying the Equilibrium Allocations and Prices

We verify that the equilibrium postulated in Section A.3 constitutes an equilibrium by showing

that the postulated equilibrium allocations solve the households' problem and that all markets

clear.

A.4.1         Household Problem

The problem for a household  born in period j is described in the main text. We denote the

Lagrange multiplier on the household's budget constraint by µ
                                                            ~t . We drop  from the notation for
simplicity.

   Using the correspondence between the planner and the household first-order conditions to




                                                            5
                                j
relate the multipliers µ
                       ~t and µ(t ), we write the optimality conditions directly as:
                                                    K -1
                      K -1                                -1
    -1          K     K
                                           K -1     K -1           - 1
 M xM         =      xK       + (zK hK )   K
                                                                  xK K                                         (A.23)
                pK
                                                    K -1
                      K -1                                -1
    -1                K
                                           K -1     K -1 
                                                                             - 1   zK
 M xM         = K    xK      + (zK hK )    K
                                                                  (zK hK )     K                               (A.24)
                                                                                   z
                                                                                   ~M
                       j
                     µ(t +1 )
 qb (sj
      t+1 ) =             j
                             f t+1,j (t+1,j |t,j )dK,t+1 dzK,t+1                                               (A.25)
                      µ(t )
                        j
     j               µ(t +1 ) t+1,j t+1,j t,j      
 qa (t +1 ) =             j
                             f       (      | )dt  +1 dK,t+1 dzK,t+1                                           (A.26)
                      µ(t )

A.4.2     Euler Equations

We next verify that the Euler equations are satisfied at the postulated equilibrium allocations

and prices.

                                                                               j
     Using the marginal utility of market consumption of the planner problem µ(t ), we write the

Euler equation for the bonds b (sj
                                 t+1 ) at the postulated equilibrium as:
                           j
                     µt+1 (t +1 )
 qb (sj
      t+1 )   =               j
                                      f t+1,j (t+1,j |t,j )dK,t+1 dzK,t+1                                      (A.27)
                          µt (t )
                                                                       -1
                             j    j              j
                           z
                           ~M,t+1 t+1 , t+1 d j (t+1 )
                                                                            f t+1,j (t+1,j |t,j )dK,t+1 dzK,t+1 ,
                                                            t+1
              =                                                   -1
                                      j  j          j
                                    z
                                    ~M,t t , t d j (t )
                                                        t


where the second line follows from equation (A.15).

     To simplify the fraction in qb (sj
                                      t+1 ) we use that:

   j                             j         j         
 z
 ~M,t +1 = (1 - 0 ) exp (1 - 1 ) t + t+1 + t + t+1 + t+1                                .                      (A.28)

Given A = (1 - 1 ), the expectation over the random variables in the numerator is given by:

        exp A j         
              t + t+1 + t+1
                                                 j
                                            d j (t +1 )
                                                  t+1



 =      exp(Aj      j
             t )dj (t )
                                         
                                    exp At      (
                                           +1 dt +1
                                                    
                                                    t+1 )
                                                                            
                                                                       exp At +1 dt
                                                                                  
                                                                                    +1
                                                                                        
                                                                                       (t +1 ) ,               (A.29)
                      t



where the final equality follows from the assumption that the innovations are drawn independently.
Similarly, the expectation over the random variables in the denominator equals:

     exp(Aj         j
          t )dj ,t (t )
                                      
                                exp (At ) dt 
                                            ( ) .
                                             t                                                                 (A.30)

                                                              6
As a result, the price qb (sj
                            t+1 ) is:

                                           
                            exp - (1 - 1 ) t               ) d  (  )
                                                    exp (At    ,t t
 qb (sj
      t+1 ) =                             
                                             +1
                                                                          
                                                                                    f t+1,j (st+1,j |st,j ) ,
                       exp At +1 d  ,t+1 (t+1 )        exp At +1 d  ,t+1 (t+1 )

where f t+1,j (st+1,j |st,j ) = f (t
                                    )f (  )f (  ). This confirms our guess in equation (A.21).
                                     +1 t+1   t+1

The key observation is that the distributions for next-period innovations are independent of
the current period state and, therefore, the term in brackets is independent of the state vector
that differentiates islands . As a result, all islands       have the same bond prices, qb (sj
                                                                                             t+1 ) =
   B , 
Qb t +1 t+1 .

   We next calculate the bond price for a set of states Vt+1  Vt+1 :

                                                 
 qb (Vt+1 ) =          exp - (1 - 1 ) t +1 dt
                                            
                                              +1
                                                 t +1
                   V
                                                                           -1
                  exp At +1 dt+1 (t+1 )
                                                 exp At +1 dt+1 (t+1 )
                                                            
           ×                                   ) d  (  )                        .
                                        exp (At   t t

Similarly, all islands face the same price qb (Vt+1 ) = Qb (Vt+1 ).
                                                                                            ):
   Finally, we calculate the price for a claim that does not depend on the realization of (t +1

                                                 
 qb (Vt+1 ) =          exp - (1 - 1 ) t +1 dt
                                            
                                              +1
                                                 t +1
                   V
                                                                           -1
                   exp At +1 dt+1 (t+1 )
                                                 exp At +1 dt+1 (t+1 )
                                                            
            ×                                  ) d  (  )                        .
                                        exp (At   t t

All islands face the same price qb (Vt+1 ) = Qb (Vt+1 ).
   By no arbitrage, the price of an inter-island claim equals the price of the same within-island

claim. The price of a claim traded across islands for set Z gives:

  a          t,j          
 qt +1 (Z ; s ) =P (t+1 , t+1 )  Z qb (Vt+1 )


This concludes the discussion on asset prices.

   By no arbitrage, the prices of bonds a and b that are contingent on the same set of states must

be equalized. Therefore, the price of a claim traded across islands for some set Zt+1 is equalized
across islands at the no-trade equilibrium and given by:

                       
 qa (Zt+1 ) =P (t +1 , t+1 )  Zt+1 Qb (Vt+1 ),                                                      (A.31)


                                                   7
          ,  )  Z
where P (t                                              
           +1 t+1 t+1 denotes the probability of (t+1 , t+1 ) being a member of Zt+1 .

The expression for qa (Zt+1 ) confirms our guess in equation (A.22).

A.4.3       Household's Budget Constraint

We now verify our guess for the bond positions bt (sj
                                                    t ) and confirm that the household budget

constraint holds at the equilibrium allocations that we postulated. We define the deficit term by
dt  xM,t +                     ~t . Using the expression for the price qb (sj
                     pK xK,t - y                                            t+1 ) in equation (A.25), the

budget constraint at the no-trade equilibrium is given by:
                                   j      j        j
                                 µ(t +1 , K,t+1 , zK,t+1 )
 bt (sj
      t)   = dt +                       j   j      j
                                                                  bt+1 (sj
                                                                         t+1 )f
                                                                                t+1 j    j
                                                                                   (t+1 |t )dsj     j      j
                                                                                              t+1 dzK,t+1 dK,t+1 .
                                      µ(t , K,t , zK,t )

By substituting forward using equation (A.25), we confirm the guess for bt (sj
                                                                             t ) in equation (A.20)

and show that the household budget constraint holds at the postulated equilibrium allocations.

A.4.4       Goods Market Clearing

Aggregating the resource constraints in every island, we obtain that the allocations that solve the

planner problems satisfy the aggregate goods market clearing condition:


         xM,t () +       A- 1
                          K xK,t () d() + G =                 zM,t ()hM,t ()d() .
                                                           

A.4.5       Asset Market Clearing

                                                                                                    j
We now confirm that asset markets clear. The asset market clearing conditions                     a(t ; )d()    =0
                                                j
hold trivially in a no-trade equilibrium with a(t ; ) = 0. Next, we confirm that asset markets

within each island        also clear, that is         b (sj                 j
                                                          t ; )d() = 0,  , st .

   Omitting the household index  for simplicity, we substitute the postulated bond holdings in
equation (A.20) into the asset market clearing conditions:
                                               j               j
                                             µ(t +n , K,t+n , zK,t+n )
     b   (sj
           t )d()    =      E         ( )n
                                                   j          j
                                                                           dt+n d()
                                n=0              µ(t , K,t , zK,t )
                                               j               j
                                 n
                                             µ(t +n , K,t+n , zK,t+n )            j     j     j
                     =         ( )                j          j
                                                                          dt+n f (t +n |t-1 )dt+n d().
                         n=0                    µ(t , K,t , zK,t )



                                                              8
                                       j                                         j    j
For simplicity we omit conditioning on t -1 and write the density function as f (t+n |t-1 ) =
     })f ({  })f ({  })f ({z
f ({t +n   t+n     t+n      K,t+n , K,t+n }). Further, we denote the marginal utility growth
                      j
                   µ(t +n )
     
by Q t +n           µ(t j
                          )
                            .   Hence, we write aggregate bond holdings   b (sj
                                                                              t )d() as:

      
           ( )n          
                       Q t                                 
                           +n dt+n f ({t+n })f ({t+n })f ({t+n })f ({zK,t+n , K,t+n }) . . .
     n=0
                                         
                  . . . d{t +n }d{t+n }d{t+n }d{zK,t+n , K,t+n }d()
      
 =         ( )n              
                    dt+n f ({t                         
                               +n })f ({t+n })d{t+n }d{t+n }d()
     n=0
                                           
 × Q t +n f ({t+n })f ({zK,t+n , K,t+n })d{t+n }d{zK,t+n , K,t+n }.


Recalling that the deficit terms equal dt = xM,t +              pK xK,t - y
                                                                          ~t , the bond market clearing

condition holds because the first term is zero by the island-level resource constraint.


B        Inference of Sources of Heterogeneity

In this appendix we show how to derive the sources of heterogeneity {zK,t , K,t , t , t } presented

in Section 2.3. Our strategy is to invert the equilibrium allocations presented in Section 2.2 and

solve for the unique sources of heterogeneity that lead to these allocations. We note that the

identification is defined up to a constant because the constant C that appears in the equations of

Section 2.3 depends on the 's.
     The solution for zK in equation (14) comes from inverting equation (13) for the optimal

allocation of expenditures and time inputs in the production of good K . Next, we use the

solution for xK in equation (9) together with the solution for xM in equation (8) and invert these
solutions to solve for the preference weight for good K relative to M :
                                                    K - 1
                        1
                                             K -1   K -1 
 K                xK    
                                     zK pK
   = pK                         1+                          .
 M                xM                  z
                                      ~M

Using this equation together with the normalization M +              K = 1 yields solutions for M in
equation (15) and K in equation (16) in the text. Finally, we infer the permanent component

of market productivity  by inverting equation (7) in the text that defines the marginal utility of
market consumption. The transitory part of labor productivity is then given by  = log zM - .

                                                       9
C      Variance of Log Consumption

In this section we prove the statement that the variance of log consumption in equation (??))
                                                                          L -1
is decreasing in L . To proof the statement, let f (x; , L , L ) = log  + L    x , where we

restrict , L  0, L  1, and x  0. This implies that the derivative of f is increasing in x, and
increasingly so for larger values of L ,

                              1    L -1   1-L                                 -1
    fx (x; , L , L ) =        L -1
                                   L    = L   +x                                   0;
                            + L x
                       1-L                         -2             -L
 fxL (x; , L , L ) = - L   +x                            (1 - L ) L   0.

The cross-derivative is the key component of the proof.

    To establish the result, it is useful to write the variance as:

                                                                                      2
 Var (f (x; , L , L )) =            f (x; , L , L ) - Ef (x; , L , L ) f (x)dx
                                                                        2
                                          x
                          =                      fx (x; , L , L )           f (x)dx
                                         x
                                         ¯(L )

where x
      ¯(L ) is such that f (¯
                            x(L ); , L , L ) = Ef (x; , L , L ).

    Because fx is increasing in L , we know that for any ~L  L .
                                     2                                                    2
         x                                                    x
                fx (x; , L , L )         f (x)dx                     fx (x; , ~L , L )        f (x)dx
        x
        ¯(L )                                                x
                                                             ¯(L )

Second, we know that the mean minimizes the variance, that is,

                                                                    2
 Ef (x; , L , L ) = arg min               f (x; , L , L ) -  f (x)dx.                                   (A.32)
                            

We let x
       ¯(~
         L ) such that f (¯
                          x(~
                            L ); , ~L , L ) = Ef (x; , ~L , L ).
    As a result, we know that
                                     2                                                    2
         x                                                    x
                fx (x; , ~L , L )        f (x)dx                     fx (x; , ~L , L )        f (x)dx
        x
        ¯(L )                                                x
                                                             ¯(~
                                                               L )

and hence that
                                     2                                                    2
         x                                                    x
                fx (x; , L , L )         f (x)dx                     fx (x; , ~L , L )        f (x)dx   (A.33)
        x
        ¯(L )                                                x
                                                             ¯(~
                                                               L )

which is what we wanted to show.

                                                             10
D      Sensitivity Analyses

In this appendix we present the details underlying our sensitivity analyses. For every sensitivity
analysis, we regenerate the sources of heterogeneity and then perform the counterfactual analyses.

    · N = 3.5: Table A.1 assesses the contribution of driving forces, presented in rows, to the

      mean values of observables, presented in columns. Figure A.1 presents the welfare effects
      of shutting off the evolution of driving forces.

    · N = 1.5: Table A.2 assesses the contribution of driving forces, presented in rows, to the
      mean values of observables, presented in columns. Figure A.2 presents the welfare effects

      of shutting off the evolution of driving forces.

    · L = 0.2: Table A.3 assesses the contribution of driving forces, presented in rows, to the

      mean values of observables, presented in columns. Figure A.3 presents the welfare effects

      of shutting off the evolution of driving forces.

    · L = 0.8: Table A.4 assesses the contribution of driving forces, presented in rows, to the

      mean values of observables, presented in columns. Figure A.4 presents the welfare effects

      of shutting off the evolution of driving forces.

    · 1 = 0.06: Table A.5 assesses the contribution of driving forces, presented in rows, to the

      mean values of observables, presented in columns. Figure A.5 presents the welfare effects

      of shutting off the evolution of driving forces.

    · 1 = 0.18: Table A.6 assesses the contribution of driving forces, presented in rows, to the

      mean values of observables, presented in columns. Figure A.6 presents the welfare effects
      of shutting off the evolution of driving forces.

    ·  = 0.5: Table A.7 assesses the contribution of driving forces, presented in rows, to the

      mean values of observables, presented in columns. Figure A.7 presents the welfare effects
      of shutting off the evolution of driving forces.




                                                 11
·  = 2.0: Table A.8 assesses the contribution of driving forces, presented in rows, to the
  mean values of observables, presented in columns. Figure A.8 presents the welfare effects
  of shutting off the evolution of driving forces.

· Adjusted consumption measures: Table A.9 assesses the contribution of driving forces,

  presented in rows, to the mean values of observables, presented in columns. Figure A.9
  presents the welfare effects of shutting off the evolution of driving forces.

· Singles: Table A.10 assesses the contribution of driving forces, presented in rows, to the
  mean values of observables, presented in columns. Figure A.10 presents the welfare effects

  of shutting off the evolution of driving forces.

· Alternative measure of leisure: Table A.11 assesses the contribution of driving forces, pre-

  sented in rows, to the mean values of observables, presented in columns. Figure A.11

  presents the welfare effects of shutting off the evolution of driving forces.




                                             12
              Table A.1: Means: Counterfactuals (N = 3.5)


                     100 × Difference between 2012-2016 and 1995-1999
Case              log(px)   log xM   log xN   log xL   log hM   log hN   log hL
Baseline           24.6      5.0      16.5    78.2      -1.8     -7.4     2.1
Mean pN            35.3      5.0      59.7    78.2      10.9    -31.6     2.1
Mean pL            27.0      5.0      16.5    62.9      1.2      -7.4     0.4
Mean  +            -15.6    -22.4    -54.0    62.8     -16.8     18.3     0.5
Variance           26.7      6.5      19.5    79.0      -0.5     -9.4     2.2
Variance           24.5      5.0      16.4    78.2      -1.8     -7.1     2.2
Mean log zN        25.0      5.0      17.3    78.2      -1.5     -8.2     2.1
Variance log zN    23.5      5.0      14.0    78.2      -3.6     -3.3     2.1
Mean log zL        18.2      5.0      16.5    35.1      -9.1     -7.4     6.3
Variance log zL    24.8      5.0      16.5    79.0      -1.6     -7.4     2.1
Mean M             33.7      30.8     12.7    74.4      8.1     -11.1     -1.6
Variance M         23.2      1.1      16.4    78.1      -2.4     -7.5     2.0
Mean N             24.3      5.4      15.7    78.5      -2.1     -8.1     2.4
Variance N         24.8      5.2      16.8    78.4      -1.6     -7.0     2.3
Mean L             29.4      11.9     23.3    72.5      4.0      -0.5     -3.6
Variance L         24.5      5.0      16.4    78.2      -1.8     -7.4     2.1




                                     13
              Table A.2: Means: Counterfactuals (N = 1.5)


                     100 × Difference between 2012-2016 and 1995-1999
Case              log(px)   log xM   log xN   log xL   log hM   log hN   log hL
Baseline           24.6      5.1      16.5    78.3      -1.8     -7.4     2.1
Mean pN            26.8      5.1      41.0    78.3      1.1     -11.8     2.1
Mean pL            27.0      5.1      16.5    62.9      1.3      -7.4     0.4
Mean  +            -3.6     -22.4    -18.7    62.9      -2.3     -1.4     0.5
Variance           26.1      6.5      18.3    79.1      -1.7     -7.8     2.2
Variance           24.6      5.1      16.5    78.3      -1.6     -7.3     2.2
Mean log zN        21.3      5.1      8.3     78.3      -5.6     -0.9     2.1
Variance log zN    21.7      5.1      9.7     78.3      -5.7     0.8      2.1
Mean log zL        18.3      5.1      16.5    35.2      -9.0     -7.4     6.3
Variance log zL    24.8      5.1      16.5    79.0      -1.5     -7.4     2.0
Mean M             33.7      30.8     12.8    74.5      8.1     -11.1     -1.6
Variance M         23.2      1.2      16.4    78.2      -2.4     -7.5     2.0
Mean N             24.4      5.4      15.8    78.6      -2.0     -8.2     2.4
Variance N         24.9      5.3      16.9    78.4      -1.6     -7.1     2.3
Mean L             29.5      12.0     23.4    72.5      4.0      -0.5     -3.6
Variance L         24.6      5.0      16.5    78.2      -1.7     -7.5     2.1




                                     14
              Table A.3: Means: Counterfactuals (L = 0.2)


                     100 × Difference between 2012-2016 and 1995-1999
Case              log(px)   log xM   log xN   log xL   log hM   log hN   log hL
Baseline           24.6      5.1      16.5    78.2      -1.8     -7.4     2.1
Mean pN            31.1      5.1      50.8    78.2      6.2     -21.3     2.1
Mean pL            28.6      5.1      16.5    69.9      3.1      -7.4     -0.8
Mean  +            -8.0     -22.4    -35.5    70.0      -7.4     9.3      -0.7
Variance           26.3      6.5      18.9    78.7      -1.4     -8.6     2.3
Variance           24.6      5.1      16.4    78.3      -1.7     -7.2     2.1
Mean log zN        23.2      5.1      12.9    78.2      -3.8     -4.4     2.1
Variance log zN    23.3      5.1      13.5    78.2      -3.5     -2.7     2.1
Mean log zL        16.6      5.1      16.5    19.7     -11.0     -7.4     7.3
Variance log zL    24.9      5.1      16.5    79.6      -1.4     -7.4     2.0
Mean M             33.7      30.8     12.8    74.5      8.1     -11.1     -1.6
Variance M         23.2      1.1      16.4    78.2      -2.4     -7.5     2.0
Mean N             24.4      5.4      15.7    78.6      -2.0     -8.1     2.4
Variance N         24.8      5.3      16.8    78.4      -1.6     -7.0     2.3
Mean L             29.5      12.0     23.4    72.5      4.0      -0.5     -3.6
Variance L         24.6      5.0      16.4    78.2      -1.7     -7.4     2.1




                                     15
              Table A.4: Means: Counterfactuals (L = 0.8)


                     100 × Difference between 2012-2016 and 1995-1999
Case              log(px)   log xM   log xN   log xL   log hM   log hN   log hL
Baseline           24.6      5.1      16.5    78.2      -1.8     -7.4     2.1
Mean pN            31.1      5.1      50.8    78.2      6.1     -21.3     2.1
Mean pL            25.5      5.1      16.5    55.8      -0.6     -7.4     1.5
Mean  +            -11.3    -22.4    -35.5    55.6     -11.2     9.3      1.5
Variance           26.5      6.5      18.9    79.4      -1.3     -8.6     2.1
Variance           24.6      5.0      16.4    78.2      -1.7     -7.2     2.2
Mean log zN        23.2      5.1      12.9    78.2      -3.8     -4.4     2.1
Variance log zN    23.3      5.1      13.5    78.2      -3.5     -2.7     2.1
Mean log zL        20.2      5.1      16.5    50.3      -6.5     -7.4     5.1
Variance log zL    24.7      5.1      16.5    78.1      -1.7     -7.4     2.1
Mean M             33.7      30.8     12.8    74.5      8.1     -11.1     -1.6
Variance M         23.2      1.1      16.4    78.1      -2.4     -7.5     2.0
Mean N             24.4      5.4      15.7    78.5      -2.1     -8.1     2.4
Variance N         24.8      5.2      16.9    78.4      -1.6     -7.0     2.3
Mean L             29.5      11.9     23.4    72.5      4.0      -0.5     -3.6
Variance L         24.5      5.0      16.4    78.2      -1.7     -7.4     2.1




                                     16
              Table A.5: Means: Counterfactuals (1 = 0.06)


                     100 × Difference between 2012-2016 and 1995-1999
Case              log(px)   log xM   log xN   log xL   log hM   log hN   log hL
Baseline           26.7      7.2      18.6    80.4      -1.8     -7.4     2.1
Mean pN            33.2      7.2      52.8    80.4      6.2     -21.4     2.1
Mean pL            29.1      7.2      18.6    65.0      1.3      -7.4     0.4
Mean  +            -9.8     -22.2    -36.9    63.9     -10.1     10.5     0.3
Variance           28.6      8.7      21.1    81.2      -1.3     -8.7     2.2
Variance           26.7      7.2      18.5    80.4      -1.9     -7.2     2.2
Mean log zN        25.9      7.2      16.5    80.4      -3.0     -5.6     2.1
Variance log zN    25.3      7.2      15.4    80.4      -3.9     -2.4     2.1
Mean log zL        20.2      7.2      18.6    36.3      -9.5     -7.4     6.5
Variance log zL    26.9      7.2      18.6    81.0      -1.6     -7.4     2.1
Mean M             35.8      32.8     14.9    76.6      8.2     -11.1     -1.6
Variance M         25.3      2.9      18.5    80.3      -2.4     -7.5     2.0
Mean N             26.5      7.6      17.8    80.7      -2.1     -8.2     2.5
Variance N         27.0      7.4      19.0    80.5      -1.6     -7.0     2.3
Mean L             31.5      14.0     25.4    74.6      4.1      -0.6     -3.6
Variance L         26.7      7.1      18.6    80.3      -1.7     -7.4     2.1




                                     17
              Table A.6: Means: Counterfactuals (1 = 0.18)


                     100 × Difference between 2012-2016 and 1995-1999
Case              log(px)   log xM   log xN   log xL   log hM   log hN   log hL
Baseline           22.4      2.9      14.3    76.1      -1.8     -7.3     2.1
Mean pN            29.0      2.9      48.7    76.1      6.1     -21.2     2.1
Mean pL            24.8      2.9      14.3    60.7      1.2      -7.3     0.4
Mean  +            -9.5     -22.6    -33.9    61.8      -8.7     8.1      0.6
Variance           24.1      4.2      16.5    76.8      -1.4     -8.4     2.2
Variance           22.4      2.9      14.3    76.1      -1.8     -7.2     2.1
Mean log zN        20.3      2.9      9.1     76.1      -4.3     -3.2     2.1
Variance log zN    21.2      2.9      11.6    76.1      -3.4     -2.9     2.1
Mean log zL        16.2      2.9      14.3    34.0      -8.5     -7.3     6.1
Variance log zL    22.6      2.9      14.3    77.0      -1.5     -7.3     2.0
Mean M             31.5      28.7     10.6    72.3      8.1     -11.1     -1.6
Variance M         21.1      -0.9     14.2    76.0      -2.5     -7.4     2.0
Mean N             22.2      3.2      13.6    76.3      -2.1     -8.0     2.4
Variance N         22.6      3.1      14.6    76.2      -1.6     -7.0     2.3
Mean L             27.3      9.8      21.2    70.3      4.1      -0.4     -3.6
Variance L         22.4      2.8      14.2    76.0      -1.8     -7.4     2.1




                                     18
                  Table A.7: Means: Counterfactuals ( = 0.5)


                       100 × Difference between 2012-2016 and 1995-1999
Case                log(px)   log xM   log xN   log xL   log hM   log hN   log hL
Baseline             24.6      5.1      16.5    78.2      -1.8     -7.4     2.1
Mean pN              30.4      6.4      47.5    79.6      5.3     -24.6     3.5
Mean pL              26.5      4.2      15.6    63.7      0.6      -8.3     1.2
Mean  +              -5.7     -13.0    -34.3    60.1      -5.2     10.5     -2.2
Variance             26.2      6.0      18.7    79.2      -1.6     -8.7     2.4
Variance             24.6      5.0      16.4    78.2      -1.7     -7.2     2.2
Mean log zN          23.1      5.4      12.1    78.6      -4.0     -5.3     2.5
Variance log zN      23.2      5.4      12.8    78.5      -3.6     -3.4     2.4
Mean log zL          -2.3     -21.9    -10.4    51.3     -32.2    -34.3    22.5
Variance log zL      25.1      5.6      17.0    78.7      -1.3     -6.9     1.8
Mean M               29.3      21.1     12.9    74.5      2.5      -6.9     -0.3
Variance M           23.9      2.9      17.3    79.1      -2.6     -7.7     2.4
Mean N               24.6      5.6      15.5    79.0      -1.5     -8.0     2.4
Variance N           23.8      6.2      13.3    79.4      -2.5     -9.6     3.9
Mean L               60.7      47.7     58.2    71.5      35.6    -11.6    -27.5
Variance L           19.3      2.7      13.6    63.6      -2.0     9.1      -1.8




                                       19
                  Table A.8: Means: Counterfactuals ( = 2.0)


                       100 × Difference between 2012-2016 and 1995-1999
Case                log(px)   log xM   log xN   log xL   log hM   log hN   log hL
Baseline             24.2      4.6      16.2    77.6      -1.9     -7.3     2.1
Mean pN              32.2      1.7      56.8    74.7      7.8     -14.9     -0.8
Mean pL              27.6      6.4      17.9    60.7      2.5      -5.5     -1.2
Mean  +              -17.9    -42.1    -38.8    67.1     -18.2     6.4      5.4
Variance             26.4      7.0      18.8    78.1      -0.8     -8.2     1.9
Variance             24.2      4.6      16.1    77.7      -1.9     -7.2     2.2
Mean log zN          23.0      3.9      14.2    76.9      -3.6     -2.7     1.4
Variance log zN      23.1      4.0      14.5    77.0      -3.4     -1.3     1.5
Mean log zL          48.6      41.7     53.2    -14.6     24.1     29.8    -42.8
Variance log zL      23.7      3.6      15.1    78.9      -1.7     -8.4     2.6
Mean M               19.8     -34.4     17.8    79.3      -6.9     -5.6     3.8
Variance M           23.3      4.8      16.7    78.2      -2.9     -6.8     2.7
Mean N               17.4      18.5    -81.9    91.5      -9.0    -105.3   16.0
Variance N           27.5      -1.2     22.9    71.8      0.8      -0.6     -3.7
Mean L               -3.0     -59.8    -48.3    94.0     -27.4    -71.7    18.5
Variance L           27.2      8.1      19.6    74.6      -0.5     -3.9     -0.9




                                       20
  Table A.9: Means: Counterfactuals (Adjusted Consumption Measures)


                     100 × Difference between 2012-2016 and 1995-1999
Case              log(px)   log xM   log xN   log xL   log hM   log hN   log hL
Baseline           24.1      6.1      15.1    78.3      -1.8     -7.4     2.1
Mean pN            30.6      6.1      49.3    78.3      6.2     -21.4     2.1
Mean pL            26.4      6.1      15.1    63.0      1.2      -7.4     0.4
Mean  +            -10.3    -21.4    -36.8    62.9      -9.3     9.4      0.5
Variance           26.1      7.7      17.8    79.2      -1.2     -8.7     2.2
Variance           24.0      6.0      15.1    78.3      -1.7     -7.2     2.1
Mean log zN        23.0      6.1      12.5    78.3      -3.2     -5.1     2.1
Variance log zN    22.7      6.1      12.0    78.3      -3.6     -2.5     2.1
Mean log zL        18.0      6.1      15.1    35.1      -8.7     -7.4     6.3
Variance log zL    24.4      6.1      15.1    79.9      -1.4     -7.4     2.0
Mean M             32.8      29.8     11.4    74.6      8.0     -11.0     -1.6
Variance M         22.3      1.9      15.0    78.2      -2.1     -7.4     2.0
Mean N             23.9      6.2      14.8    78.4      -2.0     -7.6     2.2
Variance N         24.3      6.2      15.3    78.5      -1.5     -7.1     2.3
Mean L             29.1      13.0     22.1    72.4      4.3      -0.4     -3.8
Variance L         24.0      6.0      15.0    78.2      -1.8     -7.5     2.1




                                     21
                  Table A.10: Means: Counterfactuals (Singles)


                       100 × Difference between 2012-2016 and 1995-1999
Case                log(px)   log xM   log xN   log xL   log hM   log hN   log hL
Baseline             17.6      -1.3     9.7     66.8      -3.0    -18.2     8.2
Mean pN              22.2      -1.3     39.7    66.8      3.2     -36.5     8.2
Mean pL              20.0      -1.3     9.7     51.3      0.4     -18.2     6.4
Mean  +              -10.8    -25.7    -30.6    52.9      -7.3     2.4      6.6
Variance             20.5      1.2      13.4    68.2      -2.5    -20.7     8.3
Variance             17.7      -1.3     9.7     66.8      -4.4    -17.9     8.3
Mean log zN          14.9      -1.3     3.1     66.8      -6.1     -8.6     8.2
Variance log zN      17.5      -1.3     9.5     66.8      -3.3    -17.3     8.2
Mean log zL          13.1      -1.3     9.7     37.5      -8.2    -18.2    11.5
Variance log zL      14.2      -1.3     9.7     45.6      -7.6    -18.2    12.8
Mean M               27.2      26.2     5.2     62.2      7.1     -22.7     3.7
Variance M           16.0      -5.8     9.6     66.7      -2.4    -18.3     8.1
Mean N               18.9      -3.2     15.5    64.9      -1.5    -12.4     6.3
Variance N           16.9      -1.6     8.3     66.6      -3.9    -19.6     8.0
Mean L               27.1      11.8     22.9    57.0      8.6      -5.1     -1.4
Variance L           16.5      -2.5     8.6     65.8      -3.8    -19.3     7.2




                                       22
   Table A.11: Means: Counterfactuals (Alternative Measure of Leisure)


                     100 × Difference between 2012-2016 and 1995-1999
Case              log(px)   log xM   log xN   log xL   log hM   log hN   log hL
Baseline           24.5      4.9      16.4    78.1      -1.8     12.0     -4.0
Mean pN            32.6      4.9      54.2    78.1      8.0      1.6      -4.0
Mean pL            26.8      4.9      16.4    62.3      1.2      12.0     -6.2
Mean  +            -11.6    -22.5    -40.5    62.3     -11.4     23.8     -6.1
Variance           26.4      6.4      19.1    78.9      -1.1     11.1     -3.9
Variance           24.4      4.9      16.3    78.1      -1.7     12.1     -4.0
Mean log zN        28.5      4.9      25.5    78.1      2.9      7.2      -4.0
Variance log zN    27.9      4.9      23.6    78.1      3.4      5.0      -4.0
Mean log zL        17.6      4.9      16.4    30.8      -9.5     12.0     1.8
Variance log zL    29.8      4.9      16.4    97.6      4.2      12.0     -9.5
Mean M             33.6      30.6     12.7    74.3      8.1      8.3      -7.7
Variance M         23.1      1.1      16.3    78.0      -2.4     11.9     -4.1
Mean N             24.5      9.2      10.1    82.4      -1.7     5.7      0.3
Variance N         24.4      4.9      16.2    78.0      -1.8     11.8     -4.1
Mean L             25.4      6.3      17.7    76.4      -0.6     13.3     -5.7
Variance L         24.5      4.9      16.4    78.3      -1.7     12.0     -3.8




                                     23
                         .5




                                                                                                                                            .06
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 




                                                                                                                                            .04
                         .4




                                                                                                                                            .02
                         .3
                         .2




                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                            -.02
                         .1




                                                                                                                                            -.04
                         0




                              1995          2000              2005              2010         2015                                                  1995          2000              2005              2010         2015
                                                Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL                                                                       Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL
                   .5




                                                                                                                                     .1
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                   .4




                                                                                                                                     .05
                   .3




                                                                                                                                     0
                   .2




                                                                                                                                     -.05
                   .1




                                                                                                                                     -.1
                   0




                          1995             2000               2005             2010          2015                                             1995              2000               2005             2010          2015
                                     Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)                                                     Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)
                         .5




                                                                                                                                           .1
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           .05
                         .3
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .1




                                                                                                                                           -.05
                         0




                              1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                 1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                      Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L                                                          Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L
                         .5




                                                                                                                                           .1
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           .05
                         .3
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .1




                                                                                                                                           -.05
                         0




                              1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                 1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                      Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)                                                      Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)
                         .5




                                                                                                                                           .1
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           .05
                         .3
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .1




                                                                                                                                           -.05
                         0




                              1995          2000              2005             2010          2015                                                 1995           2000              2005             2010          2015
                                       Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L                                                          Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L




                                                       Figure A.1: Welfare: Counterfactuals (N = 3.5)




                                                                                                        24
                         .5




                                                                                                                                            .15
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                            .1
                         .3




                                                                                                                                            .05
                         .2




                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                            -.05
                         .1




                                                                                                                                            -.1
                         0




                              1995          2000              2005              2010         2015                                                  1995          2000              2005              2010         2015
                                                Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL                                                                       Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL
                   .6




                                                                                                                                     .2
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                   .4




                                                                                                                                     .1
                   .2




                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                     -.1
                   0
                   -.2




                                                                                                                                     -.2
                          1995             2000               2005             2010          2015                                            1995               2000               2005             2010          2015
                                     Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)                                                     Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)

                                                                                                                                           .2
                         .5




                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           .1
                         .3
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .1
                         0




                                                                                                                                           -.1




                              1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                1995           2000               2005             2010          2015
                                      Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L                                                          Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L
                                                                                                                                           .2
                         .5




                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           .1
                         .3
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .1




                                                                                                                                           -.1
                         0




                              1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                1995           2000               2005             2010          2015
                                      Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)                                                      Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)
                         .5




                                                                                                                                           .2
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           .1
                         .3
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .1




                                                                                                                                           -.1
                         0




                              1995          2000              2005             2010          2015                                                1995            2000              2005             2010          2015
                                       Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L                                                          Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L




                                                       Figure A.2: Welfare: Counterfactuals (N = 1.5)




                                                                                                        25
                         .5




                                                                                                                                            .02
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                            0
                         .3
                         .2




                                                                                                                                            -.02
                         .1




                                                                                                                                            -.04
                         0




                              1995          2000              2005              2010         2015                                                  1995          2000              2005              2010         2015
                                                Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL                                                                       Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL




                                                                                                                                     .02
                                                                                                             D
                   .4




                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 




                                                                                                                                     0
                   .3




                                                                                                                                     -.02
                   .2




                                                                                                                                     -.04
                   .1




                                                                                                                                     -.06
                                                                                                                                     -.08
                   0




                          1995             2000               2005             2010          2015                                             1995              2000               2005             2010          2015
                                     Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)                                                     Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)

                                                                                                                                           .04
                         .5




                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           .02
                         .3




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           -.02
                         .1




                                                                                                                                           -.04
                         0




                              1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                 1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                      Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L                                                          Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L
                                                                                                                                           .04
                                                                                                             D
                         .4




                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 




                                                                                                                                           .02
                         .3




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           -.02
                         .1




                                                                                                                                           -.04
                         0




                              1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                 1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                      Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)                                                      Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)
                                                                                                                                           .04
                                                                                                             D
                         .4




                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 




                                                                                                                                           .02
                         .3




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           -.02
                         .1




                                                                                                                                           -.04
                         0




                              1995          2000              2005             2010          2015                                                 1995           2000              2005             2010          2015
                                       Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L                                                          Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L




                                                       Figure A.3: Welfare: Counterfactuals (L = 0.2)




                                                                                                        26
                          .5




                                                                                                                                             .4
                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                              Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L


                          .4
Welfare, Level Effect 




                                                                                                                                             .3
                          .3




                                                                                                                                             .2
                          .2
                          .1




                                                                                                                                             .1
                          0




                                                                                                                                             0
                               1995          2000              2005              2010         2015                                                1995          2000              2005              2010         2015
                                                 Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL                                                                     Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL
                   .6




                                                                                                                                      .4
                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                              Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                   .4




                                                                                                                                      .2
                   .2




                                                                                                                                      0
                   0




                                                                                                                                      -.2
                   -.2




                           1995             2000               2005             2010          2015                                            1995             2000               2005             2010          2015
                                      Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)                                                   Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)
                         .6




                                                                                                                                            .4
                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                              Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 




                                                                                                                                            .3
                         .4




                                                                                                                                            .2
                         .2




                                                                                                                                            .1
                         0




                                                                                                                                            0
                         -.2




                                                                                                                                            -.1




                               1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                1995         2000               2005             2010          2015
                                       Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L                                                        Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L
                                                                                                                                            .4
                         .5




                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                              Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                            .3
                         .3




                                                                                                                                            .2
                         .2




                                                                                                                                            .1
                         .1
                         0




                                                                                                                                            0




                               1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                1995         2000               2005             2010          2015
                                       Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)                                                    Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)
                         .5




                                                                                                                                            .4
                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                              Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L


                         .4
Welfare, Level Effect 




                                                                                                                                            .3
                         .3




                                                                                                                                            .2
                         .2
                         .1




                                                                                                                                            .1
                         0




                                                                                                                                            0




                               1995          2000              2005             2010          2015                                                1995          2000              2005             2010          2015
                                        Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L                                                        Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L




                                                        Figure A.4: Welfare: Counterfactuals (L = 0.8)




                                                                                                         27
                         .5




                                                                                                                                            .1
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                            .05
                         .3
                         .2




                                                                                                                                            0
                         .1




                                                                                                                                            -.05
                         0




                              1995          2000              2005              2010         2015                                                  1995          2000              2005              2010         2015
                                                Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL                                                                       Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL
                   .5




                                                                                                                                     .1
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                   .4




                                                                                                                                     .05
                   .3




                                                                                                                                     0
                   .2




                                                                                                                                     -.05
                   .1




                                                                                                                                     -.1
                   0




                          1995             2000               2005             2010          2015                                             1995              2000               2005             2010          2015
                                     Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)                                                     Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)
                         .5




                                                                                                                                           .1
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           .05
                         .3
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .1




                                                                                                                                           -.05
                         0




                              1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                 1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                      Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L                                                          Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L
                         .5




                                                                                                                                           .1
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           .05
                         .3
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .1




                                                                                                                                           -.05
                         0




                              1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                 1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                      Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)                                                      Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)
                         .5




                                                                                                                                           .1
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           .05
                         .3
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .1




                                                                                                                                           -.05
                         0




                              1995          2000              2005             2010          2015                                                 1995           2000              2005             2010          2015
                                       Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L                                                          Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L




                                                       Figure A.5: Welfare: Counterfactuals (1 = 0.06)




                                                                                                        28
                         .5




                                                                                                                                            .06
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                            .04
                         .3




                                                                                                                                            .02
                         .2




                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                            -.02
                         .1




                                                                                                                                            -.04
                         0




                              1995          2000              2005              2010         2015                                                  1995          2000              2005              2010         2015
                                                Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL                                                                       Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL




                                                                                                                                     .1
                   .4




                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 




                                                                                                                                     .05
                   .3




                                                                                                                                     0
                   .2




                                                                                                                                     -.05
                   .1




                                                                                                                                     -.1
                   0




                          1995             2000               2005             2010          2015                                             1995              2000               2005             2010          2015
                                     Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)                                                     Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)
                         .5




                                                                                                                                           .1
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           .05
                         .3
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .1




                                                                                                                                           -.05
                         0




                              1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                 1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                      Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L                                                          Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L
                         .5




                                                                                                                                           .1
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           .05
                         .3
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .1




                                                                                                                                           -.05
                         0




                              1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                 1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                      Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)                                                      Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)
                                                                                                                                           .1
                         .4




                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .3




                                                                                                                                           .05
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .1




                                                                                                                                           -.05
                         0




                              1995          2000              2005             2010          2015                                                 1995           2000              2005             2010          2015
                                       Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L                                                          Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L




                                                       Figure A.6: Welfare: Counterfactuals (1 = 0.18)




                                                                                                        29
                          .3




                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                              Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 




                                                                                                                                             -.05
                          .2




                                                                                                                                             -.1
                          .1




                                                                                                                                             -.15
                                                                                                                                             -.2
                          0




                               1995          2000              2005              2010         2015                                                  1995          2000              2005              2010         2015
                                                 Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL                                                                       Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL
                   .3




                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                              Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                   .2




                                                                                                                                      -.05
                   .1




                                                                                                                                      -.1
                   0




                                                                                                                                      -.15
                   -.1




                                                                                                                                      -.2
                   -.2




                           1995             2000               2005             2010          2015                                             1995              2000               2005             2010          2015
                                      Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)                                                     Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)
                         .3




                                                                                                                                            .1
                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                              Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L

                         .2
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .1




                                                                                                                                            0
                         0




                                                                                                                                            -.1
                         -.1
                         -.2




                                                                                                                                            -.2




                               1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                 1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                       Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L                                                          Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L
                                                                                                                                            0
                         .3




                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                              Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 




                                                                                                                                            -.05
                         .2




                                                                                                                                            -.1
                         .1




                                                                                                                                            -.15
                                                                                                                                            -.2
                         0




                               1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                 1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                       Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)                                                      Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)
                                                                                                                                            .1
                                                                                                              D
                         .2




                                                                                                              Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         0




                                                                                                                                            0
                         -.2




                                                                                                                                            -.1
                         -.4
                         -.6




                                                                                                                                            -.2




                               1995          2000              2005             2010          2015                                                 1995           2000              2005             2010          2015
                                        Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L                                                          Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L




                                                            Figure A.7: Welfare: Counterfactuals ( = 0.5)




                                                                                                         30
                                                                                                                                            .01
                         .6




                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 




                                                                                                                                            0
                         .4




                                                                                                                                            -.01
                                                                                                                                            -.02
                         .2




                                                                                                                                            -.03
                         0




                              1995          2000              2005              2010         2015                                                  1995          2000              2005              2010         2015
                                                Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL                                                                       Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL




                                                                                                                                     .05
                   .6




                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                   .4




                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                     -.05
                   .2




                                                                                                                                     -.1
                   0




                          1995             2000               2005             2010          2015                                             1995              2000               2005             2010          2015
                                     Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)                                                     Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)

                                                                                                                                           .02
                         .6




                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           -.02
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           -.04
                                                                                                                                           -.06
                         0




                              1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                 1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                      Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L                                                          Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L
                         .6




                                                                                                                                           .02
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                           -.02
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           -.04
                         0




                              1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                 1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                      Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)                                                      Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)
                                                                                                                                           .02
                         .6




                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           -.02
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           -.04
                                                                                                                                           -.06
                         0




                              1995          2000              2005             2010          2015                                                 1995           2000              2005             2010          2015
                                       Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L                                                          Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L




                                                           Figure A.8: Welfare: Counterfactuals ( = 2.0)




                                                                                                        31
                                                                                                                                            .05
                         .5




                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4
                         .3




                                                                                                                                            0
                         .2
                         .1




                                                                                                                                            -.05
                         0




                              1995          2000              2005              2010         2015                                                  1995          2000              2005              2010         2015
                                                Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL                                                                       Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL
                   .5




                                                                                                                                     .05
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                   .4




                                                                                                                                     0
                   .3
                   .2




                                                                                                                                     -.05
                   .1




                                                                                                                                     -.1
                   0




                          1995             2000               2005             2010          2015                                             1995              2000               2005             2010          2015
                                     Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)                                                     Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)
                         .5




                                                                                                                                           .05
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4
                         .3




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .2
                         .1




                                                                                                                                           -.05
                         0




                              1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                 1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                      Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L                                                          Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L
                         .5




                                                                                                                                           .1
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           .05
                         .3
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .1




                                                                                                                                           -.05
                         0




                              1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                 1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                      Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)                                                      Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)
                         .5




                                                                                                                                           .06
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           .04
                         .3




                                                                                                                                           .02
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                           -.02
                         .1




                                                                                                                                           -.04
                         0




                              1995          2000              2005             2010          2015                                                 1995           2000              2005             2010          2015
                                       Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L                                                          Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L




                              Figure A.9: Welfare: Counterfactuals (Adjusted Consumption Measures)




                                                                                                        32
                         .5




                                                                                                                                             .1
                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                              Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 




                                                                                                                                             0
                         .4




                                                                                                                                             -.1
                         .3




                                                                                                                                             -.2
                         .2




                                                                                                                                             -.3
                         .1




                                                                                                                                             -.4
                         0




                              1995          2000               2005              2010         2015                                                 1995          2000              2005              2010         2015
                                                Baseline              Mean pN           Mean pL                                                                      Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL




                                                                                                                                      .2
                                                                                                              D
                   .4




                                                                                                              Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 




                                                                                                                                      0
                   .3




                                                                                                                                      -.2
                   .2
                   .1




                                                                                                                                      -.4
                   0




                                                                                                                                      -.6
                          1995             2000                2005             2010          2015                                            1995              2000               2005             2010          2015
                                     Baseline          Mean +            Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)                                                    Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)
                         .5




                                                                                                                                            .2
                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                              Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                            0
                         .3
                         .2




                                                                                                                                            -.2
                         .1




                                                                                                                                            -.4
                         0




                              1995         2000                2005             2010          2015                                                1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                      Baseline              Mean M           Mean N         Mean L                                                         Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L
                         .8




                                                                                                                                            .4
                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                              Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 




                                                                                                                                            .2
                         .6




                                                                                                                                            0
                         .4




                                                                                                                                            -.2
                         .2




                                                                                                                                            -.4
                         0




                              1995         2000                2005             2010          2015                                                1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                      Baseline              Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)                                                     Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)
                         .5




                                                                                                                                            .1
                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                              Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 




                                                                                                                                            0
                         .4




                                                                                                                                            -.1
                         .3




                                                                                                                                            -.2
                         .2




                                                                                                                                            -.3
                         .1




                                                                                                                                            -.4
                         0




                              1995          2000               2005             2010          2015                                                1995           2000              2005             2010          2015
                                       Baseline              Var M              Var N         Var L                                                         Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L




                                                           Figure A.10: Welfare: Counterfactuals (Singles)




                                                                                                         33
                                                                                                                                            .05
                         .5




                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                            0
                         .3




                                                                                                                                            -.05
                         .2




                                                                                                                                            -.1
                         .1




                                                                                                                                            -.15
                         0




                              1995          2000              2005              2010         2015                                                  1995          2000              2005              2010         2015
                                                Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL                                                                       Baseline             Mean pN           Mean pL




                                                                                                                                     .05
                   .5




                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                   .4




                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                     -.05
                   .3




                                                                                                                                     -.1
                   .2




                                                                                                                                     -.15
                   .1




                                                                                                                                     -.2
                   0




                          1995             2000               2005             2010          2015                                             1995              2000               2005             2010          2015
                                     Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)                                                     Baseline          Mean +           Mean log(zN)     Mean log(zL)

                                                                                                                                           .05
                         .5




                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .3




                                                                                                                                           -.05
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           -.1
                         .1




                                                                                                                                           -.15
                         0




                              1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                 1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                      Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L                                                          Baseline             Mean M           Mean N         Mean L
                         .8




                                                                                                                                           .2
                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .6




                                                                                                                                           .1
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                           -.1
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           -.2
                         0




                              1995         2000               2005             2010          2015                                                 1995          2000               2005             2010          2015
                                      Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)                                                      Baseline             Var           Var log(zN)      Var log(zL)
                                                                                                                                           .05
                         .5




                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                             Welfare, Dispersion Effect 
L
Welfare, Level Effect 
                         .4




                                                                                                                                           0
                         .3




                                                                                                                                           -.05
                         .2




                                                                                                                                           -.1
                         .1




                                                                                                                                           -.15
                         0




                              1995          2000              2005             2010          2015                                                 1995           2000              2005             2010          2015
                                       Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L                                                          Baseline             Var M              Var N         Var L




                               Figure A.11: Welfare: Counterfactuals (Alternative Measure of Leisure)




                                                                                                        34
