                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         RISK-MITIGATING TECHNOLOGIES:
                    THE CASE OF RADIATION DIAGNOSTIC DEVICES

                                        Alberto Galasso
                                          Hong Luo

                                      Working Paper 26305
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26305


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019




We are grateful for financial support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council
of Canada. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Alberto Galasso and Hong Luo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Risk-Mitigating Technologies: the Case of Radiation Diagnostic Devices
Alberto Galasso and Hong Luo
NBER Working Paper No. 26305
September 2019
JEL No. K13,O3,O31,O32,O33

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the impact of consumers' risk perception on firm innovation. Our analysis exploits a
major surge in the perceived risk of radiation diagnostic devices, following extensive media
coverage of a set of over-radiation accidents involving CT scanners in late 2009. Difference-in-
differences regressions using data on patents and FDA product clearances show that the increased
perception of radiation risk spurred the development of new technologies that mitigated such risk
and led to a greater number of new products. We provide qualitative evidence and describe
patterns of equipment usage and upgrade that are consistent with this mechanism. Our analysis
suggests that changes in risk perception can be an important driver of innovation and can shape
the direction of technological progress.


Alberto Galasso
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
alberto.galasso@rotman.utoronto.ca

Hong Luo
Harvard University
Morgan Hall 241
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
hluo@hbs.edu
1    Introduction
At least since Schmookler (1966), strategy, innovation, and economics scholars have emphasized the links
between market demand, innovation incentives, and technological progress. The broad consensus is that
market demand plays a crucial role in selecting from among the potential alternative paths opened up by
scientific and technological progress (Dosi (1982); Kline and Rosenberg (1986); Di Stefano et al. (2012)).
    Empirical research has shown that demand may steer technological progress through a variety of mech-
anisms. These include: market size (Acemoglu and Linn (2004)); heterogeneity in consumer needs (Adner
and Levinthal (2001)); knowledge of local demand patterns (Fabrizio and Thomas (2012)); and feedback
from customers and lead users (Von Hippel (1986); Chatterji and Fabrizio (2012)). Despite this extensive
literature, shifts in demand driven by the perception of risk in using a product have, thus far, received little
empirical and theoretical attention. Our paper fills this gap by examining firms' innovation responses to a
significant change in perceived product safety and by characterizing the nature of the resulting innovations.
    Health and safety concerns are of first-order importance in many aspects of our lives. With product
liability accounting for the majority of civil personal injury cases in the U.S. (70 percent in 2016), such
concerns are critically important to firms that produce these products. Moreover, prominent product failures
tend to attract extensive media coverage and public attention--e.g., the fatal accident in 2018 involving
Uber's autonomous vehicle and the Boeing 737 MAX crashes in Indonesia and Ethiopia in 2018 and 2019--
and such attention can have profound impacts on the perceived safety level of the underlying technologies.
    Changes in risk perception potentially differ from other demand-pull forces in a number of dimensions.
First, consumers rarely have the full information about risk, and their learning process is typically subject to
biases, such as the over-weighting of small-probability events and events that are highly publicized (Licht-
enstein et al. (1978); Slovic et al. (1982)). Second, the impact of an increase in risk perception on product
demand and, hence, innovation incentives is potentially ambiguous. On the one hand, the willingness to pay
for safety will increase and drive up investments in safety features and safer machines (Viscusi (1993)). On
the other hand, innovation incentives for products that are valuable in other dimensions but impose higher
risk may decline. Third, changes in risk perception may exhibit externalities that potentially affect the entire
product category. As a result, negative events may have far-reaching impact beyond firms that are directly
involved (Jarrell and Peltzman, 1985), and their impact on innovation activities is also likely to be shaped
by non-market forces such as regulation, the liability systems, and standard-setting organizations (Viscusi
and Moore (1993); Barnett and King (2008); Berrone et al. (2013); Galasso and Luo (2017, 2018)). These
features of risk perception may have important implications for the direction of technological progress,
competitive advantage, and market structure.


                                                       2
    We define innovations that reduce the probability of negative events and/or the severity of the conse-
quences as risk-mitigating technologies (henceforth, RMTs). RMTs may take various forms, ranging from
incremental to radical innovations (Henderson (1993)) and from process to product innovations (Cohen and
Klepper (1996)). To examine the incentives to develop RMTs, our paper exploits a quasi-exogenous surge
in risk perception that affected diagnostic medical devices emitting radiation. In October 2009, a medical
center in Los Angeles disclosed that it had administered up to eight times the normal radiation dose to over
200 patients undergoing CT brain perfusion due to erroneous scanner settings caused by the hospital. We
document a variety of evidence based on field interviews, industry accounts, congressional hearings, and
surveys, suggesting that the extensive media coverage of this and other overdose accidents uncovered at the
time increased patients' and medical providers' perceived risk of CT and other technologies using radiation.
    We begin with an examination of the shock's impact on firm innovation in terms of both patenting and
new product introductions. For patenting, we leverage the detailed patent classification system to define
RMTs--that is, patent subclasses related to technologies aimed at protecting against radiation, controlling
the level of radiation exposure, and detecting device malfunctions. Difference-in-differences analysis shows
that after the shock, patenting in RMT subclasses (treatment group) experienced a large and statistically
significant increase of over 100 percent relative to other non-RMT subclasses of radiation diagnostic de-
vices (control group). We show that this surge was not driven by differential patenting trends in treated and
control groups before the shock and that the finding is robust to different specifications and alternative ways
to define treatment subclasses. Using non-RMT features of radiation diagnostic devices as the control group
provides a direct test of the direction of technological change and can control for broad shocks affecting
innovation incentives for radiation diagnostic devices. But the over-radiation shock may also affect patent-
ing in such control subclasses negatively, leading to a potential over-estimation of the level of increase in
RMT patenting. To this end, we further confirm that the increase in RMT patenting is also robust to using
alternative control subclasses for which the shock's impact is likely to be more limited.
    Our analysis of the FDA pre-market notifications shows that the over-radiation shock also led to an in-
crease in new product introductions. In particular, the number of applications in radiation diagnostic devices
increased significantly after the shock relative to control devices. Furthermore, using textual information ex-
tracted from the FDA application summary files, we confirm that the increase was driven by products for
which radiation safety features are prominent.
    We further complement our aggregate, quantitative analysis with an in-depth characterization of the
nature of RMTs developed by CT producers after the shock. Specifically, we document two types of RMTs.
The first type can be thought of as `low-hanging fruit,' as the goal is to prevent over-radiation errors or



                                                      3
to manage dosage more efficiently without a substantial departure from existing technologies. Many of
these new features, including alerts and notification systems, are implemented through a series of new
standards set by the industry association. The second type of RMTs is qualitatively different because it
requires a substantial departure from the method that has dominated the CT industry for the last 30 years.
This alternative method involves the adoption of a long-shelved technique to reconstruct image data, which
requires a significant sacrifice in speed and image quality but allows for levels of radiation dose reduction
that are not achievable by simply `tweaking' the existing technologies. This evidence is consistent with the
idea that market demand can play a role in the selection and establishment of dominant designs (Utterback
and Abernathy (1975)) or technological paradigms (Dosi (1982)).
   A detailed firm-level analysis shows that innovation responses were industry-wide and came both from
firms directly involved in the accidents and from firms that were not. We also find increased (net) entry
by new players in the industry after the shock, together with an increase in the share of innovations by
the largest incumbents. These patterns are consistent with the idea that changes in risk perceptions exhibit
externalities and affect the entire product category, and that dominant players are well-positioned to take
advantage of such market opportunities to incorporate new technologies into new products.
   Having established the impact on innovation activities, we next provide evidence for our proposed mech-
anism: the over-radiation shock led to an increase in users' perceived risk of medical radiation, which, in
turn, increased the willingness to pay for safety. Quantitatively, we document opposite effects at two dif-
ferent margins of demand. At the intensive margin (technology use), the number of services rendered for
diagnostic procedures involving high radiation experienced a large and sharp drop after 2010. At the ex-
tensive margin (technology upgrade), however, hospitals' and clinics' propensity to replace or upgrade CT
systems increased significantly after the shock relative to equipment emitting lower levels of radiation. The
joint presence of a decline in usage and an increase in equipment upgrade, together with our results on
innovation responses, is hard to reconcile with alternative mechanisms.
   Taken together, our results show that risk perception can be an important driver of innovation and can
shape the direction of technological progress. Safety-related shocks such as ours, by increasing demand for
newer/safer products, may imply valuable market opportunities and create a new dimension along which
firms can innovate, compete, and market their products. Large incumbents are likely to play an important
role in the development and commercialization of risk-mitigating technologies, and the shock may perpetu-
ate rather than diminish their market dominance.




                                                     4
2    Related literature
Our paper relates to studies on the relationship between tort liability risk and innovation. Despite much
theoretical and policy attention (Huber (1989); Porter (1990); Daughety and Reinganum (1995); Hay and
Spier (2005)), large-sample empirical evidence on this topic is relatively scarce. Examining a sample of
large U.S. manufacturing firms in the 1980s, Viscusi and Moore (1993) find a positive relationship between
product liability insurance costs and R&D expenditure, suggesting that, on average, product liability pro-
motes rather than discourages innovation. Galasso and Luo (2017) also find a positive relationship between
liability risk and innovation: on average, states passing tort reforms that decrease physicians' exposure to
medical malpractice liability are associated with a significant decrease in medical-device patenting. Galasso
and Luo (2018) exploit a major quasi-exogenous increase in liability risk faced by US polymer suppliers
to medical implants. In contrast to the two prior studies, they show that suppliers responded by restricting
input supplies, which resulted in a large and negative impact on downstream innovation in medical implants.
This paper makes two contributions to the understanding of liability risk and innovation. First, while Viscusi
and Moore (1993) and Galasso and Luo (2017) suggest that liabilities may incentivize the development of
risk-mitigating technologies, neither paper directly measures this type of innovation. This paper character-
izes and measures risk-mitigating technologies and provides direct evidence for a change in the direction of
innovation. Second, it shows that even in the absence of changes in the liability rules, altered risk perception
of a product may lead to changes in technological development and industry standards.
    More broadly, our analysis relates to the vast economics and management literatures on the determinants
and directions of technological change. Ahuja et al. (2008); Cohen (2010), and Di Stefano et al. (2012)
provide comprehensive overviews of the academic debate on the sources of innovation. While Schmookler's
seminal work on the primary role of market demand raised a number of important empirical and theoretical
concerns, more-recent studies have made progress in addressing these issues and providing new evidence
for the linkages between market demand and innovation (Acemoglu and Linn (2004); Finkelstein (2004)).
While these studies mostly focus on market size and factor prices, the economics and strategy literatures
on the environment have examined the innovation responses to climate change and natural disasters (Miao
and Popp (2014); Popp (2019)), as well as to regulatory and normative pressures (Berrone et al. (2013)).
We contribute to this line of research by examining the innovation responses to demand shifts driven by
increases in the risk perception of product use.
    Our paper also relates to the literature on product recalls, especially the stream of research that explores
the effect on competitors who do not suffer direct costs but may experience reduced demand due to con-
sumers' revised beliefs about the safety of the product category (Jarrell and Peltzman (1985); Borenstein


                                                       5
and Zimmerman (1988); Dranove and Olsen (1994); Freedman et al. (2012)).1 We are aware of two papers
on the impacts of product recalls on innovation: Ball et al. (2019) show that product recalls in medical
devices have negative impacts on focal firms but positive effects on their rivals; Krieger et al. (2019), in
the context of drugs withdrawn from the market, find the opposite--a positive effect on focal firms' R&D
projects (mostly through acquisitions) but a negative effect on rival firms. Our paper is different from these
two studies in terms of the nature of the shocks (consumer risk perception without disruptions to firms, as
there are no product recalls); our focus on innovations that specifically address safety concerns; and the
underlying mechanisms.

3     Theoretical considerations
Risk perceptions may have important impacts on consumer choices, especially when markets fail to provide
full insurance against uncertainty (Arrow (1970)). In the context of product safety, one can think of the
risk associated with the use of a product as the probability of a negative event and the severity of the
consequences (e.g., minor or major injuries). Such negative events may occur to the user of the product
directly or to a third party for whom the user bears the cost indirectly, such as through legal liabilities.
     Often, consumers do not have precise risk information. Their choices of products and their intensity of
use are based on the perception of risk. Risk perception evolves as new information is revealed over time--
e.g. through personal experience, news reporting of accidents, and publication of new scientific studies.
This new information can serve as either good news or bad news, leading to a downward or upward revision
in risk perception. The magnitudes of these revisions depend on the precision of consumers' prior belief and
the precision of the new information. Thus, a couple of fatal accidents may result in a large increase in the
perceived risk associated with emerging technologies, such as driverless cars, but may have little influence
on consumers' assessment of products for which rich statistical data are available.2
     Learning about risk implies that informational shocks that increase the risk that consumers perceive
about a product may generate shifts in market demand. In particular, consumers' willingness to pay for
risk reduction will increase (Viscusi (1993)). If this increase in willingness to pay for safety is sufficiently
large, demand changes may serve as a "pull" force for innovation and incentivize the development of RMTs
(Schmookler (1966)). Conceptually, RMTs reduce the probability of negative events and/or the severity
    1 Focusing   on sales and stock prices, this literature finds that the spillover effect is more likely to be present when consumers'
prior of rival firms' product safety is less precise, which, in turn, depends on the stringency of government regulation, the develop-
ment stage of an industry, and whether firms share common practices (Borenstein and Zimmerman (1988); Freedman et al. (2012)).
The spillover effect is also more likely when regulation is more stringent as a result (Dranove and Olsen (1994)).
   2 The risk perception literature finds that individuals tend to over-assess the risks of low-probability events and under-assess

that of high-probability events, and some of the over-assessed risks are those that are highly publicized (Lichtenstein et al. (1978);
Slovic et al. (1982)). Viscusi (1985) shows that these patterns of risk assessment are consistent with a Bayesian learning process
even with fully rational agents, unless they acquire full information about the riskiness of the product.


                                                                   6
of the consequences. Seatbelts and airbags, for example, reduce the risk of fatal accidents in automobiles.
Often, RMTs involve trade-offs between different characteristics of a product. For example, installing a
speed limiter on a motorcycle reduces the likelihood of serious accidents but also reduces the pleasure that
some consumers derive from high speed.
   RMTs may take various forms, depending on the nature of the hazards, the magnitudes of the demand
changes, and the technological possibilities. They can be incremental innovations that refine existing tech-
nologies or radical innovations that may establish new, dominant designs (Utterback and Abernathy (1975);
Dosi (1982); Anderson and Tushman (1990)). Moreover, while many examples of RMTs are product inno-
vations, process innovations--e.g., an assembly-line redesign that is more effective at identifying defects or
the use of checklists during surgeries to reduce medical errors (Gawande (2009))--can also be RMTs.
   While an increase in risk perception increases the willingness to pay for product safety, its impact on
the overall demand for a product and, hence, on overall innovation incentives, is potentially ambiguous. In
Appendix B, we make this point more formally with a model that links an increase in risk perception to in-
novation incentives. The framework builds on Galasso and Luo (2017) and considers products characterized
by multi-dimensional heterogeneity. Specifically, products are characterized by a quality level (capturing
non-safety aspects such as the speed and image quality of CT scans) and a risk level (capturing safety as-
pects such as the likelihood of an accidental overdose). There is a feasible set of quality-risk combinations,
which captures the possible directions of development notionally allowed by science (Dosi (1982)).
   In deciding which product to adopt, consumers may need to trade off safety with quality. An increase
in risk perception reduces the demand for riskier products but increases the demand for safer ones. This
demand shift, in turn, shapes R&D investments at both the marginal and infra-marginal levels.
   Specifically, at the margin, as risk perception increases, some high-quality but riskier products that were
profitable before the demand shift will no longer be developed. At the same time, some low-quality but
safer products that were unprofitable before will become profitable after the demand shift and attract R&D
investment. Among infra-marginal products--i.e., those attracting R&D investments both before and after
the change in risk perception--there will also be an increase in the profitability of safer technologies but a
decrease in the profitability of riskier ones. R&D investments will increase for the former and decrease for
the latter. The combination of these opposite effects implies that, while safer technologies will experience
an increase in R&D investments, the overall level of innovation may increase or decrease.
   Though micro-founded to fit our empirical setting, two insights derived from the model can be quite
general. First, under fairly general conditions, an increase in risk perception should induce a change in the
direction of innovation investments, with safer products attracting more R&D investments relative to riskier



                                                      7
ones. Second, while potentially ambiguous, the overall effect on innovation is likely to be positive if the set
of technological possibilities leading to safer products is sufficiently large. In other words, if the increase
in risk perception takes place in a setting in which the safety of existing products differs substantially from
the maximum safety level allowed by science, the increase in investments to develop safer products will
dominate the decrease in innovation experienced by riskier products. Conversely, if the increase in risk
perception takes place in a setting in which product safety is close to what is technologically feasible, the
increased investments in safety will be dominated by the decreased investments in riskier products. This
second result has broader implications for the role of demand-pull forces, suggesting that large shifts in
economic, institutional and social factors may have no effect on, or even slow down, technological progress
when scientific opportunities are limited.

4      Background
Computed tomography (CT) is a medical imaging method that combines multiple X-ray projections taken
from different angles to produce detailed cross-sectional images of areas inside the body. Judged by primary
care physicians as one of the most important innovations in medicine (Fuchs and Sox (2001)), more than 62
million CT scans were performed in 2006 in the U.S. (Brenner and Hall (2007)).
      Key advantages of CT over standard X-rays and ultrasound are its superior image quality and the abil-
ity to see from different angles and planes. Contrasting magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) that delivers
more-detailed images, especially of soft tissues and ligaments, CT takes seconds (instead of more than 30
minutes), is cheaper and more available, and can be used on patients with implants. A major disadvantage
of CT, however, is the relatively high levels of (ionizing) radiation required. As Pelc (2014) puts it, "[A]n
underlying principle of all X-ray imaging, and especially CT, is that we `pay for' image quality with radi-
ation dose." According to the FDA, the dose of a CT chest exam, for example, is about 350 times that of a
chest X-ray.

4.1     Over-radiation accidents and extensive media coverage

On October 8 2009, the FDA warned hospitals across the countries that the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
in Los Angeles had mistakenly administered up to eight times the normal radiation to 206 patients under-
going CT brain perfusion. The error had been made a year prior to the disclosure, when the hospital had
reconfigured a scanner to improve doctors' ability to see blood flow in the brain.3
      These accidents were reported by multiple media outlets in the next few days, including the Los Angeles
Times, the Associated Press, NPR, and NBC. On October 15th, Walt Bogdanich at the New York Times, by
    3 Alan   Zarembo, "Cedars-Sinai radiation overdoses went unseen at several points," Los Angeles Times, October 14.



                                                                 8
then a three-time Pulitzer Prize winner, reported these accidents together with a contemporaneous case in
Northern California of a 2.5-year-old boy who was scanned for 68 minutes for a procedure normally taking
a few minutes.4 This was the start of a series of over 20 articles--titled `The Radiation Boom'--on the
medical radiation risk associated with imaging technologies and radiation therapies published by the New
York Times in a span of two years.5 Bogdanich was a 2011 Pulitzer Prize finalist for "his spotlighting
of medical radiation errors that injure thousands of Americans, sparking national discussion and remedial
steps."6

4.2     Change in risk perception

Anecdotal and survey evidence suggests that the over-radiation accidents and their extensive media coverage--
which we collectively refer to as the `over-radiation shock' hereafter--have increased the awareness levels
of both patients and medical providers about medical radiation risk.
      Prior to the shock, a highly-cited study based on a 2002 survey (Lee et al. (2004)) shows that 47 percent
of radiologists and nine percent of emergency-room physicians believed that CT scans increase the lifetime
risk of cancer; and roughly 75 percent of both groups significantly underestimated the radiation dose from
a CT scan. After the shock, Boutis et al. (2014), based on a 2012 survey, show that almost all responding
physicians are aware of the potential malignancy risk from a head CT, and only 25 percent underestimated
the radiation dose. For patients, Zwank et al. (2014), using a 2010 survey, show that 25 percent of the
patients believed that radiation from CT can increase the lifetime risk of cancer, significantly higher than the
three percent reported in Lee et al. (2004). Both post-2010 studies refer to mass media coverage as a likely
reason for the significant increase in patient and physician awareness.
      Concerned about the public misunderstanding the nature of radiation at the dose of CT imaging and
being overly fearful, the medical community stressed not to lose sight of the contributions of CT to more-
effective surgeries, shorter hospital stays, and better diagnosis and treatment of cancer.7 At the same time, it
agreed that CT should be used only when appropriate (Thrall (2012)). According to Freiherr (2010), these
events seem to have also led to a fundamental change in radiologists' mindset--"from requesting the highest
   4 Walt  Bogdanich, "Radiation Overdoses Point up Dangers of CT Scans," New York Times, October 15, 2009.
   5 Radiation  therapies are very different from CT imaging; they irradiate tumors with particle beams produced by linear acceler-
ators and will result in much more severe consequences if mistakenly over-radiated. We exclude radiation therapies from both the
treatment and the control groups in our analysis.
    6 Source: www.pulitzer.org/finalists/walt-bogdanich.
    7 In March 2010, a two-day national "CT Dose Summit" gathered radiologists, state and federal regulators, and CT scan equip-

ment manufacturers. Dianna Cody and Cynthia McCollough, two of the conference organizers and medical physicists themselves,
emphasized that the recent media attention might lead to "a fundamental misunderstanding of the nature of radiation." "Basic
facts--a typical chest CT scan is comparable to the radiation exposure from radon gas annually emitted in the average home, for
example--rarely make it into news articles. As a result, for too many people the mention of radiation connotes Chernobyl and the
atom bomb," McCollough said. Source: https://medicalxpress.com/news/2010-05-medical-physicists-ct-scans-safe.html.




                                                                9
image quality to requesting `good enough' images obtained with minimal radiation doses."

4.3     Subsequent events

Immediately after the disclosure of these accidents, the FDA initiated an investigation of the scanners in-
volved. The manufacturer of the scanners involved in both sets of accidents was GE Healthcare.8 The
investigation, which concluded in October 2010, revealed more widespread overexposure: the agency be-
came aware of about 385 patients from six different hospitals who were exposed to excess radiation; and
the reported cases involved scanners manufactured by GE and Toshiba. The FDA concluded, however,
that these companies had not violated FDA regulations; that is, these scanners, if used according to the
manufacturers' specifications, would not result in overexposure. The FDA did, however, issue a letter to
the Medical Imaging Technology Alliance (MITA), an industry association of equipment manufacturers,
suggesting improvements that the industry could make to its equipment and user training.
      Public concerns raised by these events also led to a congressional hearing held in February 2010 by the
House of Representatives.9 The testimonies by industry representatives emphasized innovations that the in-
dustry had already introduced--such as weight- and age-based protocols and automatic exposure control--
that could help reduce the radiation dose; they were also collaborating with various stakeholders on measures
to prevent future errors. Testimonies by medical professionals and researchers emphasized the importance
of CT imaging and made suggestions for improving current education and accreditation programs for ma-
chine operators. During the hearing, participants discussed legislation co-sponsored by 134 members from
both political parties. This legislation would require federal or state certification for personnel performing
medical imaging exams or radiation therapies, but the bill was never enacted.

5      Data and methods
We investigate the impacts of the over-radiation shock on a number of outcome variables, ranging from inno-
vation by firms, to equipment upgrade by hospitals and clinics, and to the ordering of exams by physicians.
This section describes the two datasets used to examine the impacts on innovation: (i) patent applications
filed at (and eventually granted by) the US Patents and Trademarks Office (USPTO); and (ii) pre-market
notifications submitted to and approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).

5.1     Patent applications

The USPTO assigns patents to one or more technology classes following the Cooperative Patent Classifica-
tion (CPC) scheme. Our baseline analysis focuses on the 140 subclasses in group A61B6, "Apparatus for
    8 An analysis of the cumulative abnormal returns suggests a negative stock market reaction to the over-radiation news for GE
but not for the other leading CT scan producers.
   9 The New York Times articles were mentioned eight times in the brief opening statement by Hon. Frank Pallone.



                                                              10
radiation diagnosis," which captures radiation diagnostic devices, including standard X-rays and CT.
      Based on the class descriptions provided by the USPTO, we identify eight patent subclasses (234 patents)
related to reducing radiation risk. We refer to them as RMT subclasses and allocate them to the treatment
group. Two examples are A61B6/542 "Control of devices for radiation diagnosis involving control of expo-
sure" and A61B6/107 "Protection against radiation, e.g. shielding." The complete list of treated subclasses
is provided in the data appendix. In Section 6.1, we show that our results are robust to a different (keyword-
based) method of defining treated subclasses. We use the remaining 132 subclasses (4,328 patents related to
non-RMT features of radiation diagnostic devices) as the control group in our baseline analysis.
      We assign patents to treatment versus control groups based on their primary CPC subclasses. Our
baseline patent sample spans 2005-2015, as data after 2015 are sparse due to long grant delays; and we date
patents using their application rather than grant year. There are 2.96 patent applications per year per subclass
(Table 1, first panel), and about six percent of the observations (subclass-year) belong to RMT subclasses.

5.2     FDA premarket notifications

CT scanners and other X-ray diagnostic devices are classified as class-II "moderate to high risk" devices,
for which a manufacturer intending to market in the U.S. must submit premarket notification (510k) to the
FDA. The strength of the FDA data lies in the fact that they are about new product introductions and capture
innovations that are not necessarily patentable. The challenge, however, is that each product may embody
various features, making it difficult to separately capture RMT versus the other features of a product, as we
can do with patents. In Section 6.2, we exploit the texts of the applications to help confirm that changes we
detect are likely to be driven by products for which RMTs are prominent features.
      The FDA classifies each product with a specific product code that identifies the generic category of
the product. We define a product code as treated if it relates to radiology diagnostic devices that emit
ionizing radiation.10 There are 19 treated product codes (1,242 applications); examples include computed
tomography (CT) X-ray system, emission computed tomography system (PET/CT), mammographic X-ray
system, and diagnostic X-ray high voltage generator. The control group includes product codes on non-
radiation diagnostic devices and all class-II devices in non-radiology medical specialties, such as orthopedics
and general and plastic surgery. In total, there are 1,458 control product codes and 33,371 applications.
      The panel dataset spans 2005-2017; we use the application year, not the FDA's decision year, and be-
cause approval time of class-II devices is typically a few months, we can extend the analysis up to 2017. On
average, there are 1.8 pre-market notifications per year in a product code (Table 1, second panel).
  10 We identify whether a device is diagnostic based on the regulation numbers associated with a product code. Information on
whether a device emits ionizing radiation is provided by the FDA Radiation-Emitting Electronic Product Codes Database.




                                                             11
5.3     Econometric model

Our empirical strategy relies on a standard difference-in-differences estimation:


                              Yc,t =  + Treatedc × A f ter2010t + t + fc + c,t ,                            (1)


where the dependent variable, Yc,t , captures innovation activities in technology area c--which is defined as
a subclass for the patent analysis and a product code for the FDA data--and year t . As defined above, for
patents, the treatment group, Treatedc , includes RMT features of radiation diagnostic devices, whereas
for the FDA data, it includes diagnostic devices in radiology emitting ionizing radiation. The dummy
A f ter2010t equals 1 for every year after (and including) 2010; and t and fc are year and technology-area
fixed effects. The coefficient  of the interaction term Treatedc × A f ter2010t is the difference-in-differences
estimator. We cluster the standard errors at the technology area level for all regressions.
      The accidental nature of the over-radiation incidents and the rich documentation at the time provide
quite convincing evidence for the exogeneity of our shock. We provide additional evidence in support of
our choice of treatment timing. In the Appendix, panel (a) of Figure A1 plots the timing of news articles
referring to CT scan and X-ray radiation risk, retrieved from the Factiva (Dow Jones) database. The figure
shows that following the first wave of reporting in October 2009, media coverage of radiation and dosage
of imaging devices spiked in 2010. Panel (b) of the same figure shows that, relative to control devices, the
average number of months that the FDA took to approve an application increased substantially for radiation
diagnostic devices starting from the fourth quarter of 2009. This is consistent with the idea that the regulator
scrutinized these devices more after the shock. Lastly, panel (c) plots the Google search trend for the term
"CT scan radiation," which also suggests that public interest became more intense after late 2009.

6      Innovation responses to the over-radiation shock
6.1     Patent applications

Figure 1 compares the average number of patent applications between RMT and non-RMT subclasses in
radiation diagnostic devices. It provides a first look at our main result: patenting in control subclasses was
stable throughout the period, whereas patenting in RMT subclasses was stable before 2009, dropped slightly
in 2009 and 2010, and increased substantially after 2010.
      Table 2 presents the difference-in-differences estimates specified in equation (1). Column 1 shows that
after 2010, patenting in RMT subclasses experienced an average increase of 1.78 patents per year relative
to control subclasses (p-value is 0.029). Assuming the same difference between the two groups before and



                                                      12
after 2010, the hypothetical average number of patents for RMT subclasses would have been 1.63 per year
after 2010. This implies that the increase in RMT patenting after 2010 was about 110 percent. Column 2
produces a similar estimate, dropping subclasses with zero patents during the entire sample period. Column
3, following Moser and Voena (2012), shows that our baseline result is robust in an unbalanced panel that
includes only observations for which we observe at least one patent in this subclass in previous years.
    Because the over-radiation shock involves CT scanners, we expect the surge in RMT patenting to be
driven mostly by CT technology. We define CT patents as those referring to subclass A61B6/032, "Trans-
mission computed tomography [CT] ," as either primary or secondary classification. The DID coefficient
of this much smaller sample is reported in column 4 of Table 2. The estimate is economically large (corre-
sponding to an increase of about 300 percent), with a p-value of 0.07. This result supports our interpretation
that the increase in RMT patenting is related to the over-radiation shock.11 Appendix Table A1 shows that
our results are robust to a number of different specifications, including models addressing the skewed and
count nature of our dependent variable, such as Poisson and negative binomial.12
    A potential concern is that RMT subclasses have been identified based on our interpretation of the
subclass description. As an alternative approach, we identify RMT subclasses using a keyword method. We
first construct a dictionary of keywords related to dose and radiation control (e.g., "dose control," "reducing
radiation," and "X-ray exposure;" see the full list of keywords in Appendix C). We then classify a patent as
an RMT patent if its title contains at least one of the keywords. We compute the fraction of RMT patents in
each subclass based on all patents in radiation diagnostic devices applied between 1975 and 2015, and we
define the treatment group as subclasses for which this fraction is above a certain threshold. Appendix Table
A2 confirms our baseline result, using various threshold definitions.13

6.1.1      Pre-treatment trend and time-specific treatment effects

Figure 2 plots the year-specific differences between the treatment and control groups, t , and their 95-percent
confidence intervals based on the following specification (2009 is the baseline year):


                                  Patentsc,t =  +  t RMTc × Yeart + t + fc + c,t .                                             (2)
                                                       t
  11 The  difference-in-differences coefficient in a fixed effects Poisson model is 1.368 and significant at the 0.01 level.
  12 Recall  that we allocate patents to treatment and control groups based on their primary subclasses. We confirm our baseline
result also using a patent's secondary classification. In 2005-09, nine percent of the patents in A61B6 listed an RMT subclass as a
secondary classification (but not as the primary classification), whereas 19 percent did so between 2010 and 2015. Appendix Table
A3 reports a series of patent-level regressions confirming this increase. Furthermore, the unique number of primary subclasses for
which an RMT subclass was listed as a secondary classification by at least one patent increased from 52 to 93, suggesting that risk
mitigation had become a more prevalent feature across different types of radiation diagnostic devices.
  13 Unreported results also confirm that these results are not driven by any single most-frequently used keywords.




                                                               13
Before the over-radiation shock, the estimated differences between treatment and control subclasses are not
statistically different from those in 2009; the year-specific difference-in-differences coefficients after 2010
are positive and increasingly larger, and they become statistically significant in 2013.

6.1.2     Alternative control groups

The control group in our baseline analysis provides two main advantages. First, contrasting RMT with non-
RMT features of radiation diagnostic devices is the most direct way to test the hypothesis that risk perception
affects innovation incentives and shapes the direction of technological progress. Second, an analysis within
radiation diagnostic devices allows us to control for broad, unobservable shocks that may affect all features
of radiation diagnostic devices. Accounting for such confounding factors would be more difficult with a
control group that is technologically more distant. Specifically, with a more distant control group, a relative
increase in RMT patenting may not capture a change in the direction of innovation because patenting on
non-RMT features of radiation diagnostic devices might have increased even more.
    Our baseline control group, however, may be subject to spillover effects for a number of reasons. First,
because the market is highly concentrated, many firms are active in both treatment and control groups.14 If
these firms are subject to budget constraint, they may move resources away from non-RMT to RMT tech-
nologies, leading to an over-estimation of the level of increase in RMT patenting. Second, the heightened
fear about radiation may chill innovation in radiation diagnostic devices overall, also leading to a large drop
in non-RMT patenting. Empirically, these spillovers imply that the control group may also be affected by
the shock and affect the interpretation of the difference-in-differences coefficients in our baseline analysis.
    In this section, we show that our main finding is robust to using alternative controls for which spillover
concerns discussed above are limited. Specifically, we use two alternative control groups. The first (column
1 of Table 3) includes non-radiation diagnostic devices such as MRI and ultrasound (CPC groups `A61B5'
and `A61B8'). This control group is less likely to experience a substitution effect if firms allocate budgets
and personnel relatively independently across technology groups. Note that demand-side spillover may still
be at play if the shock induces hospitals and clinics to increase the use of non-radiation diagnostic tools.15
Such contamination is less concerning, however, as it should increase innovation in these substitute products
and make our difference-in-differences coefficient more conservative. To further mitigate potential supply-
  14 87  percent of RMT patents and 68.36 percent of non-RMT patents in radiation diagnostic devices are by 37 unique assignees
that patent in both groups.
   15 This is consistent with our theoretical model, in which an increase in risk perception generates an increase in the profitability of

all products safer than the current standard (both safer radiation diagnostic devices and substitute non-radiation devices). To see this
empirically, we run a series of difference-in-differences regressions and find a ten-percent increase in patents and FDA applications
for MRI and ultrasound, though the estimates are significant only for patents. These results are consistent with a demand increase
for substitute non-radiation diagnostic tools. At the same time, the relatively smaller magnitude relative to the innovation response
in radiation diagnostic devices suggests that it was more profitable to improve the safety of radiation technologies than to develop
substitute non-radiation devices.


                                                                   14
side and demand-side spillovers, we employ the second alternative control group (column 3 in Table 3)
consisting of medical implants such as replacement joints and pacemakers (CPC subsection `A61F'). These
devices are not substitutes for radiation diagnostic devices and are technologically very different.
      To further isolate any spillover effects due to firms patenting in both treatment and control groups, we
also use more-restrictive specifications that exclude patents by these common patentees from the analysis.
When using non-radiation diagnostic devices as the control group, because the percentage of RMT patents
by common patentees is still very high at 80 percent, we exclude patents by common patentees from only
the control group (column 2 in Table 3).16 When using medical implants as the control group, in addition
to excluding patents by the common patentees from the control group (column 4), we go a step further and
exclude such patents from both the control and the treatment groups (column 5). The last specification is
still very stringent, as 56 percent of the RMT patents are excluded due to common patentees.17
      The results across all columns in Table 3 confirm a relative increase in RMT patenting after the shock; the
estimates are statistically significant at least at the ten-percent level. Assuming the same average difference
between the treatment and control groups before and after 2010, the difference-in-differences coefficients
of the first four columns represent an increase of between 56 and 87 percent. Even for the last column, in
which we exclude more than half of the RMT patents, the increase is still 36 percent (p-value is 0.073).

6.2     FDA pre-market notifications

In this section, we present difference-in-differences estimates on new product introductions using the FDA
data. The dependent variable in column 1 of Table 4 is the number of 510k applications in a product
code-year. Recall that our treatment group includes the 19 product codes of radiation diagnostic devices,
and the control group includes non-radiation diagnostic devices in radiology and all class-II devices outside
radiology. The result shows that after 2010, the number of applications in treated product codes increased by
1.25 per year relative to the control group (p-value is 0.07). This increase represents a 30-percent difference,
assuming the same difference between the treatment and control groups before and after 2010.
      In columns 2 and 3, we use the same control group as in column 1 but focus on two specific sub-samples
of the treatment group: column 2 excludes devices emitting high levels of radiation from the treatment group,
whereas column 3 excludes devices emitting low levels of radiation.18 Though not statistically different
from each other, the difference-in-differences coefficient in column 3 is substantially greater in magnitude
  16 14.08  percent of the control patents are by common patentees.
  17 Even   with medical implants as the control group, the percentage of RMT patents by common patentees is still quite high
because of the sheer size of the large conglomerates that patent in the treatment group, so that they are likely to have some patents
in other medical areas, no matter how remote. Only 0.49 percent of the control patents are by common patentees.
   18 To distinguish between devices with high or low radiation levels, we follow the FDA 2010 White Paper that lists computed

tomography (CT), fluoroscopy, and nuclear medicine imaging exams (such as a positron emission tomography (PET) scan) as
imaging procedures with relatively high radiation levels, versus other radiation-emitting procedures such as standard X-rays.


                                                                15
and more statistically significant than that in column 2, consistent with the idea that the increase documented
in column 1 is driven mainly by devices more affected by the over-radiation shock.
      To provide additional evidence that the increase in applications in the treatment group is, indeed, linked
to the over-radiation shock, we further identify applications that emphasize radiation safety features. In
particular, for each application in the treatment group, we search for the keyword `dose' in the "Summary
of Safety and Effectiveness." Example phrases including this keyword are `dose check,' `dose efficiency,'
and `dose reduction.' Overall, 18 percent of the 1,242 applications include this keyword. The regression in
column 4 counts only applications in a treated product code that did not mention `dose' in their summary
files, and column 5 counts only applications that did; and the dependent variable of the control group is the
same as in previous columns. The coefficient in column 4 is small and statistically insignificant, whereas
that in column 5 is large and significant at the 0.05 level. This contrast further corroborates the idea that the
increase in radiation diagnostic devices is associated with a stronger emphasis on dose and radiation control.
      Column 6, building on column 5, further excludes from the control group non-radiation diagnostic de-
vices (substitutes for our treated devices) that may have experienced potential demand-side spillover effect.
The estimate confirms the result in column 5. Based on the sample in column 6, Appendix Figure A2
examines the timing of the effect of the 2010 shock. There is no evidence of pre-trends: the coefficients
before 2010 are small and statistically insignificant. The relative number of treatment group applications
that include safety features began to increase after 2010, with an increasing magnitude over time.19
      Overall, the FDA data show an increase in the number of new products after 2010 for radiation diagnostic
devices and that this increase was driven by applications explicitly referring to radiation control. It is worth
noting that, because there is typically a delay between invention and commercialization, the relative fast
response in product introduction (as illustrated in Figure A2) suggests that the response in the short run was
likely to have been based on non-patentable technologies (therefore, not captured by the patent data) or on
patentable technologies that were readily available prior to 2010. In the next section, we provide a detailed
description of RMTs in the case of CT scanners that is consistent with this interpretation.

6.3     Characterizing RMTs: the case of CT scanners

Based on field interviews, industry and clinical publications, and textual analysis of FDA applications, we
uncover two types of RMTs that were developed after the shock.
  19 Appendix Table A4 confirms the robustness of our findings to a number of alternative specifications, including alternative

econometric models--using the logarithm of (one plus) the number of applications as the dependent variable or a Poisson model.




                                                              16
6.3.1      Progress along the existing, dominant technological path

The first type of RMTs appeared to tackle `low-hanging fruit,' in the sense that the goal of the improvement
was to prevent radiation overdose or to manage dosage more efficiently. These innovations, though impor-
tant, did not require substantial R&D investment or departure from existing technologies. Examples include
dose display; alert and notification systems for dose exceeding pre-assigned thresholds; standardized dose
recording softwares; and redesigned use protocols for certain procedures (Mahesh (2016)). These safety-
check features are consistent with the FDA's recommendations after its investigation of the over-radiation
accidents and were implemented through a series of new standards set by the industry association.20 , 21

6.3.2      Change in the technological path

The second type of RMTs involved a substantial departure from the existing technological path (Utterback
and Abernathy (1975); Dosi (1982); Anderson and Tushman (1990)). The technology allows for a reduction
in radiation dose of up to 90 percent, which is not achievable by simply `tweaking' the existing technologies.
    Specifically, the change involves shifting away from the dominant method of image reconstruction to an
alternative (long-shelved) method. For over 30 years, the dominant method had been filtered back projection
(FBP), which projects X-ray data `linearly' into image data (Ramirez-Giraldo et al. (2018)). Although FBP
is fast and robust, the image resolution is strongly dependent on the dosage used; in other words, "we `pay
for' image quality with radiation dose" (Pelc (2014)).
    An alternative approach, called `iterative reconstruction (IR),' starts with an initial guess of an object
and iteratively improves on the initial estimate through a dynamic optimization process (Mayo-Smith et al.
(2014)). This `non-linear' methodology breaks the strong dependence of noise on radiation dose and, there-
fore, allows for substantial reductions in radiation dose (Pelc (2014)). IR was first introduced when CT was
invented in the 1970s, but it was shelved due to its high computational intensity: IR took about 45 minutes
to reconstruct a single slice, while FBP could process slices in 30 seconds.22 Our interviews with indus-
try practitioners, along with industry white papers and clinical publications, suggest that CT manufacturers
invested in and marketed IR algorithms heavily after the over-radiation shock.
    It is important to note that IR algorithms involve a substantial reduction in other quality aspects, at
least initially. These include a slower speed even with today's computing power; low image quality for
  20 The  FDA's recommendations in its 2010 letter to MITA, the industry association, include providing particular informa-
tion and training on high-risk procedures; clarification and recommendations of parameter settings; pop-up notification at
threshold to alert the operator of high radiation dose; and user-accessible organization of dose-related information. Source:
https://www.fda.gov/Radiation-EmittingProducts/RadiationSafety/RadiationDoseReduction/ucm232551.htm.
   21 MITA published the CT Dose Check standard in October 2010. The 2013 XR-28 standard explicitly responded to the FDA's

recommendations. Both standards became a part of a later MITA Smart Dose standard (XR-29, 2013).
   22 Dave Fornell, "Iterative Reconstruction 101," Imaging Technology News, July 23, 2013.




                                                             17
certain clinical applications; an `over-smoothed' and `artificial' appearance that makes the images difficult
to interpret and require retraining of radiologists (Ramirez-Giraldo et al. (2018)). According to one estimate,
radiologists needed about 90 days to adjust to the new image texture.23

6.3.3    Textual analysis of the FDA application summary files

To provide quantitative evidence for the two types of safety features described above, we conduct a textual
analysis using the 294 FDA applications filed between 2005 and 2017 in product code JAK, "Computed
tomography X-ray system." For each application, we examine all phrases in the application summary file
that include the term `dose,' and we determine, based on keywords used together with `dose,' whether the
product (i) achieves a substantial dose reduction relative to previous products; and/or (ii) provides safety
checks or tools to manage radiation dose more efficiently.
      Appendix Figure A3 shows that both types of safety features were rarely mentioned in the application
summary files before 2010, whereas they were increasingly more likely to appear afterwards. Between 2014
and 2017, for example, 37.5 percent of all applications mentioned dose check or efficiency, and 25 percent
mentioned dose reduction. The lower percentage of dose-reduction mention is consistent with the idea that
such features require more substantial investment than do features related to dose efficiency or dose check.
      The same figure also illustrates an increasing adoption of the IR method after 2010. Overall, 52 percent
of all CT systems adopted after 2010 included an IR option, and 20 percent of the software packages were
specifically related to this method. Moreover, all 118 applications after 2010 without an IR option failed to
mention `dose reduction,' whereas 38 out of 66 applications that included an IR option did mention the term,
consistent with our understanding that substantial dose reduction is achievable only with the IR method.

6.4     Firm-level analysis and impacts on market structure

In this section, we provide a firm-level analysis that confirms the technology-area level analysis and provides
insights into how safety-related shocks affect the competitive dynamics and market structure. We distinguish
among the top-five firms--the two largest are GE and Siemens, followed by Toshiba, Philips, and then
Hitachi--and smaller players, including smaller firms, research entities, and individuals.24
      We report three sets of results. First, columns 1-3 of Table 5 report firm-level patent regressions. The unit
of analysis is firm-patent subclass-year, and the regressions include year, firm, and subclass fixed effects.
The control group, non-RMT subclasses of radiation diagnostic devices, is the same as in our baseline
  23 "Iterative Reconstruction in CT: What Does It Do? How Can I Use It?" by William P. Shuman, November 2010, Image Wisely,

American College of Radiology.
  24 The top five firms comprised the CT group of the industry association MITA at the time of the shock; and they had the

highest numbers of patents in radiation diagnostic devices during the pre-sample period 1995-2005. According to the IBISWorld
Procurement Report, these five firms had the largest market shares in 2014: GE and Siemens each had 20-25 percent shares of the
U.S. market; Toshiba 15-20 percent; Philips 10-15 percent; and Hitachi less than five percent.


                                                              18
analysis. Column 1, using all firms, confirms the significant increase in RMT patenting after the shock.25
Columns 2 and 3 examine the top-five firms and smaller players separately: the increase for the largest five
firms represents a 280-percent difference, while that for smaller players represents a 110-percent increase.
In Appendix Table A5 (panel a), we run the same regression for each of the top five firms individually.
The difference-in-differences coefficients are all positive and economically large: they are significant for the
largest firms; for Toshiba and Philips, the estimates are less precise (p-values are 0.101 and 0.148).
    Columns 4-6 of Table 5 provide an analogous analysis of FDA applications in which the unit of analysis
is firm-product code-year. Column 4 confirms a significant increase for the number of FDA applications
in radiation diagnostic devices, relative to control devices outside radiology. Column 5 shows that the
increase is large and significant for the five largest firms, representing a 60-percent difference; the change is
economically smaller for smaller players, though still at 31 percent, and less significant (p-value is 0.144).
Individual regressions for the top-five firms (Appendix Table A5, panel b) show a similar pattern across the
largest four firms, though the estimates are noisy.
    Second, Appendix Figure A4 examines firms' responses in terms of the two types of RMTs that we
identified for CT scanners: large and small players appear similar in their responses through incremental
features such as safety checks and dose-efficiency management, but responses by large firms were faster
and more intense for more-complex technologies that can reduce dose­ in particular, the development and
implementation of IR algorithms. A further breakdown in Appendix Figure A5 shows that the two largest
firms--GE and Siemens--were the fastest in incorporating IR in 2010, Toshiba and Philips responded in
2011, and Hitachi, the smallest of the top-five, in 2015.
    Third, the above firm-level panel analysis uses firms already in the market before the shock. Appendix
Table A6 provides some (weak) evidence for more entry in radiation diagnostic devices after the shock,
relative to control product markets. The number of new entrants increases by about 35 percent (p-value =
0.210), and the unique number of firms active in the market also increases (by 26 percent, p-value = 0.051),
indicating an increase in net entry.
    To summarize, the results in this section illustrate the following two patterns: (i) innovation responses
in RMTs appear to be industry-wide, and the positive response is observed both for firms that were directly
involved in these accidents (GE, in particular, and Toshiba) and for firms that were not (e.g., Siemens and
Philips); and (ii) together with a greater net entry by new players in the industry, the shares (of innovations,
at least) for the largest incumbents seem to have increased. Though not definitive, these results are consistent
with the idea that CT producers, overall, might have benefited from the market opportunities created by the
increased demand for newer/safer technologies, at least in the medium run. Moreover, the over-radiation
  25 Including   firm-specific linear year trends produces a very similar coefficient, 0.148, and standard error, 0.068.


                                                                   19
shock appears to have perpetuated the market dominance of large incumbents, rather than diminishing it.
This conjecture is supported by the 2014 IBISWorld Procurement Report, which shows that the market
shares of the largest players in the U.S. increased between 2011 and 2013.
    A number of factors may explain these patterns. First, as discussed previously, information shock on
product safety is likely to exhibit externalities and to affect the entire product category--in particular, the
demand of mainstream customers served by large incumbents. Thus, conditions often characterized in theo-
ries such as disruptive innovation--that is, the innovation is initially not valued by mainstream customers--
are not satisfied in our context (Christensen and Bower (1996)). Second, the types of RMTs described in
Section 6.3 do not fit a situation in which incumbent firms are less competent to respond in terms of organi-
zational capabilities or resources (Henderson and Clark (1990)). In contrast, large incumbents in our setting
are well-positioned, in terms of R&D resources and marketing and distribution capabilities, to develop and
incorporate these RMTs into their products.
    Lastly, it is worth pointing out that our results differ from most of the product-recall literature that tends
to find negative effects on the focal firms. This may be partly because the news reporting was clear from
the beginning that the accidents were due to technician errors, and because the FDA investigation quickly
concluded that the focal companies had not violated any regulations. Thus, different from Ball et al. (2019),
operational or financial disruption for the focal firms was limited in our setting.

7    Demand effects of an increase in risk perception
The above analysis shows that the over-radiation shock led to a significant increase in innovation activities in
terms of both RMT patenting and new products. In this section, we provide direct evidence for our proposed
mechanism--i.e., higher risk perception increases the willingness to pay for safety--by unbundling the
shock's impact on demand.
    As in most medical settings, the demand side of diagnostic devices involves multiple players. The key
decision makers regarding the use of diagnostic technologies--i.e., the intensive margin of demand--are
physicians who prescribe exams. They (at least partially) internalize the radiation risk because they care
about their patients and want to avoid the liability costs associated with overuse and accidents. The key
decision makers of equipment upgrade--i.e., the extensive margin of demand--are managers of hospitals
and clinics, who may demand safer machines to reduce the liability costs of errors and to account for the
preferences of their physicians and radiologists.
    Survey and anecdotal evidence presented in Section 4 shows a significant increase in risk perception by
all of these parties after the shock. In the following, we show a large decline in the number of high-radiation
imaging exams; at the same time, hospitals and clinics exhibit a greater propensity to upgrade equipment


                                                       20
that emits high levels of radiation. These opposite effects at the intensive and extensive margins, together
with our findings on innovation, are hard to reconcile with alternative explanations.

7.1     Equipment use

The Medicare Part B National Summary data provide the total number of imaging services rendered to Medi-
care beneficiaries (people older than 65) in a procedure-year. Procedures are defined by `current procedural
terminology' (CPT) codes, which specify the technology, organ, and techniques (e.g., CT chest without
contrast). To construct a balanced panel, we keep codes present throughout 2005-2017. This leaves 340
codes in seven diagnostic technologies (e.g., CT and MRI), corresponding to 76 percent of the total number
of services rendered in this time period. The final dataset includes 4,420 year-procedure observations.
      Columns 1-2 in Table 6 present the difference-in-differences coefficients for the logarithm of the number
of services provided, controlling for CPT and year fixed effects. Column 1 compares high-radiation proce-
dures (including CT, PET/CT, and fluoroscopy) to low-radiation X-rays; and column 2 uses non-radiation
procedures--MRI and ultrasound--as the control group. The results show that, relative to control proce-
dures, the number of high-radiation procedures dropped significantly after 2010 (by about 20 percent). (Un-
reported) regressions confirm these results using only control procedures that match treated, high-radiation
procedures in terms of pre-trends. Appendix Figure A6 plots the year-specific effect of the over-radiation
shock on high-radiation procedures relative to matched control procedures of MRI and ultrasound. The
figure shows little pre-trend, a slight drop in 2010 and 2011 (p-value=0.115), and a large and significant
decline starting in 2012 that had yet to recover as of 2017.
      Five of the six hospitals involved in the FDA investigation were located in California and one in Al-
abama. Appendix Table A7 reports triple-differences regression results using state-level Medicare data.26
The results show that the relative decline in high-radiation procedures was significantly more pronounced
in the two states with hospitals directly involved in the FDA investigation, providing further support for the
link to the over-radiation shock. The results also show a general decline in high-radiation procedures even
in other states. This is not surprising given the negative externality of product-safety information, the mass
media attention, and the subsequent national-level conversation about radiation safety.
      We also cross-validate the above result with an alternative dataset provided by the Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).27 Appendix Figure A7 (panel a) shows that in the U.S.,
relative to MRIs' increasing trend throughout our sample period, CT broke the increasing trend in 2012
   26 Columns 3 and 4 in Appendix Table A7 include control variables for state liability laws (cap on non-economic damages and

joint and several liability rule) and political preferences (a dummy indicating Republican-controlled government and legislature).
All the regressions also include all the double-interaction terms.
   27 The downside of the OECD data is that they are extrapolated from surveys covering only about 200 sites. On the positive side,

the data include services for patients of all ages, unlike the Medicare data, which cover only the elderly.


                                                               21
and declined afterwards. Relative to the peak in 2011, the average number of CT exams between 2012 and
2017 represents a ten-percent reduction, a likely underestimation because it does not take into account the
hypothetical continuation of the increasing trend in the absence of the over-radiation shock.28
      Overall, results in this section show a relative decline in high-radiation procedures after the shock. The
slower growth of CT use has also been documented by the medical literature, which also suggests that
fear of radiation was an important factor (Lee and Levy (2012)). Of course, the decline in high-radiation
procedures could have been driven by drops in Medicare payments. We examine this alternative explanation
in a series of (unreported) difference-in-differences regressions and find no evidence for differential drops
in the payment for high-radiation procedures after 2010, relative to control procedures.29

7.2     Equipment upgrade

The key data source for equipment upgrade is the X-ray assembler dataset provided by the FDA. Manufac-
turers of X-ray systems are required to file reports upon installation of a certifiable system or component(s).
A key limitation of this dataset is that it contains only X-ray equipment and lacks non-radiation equipment
such as MRI or ultrasound. Thus, we compare the propensity to upgrade CT equipment to that of chest X-
ray and dental X-ray equipment, based on the fact that radiation exposure from CT is substantially greater
than that from standard X-rays and is in line with our finding that the use of low-radiation X-ray devices was
less affected by the shock. We identify reports that are likely to capture the installation of new CT systems
or substantial upgrades of existing CT systems as reports for which the intended use of the components is
"CT whole body scanner" and for which the installation involves at least three major components (X-ray
control, high voltage generator and tube housing). With a similar approach, we identify records that are
likely to capture replacement or substantial upgrades of control devices: non-fluoroscopic chest X-ray and
dental X-ray systems. The final sample is based on 6,161 CT assembly reports and 4,389 chest X-ray and
2,246 dental X-ray assembly reports for 2008-18 (data before 2008 are not systematically available).
      We generate a balanced panel in which the unit of observation is a site-equipment type-year.30 Column 3
of Table 6 contrasts the number of assembly reports on CT systems versus chest X-ray systems, controlling
for year and site×equipment type fixed effects. The result shows that, within a site, the propensity to
replace or upgrade a CT system after 2010 exceeds that for a chest X-ray system; and the magnitude of the
coefficient is equivalent to a 25-percent difference. Column 4 shows a similar result contrasting CT systems
   28 Appendix Figure A7 (panel b) shows no decline in CT relative to MRI exams in other OECD countries after 2010, which is

different from the general decline in the U.S. This may have been driven by a multiplicity of factors, including differences in the
intensity and scope of media coverage and regulatory scrutiny; different levels of CT use before the shock; and heterogeneity in the
medical and liability systems.
   29 Relative to MRI and ultrasound, payments for high-radiation procedures actually increased by nine dollars after 2010, though

the difference is not statistically significant.
   30 Sites (hospitals or clinics) are defined as unique combinations of firm name, city and state in which the equipment is installed.




                                                                 22
with dental X-ray systems.
      Similar to the equipment use analysis, Appendix Table A8 reports triple-differences results exploiting
the location information of these sites. The results also show a general increase in the propensity to upgrade
CT systems after 2010 for hospitals (or hospitals located in states) not directly involved, but the magnitude is
significantly larger for the six hospitals under investigation (or hospitals located in California and Alabama,
the two states in which the six focal hospitals are located).
      In principle, the higher propensity to upgrade CT scanners could have been a result of lower prices
charged by CT producers. Historical CT prices turn out to be very difficult to obtain. The only information
we were able to find is from the 2014 IBIS Procurement Report, which estimates that the benchmark price
of CT scanners had been, instead, rising monotonically between 2005 and 2014.31

7.3       Qualitative evidence

The above results are consistent with our hypothesis that the over-radiation shock substantially increased
users' willingness to pay for safer machines. In this section, we provide qualitative evidence that links such
demand changes to the development of the RMTs we described in Section 6.3.
      First, our interviews with two industry insiders familiar with these events made it quite clear that CT
producers ultimately responded to market demand. One interviewee pointed out that CT producers had
always been conscious of radiation dose and had been innovating to address these concerns. However, before
the shock, the most important request from physicians and radiologists was to `see more stuff,' while dose
control had been a secondary consideration.32 Only after the accidents did the demand for safety-related
features became a first-order consideration.33 As discussed in Section 6.3, to adopt these new technologies
hospitals faced non-trivial costs for adjusting their operational routines and retraining radiologists, and it
took the producers several improved versions to address drawbacks in image quality and speed of the IR
technology. A substantial demand shift (and, hence, the willingness for the users to incur such adoption
costs) seemed necessary for CT producers to develop these technologies profitably.
      Second, there is also direct evidence of users' requests for safer machines. The CEO of Cedars-Sinai
Medical Center--where the adverse events took place--submitted a written document to the FDA imme-
diately after the disclosure of the accidents. The document listed suggestions for changes to CT machines,
such as dose display, alerts, and password protection that can prevent radiation overdose, which are exactly
  31 "IBISWorld     Procurement Report: 30105050 CT Scanners," by Keiko Cadby, July 2014, IBIS World.
  32 As  summarized in Pelc (2014), "historically, the main drivers for technological improvements have been the physicians' de-
mand for improved image quality, speed, and new clinical applications."
   33 This is clear from various historical sources that we identified. The following quote is just one such example: "Radiation dose

will be an enormous topic over the next five years," stated David Waldman, chair of the imaging sciences department at University
of Rochester Medical Center, in an interview with Diagnostic Imaging in December 2010.



                                                                23
in line with the `low-hanging fruit' type of RMTs later developed by producers.
      Finally, there is also evidence that RMTs are mentioned in marketing messages by hospitals to mitigate
their patients' fear. For example, the Ridgeview Imaging Center in Minnesota, a testing site of Siemens'
machine equipped with the IR option, displayed this technology on its website as "providing patients with the
lowest-possible radiation dose;" and David Gross, the center's chief of radiology, told Diagnostic Imaging
that "our referring docs know that we have done as much as we can to reduce the radiation given to the
patient" and that "this is a real selling point."34 CT producers also explicitly highlighted the dose-reduction
aspect of IR technologies in addressing their customers--physicians and hospitals. For example, the front
page of GE's product brochure for Veo--the second generation of its IR algorithm--prints the following in
large font: "The breakthrough that is rewriting the rule of CT imaging." On the next page, it says that the
new technology allows "enhanced image quality at a radiation dose never before thought possible."

7.4     Alternative mechanisms

This section discusses three alternative mechanisms for our findings.
      Regulatory pressure It is possible that the development of the RMTs was driven mainly by regulatory
pressure. The evidence reported in the previous section suggests that regulatory prescriptions were mostly
internalizing requests from users. Moreover, in Section 6.3.1, we discussed how the FDA's recommendations
and the new standards developed by the industry association involved only the `low-hanging fruit" type
of RMTs. Thus, while regulatory pressure may have facilitated the diffusion of safety-check features of
CT scanners, it cannot quite explain the second type of RMTs--IR technologies--which go far beyond
regulatory prescriptions.
      Changing guidelines for medical practice Medical societies and associations may also have changed
their guidelines in response to the over-radiation shock and, hence, shaped demand. An analysis of the
recommendations by medical associations show that they focused mainly on the organizational aspects
of radiation facilities, such as the development of routines for systematic protocol reviews, techniques to
identify and correct errors, and qualification requirements for CT technicians (Hendee and Herman (2011)).
The few recommendations to vendors focused only on safety-check features (not IR), in line with demands
from patients and medical providers.
      Increased risk perception by CT producers The over-radiation shock may have changed risk percep-
  34 "Iterative reconstruction cuts CT dose without harming image quality," by Greg Freiherr, December 14, 2010, Diagnostic

Imaging. Similarly, Leslee Shaw, the co-director of the Emory Clinical Cardiovascular Research Institute, stated in an interview:
"There is a lot of concern today about the overuse of CT and overexposure of patients to radiation. So, having as a marketing
piece that you are very concerned about patient-centered imaging and safety, and that you are using new technology to decrease
dose--that is something you can make a great business case for. Or, to tell people that you are updating your technology to look
precisely for improved patient care." Source: https://www.dicardiology.com/article/what-consider-when-buying-new-ct-scanner.



                                                              24
tion among CT producers, which, in turn, could have spurred the development of these RMTs. As discussed
above, our interviews suggest that CT producers had always been conscious of potential risks of radiation,
as dose information is clearly measured and should have been known to CT producers and other specialists
(Lee et al. (2004) show that radiologists, who are specialists, were more aware of such risk than patients
and even physicians prior to the shock). Our reading of the scientific literature suggests that the evidence
moved only slightly in favor of an association between CT scans and cancer risk over our sample period,
with epidemiological cohort studies published after 2012 and subject to criticisms (Harbron (2016)). Thus,
new scientific results are unlikely to explain the swift reactions of the industry in incorporating RMTs.35

8      Conclusion
In this paper, we examine the impact of changes in risk perception on innovation, taking advantage of the
disclosure and the extensive reporting of a set of unexpected CT scan over-radiation accidents in late 2009.
Our results show significantly increased patenting of features of radiation diagnostic devices that mitigate
radiation risk, relative to other features--on the order of 110 percent. Using FDA data, we find a significant
increase in the number of new applications for radiation diagnostic devices, driven by products for which
radiation control features are prominent. For the underlying mechanisms, we provide survey, interview,
and other qualitative evidence suggesting that risk perception by users (physicians, radiologists, hospital
administrators, and patients) changed substantially after the over-radiation shock. Quantitatively, we find
that the shock led to (i) fewer high-radiation diagnostic procedures performed; and (ii) a greater propensity
to upgrade CT scanners. These opposite effects on device use and equipment upgrade are consistent with
the idea that changes in risk perception played an important role in driving firms' innovation investments.
      Ultimately, our paper suggests that changes in risk perception can be an important driver of innovation
and can shape the direction of technological progress. Increased risk perception, in principle, has ambiguous
effects on the demand for a product. In settings such as ours--in which there are sufficiently large technolog-
ical possibilities to develop safer technologies--the positive effect of a higher willingness to pay for safety
may dominate the chilling effect that risk has on innovation. Finally, large players may play an important
role in the development and, even more so, in the commercialization of risk-mitigating technologies, and
this has important implications for the dynamics of competitive advantage and market structure.
    35 Ofcourse, it could be that CT producers' perception of their liability risk increased after the shock. However, liability risk
is tightly linked to industry standards and regulatory requirements, which prescribed only safety-check features and not more
substantial dose-reduction technologies as IR.




                                                                25
References
Acemoglu, D. and J. Linn (2004). Market size in innovation: Theory and evidence fromthe pharmaceutical
  industry. Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 1049­1090.

Adner, R. and D. Levinthal (2001). Demand heterogeneity and technology evolution: implications for
  product and process innovation. Management Science 47, 611­628.

Ahuja, G., C. M. Lampert, and V. Tandon (2008). Moving beyond schumpeter: Management research on
  the determinants of technological innovation. The Academy of Management Annals 2, 1­98.

Anderson, P. and M. Tushman (1990). Technological discontinuities and dominant designs: a cyclical model
  of technological change. Administrative Science Quarterly 35, 604­633.

Arrow, K. (1970). Essays in the theory of risk bearing. North Holland.

Ball, G. P., J. T. Macher, and A. D. Stern (2019). Recalls, innovation, and competitor response: Evidence
  from medical device firms. Harvard Business School Working Paper.

Barnett, M. and A. King (2008). Good fences make good neighbors: An institutional explanation of the
  benefits of industry self-regulation. Academy of Management Journal 51, 1150­1170.

Berrone, P., A. Fosfuri, L. Gelabert, and L. R. Gomez-Mejia (2013). Necessity as the mother of 'green'
  inventions: Institutional pressures and environmental innovations. StrategicManagement Journal 34,
  891­909.

Borenstein, S. and M. B. Zimmerman (1988). Market incentives for safe commercial airline operation.
  American Economic Review 78, 913­935.

Boutis, K., J. Fischer, S. Freedman, and K. Thomas (2014). Radiation exposure from imaging tests in
  pediatric emergency medicine: a survey of physician knowledge and risk disclosure practices. Journal of
  Emergency Medicine 47, 36­44.

Brenner, D. and E. Hall (2007). Computed tomography - an increasing source of radiation exposure. New
  England Journal of Medicine 357, 2277­2284.

Chatterji, A. K. and K. Fabrizio (2012). How do product users influence corporate invention? Organization
  Science 23, 971­987.

Christensen, C. and J. Bower (1996). Customer power, strategic investment, and the failure of leading firms.
  Strategic Management Journal 17, 197­218.

Cohen, W. (2010). Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Volume 1, Chapter Fifty years of empirical
  studies of innovative activity and performance, pp. 129­213. North-Holland.

Cohen, W. and S. Klepper (1996). Firm size and the nature of innovation within industries: the case of
  process and product r&d. Review of Economics and Statistics 78, 232­243.

Daughety, A. and J. Reinganum (1995). Product safety: Liability, r&d, and signaling. American Economic
  Review 85, 1187­1206.

Di Stefano, G., A. Gambardella, and G. Verona (2012). Technology push and demand pull perspectives in
  innovation studies: Current findings and future research directions. Research Policy 41, 1283­1295.


                                                    26
Dosi, G. (1982). Technological paradigms and technological trajectories: a suggested interpretation of the
  determinants and directions of technical change. Research Policy 11, 147­162.

Dranove, D. and C. Olsen (1994). The economic side ffects of dangerous drug announcements. Journal of
  Law and Economics 37, 323­348.

Fabrizio, K. and L. G. Thomas (2012). The impact of local demand on innovation in a global industry.
  Strategic Management Journal 33, 42­64.

Finkelstein, A. (2004). Static and dynamic effects of health policy: Evidence from the vaccine industry.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 527­564.

Freedman, S., M. Kearney, and M. Lederman (2012). Product recalls, imperfect information, and spillover
  effects: Lessons from the consumer response to the 2007 toy recalls. Recalls, Review of Economics and
  Statistics 94, 499­516.

Freiherr, G. (2010). Iterative reconstruction cuts ct dose without harming image quality. Diagnostic Imag-
  ing 42.

Fuchs, V. and H. Sox (2001). Physicians' views of the relative importance of thirty medical innovations.
  Health Affairs 20, 30­42.

Galasso, A. and H. Luo (2017). Tort reform and innovation. Journal of Law and Economics 60, 385­412.

Galasso, A. and H. Luo (2018). When does product liability risk chill innovation? evidence from medical
  implants. NBER working paper 25068.

Gawande, A. (2009). The Checklist Manifesto: How to Get Things Right. Metropolitan Books.

Harbron, R. (2016). What do recent epidemiological studies tell us about the risk of cancer from radiation
  doses typical of diagnostic radiography? Radiography 22, S41­S46.

Hay, B. and K. Spier (2005). Manufacturer liability for harms caused by consumers to others. American
  Economic Review 95, 1700­1711.

Hendee, W. and M. Herman (2011). Improving patient safety in radiation oncology. Medical Physics 11,
  78­82.

Henderson, R. (1993). Underinvestment and incompetence as responses to radical innovation: Evidence
  from the photolithographic equipment alignment industry. Rand Journal of Economics 24, 248­270.

Henderson, R. and K. Clark (1990). Architectural innovation: The reconfiguration of existing product
  technologies and the failure of established firms. Administrative science quarterly 35, 9­30.

Huber, P. (1989). Liability: The Legal Revolution and Its Consequences. Basic Books.

Jarrell, G. and S. Peltzman (1985). The impact of product recalls on the wealth of sellers. Journal of Political
   Economy 93, 512­536.

Kline, S. and N. Rosenberg (1986). The Positive Sum Strategy: Harnessing Technology for Economic
  Growth, Chapter An overview of innovation, pp. 275­305. National Academy Press.

Krieger, J., X. Li, and R. T. Thakor (2019). Find and replace: R&d investment following the erosion of
  existing products.

                                                      27
Lee, C., A. Haims, E. Monico, J. Brink, and H. Forman (2004). Diagnostic ct scans: assessment of patient,
  physician, and radiologist awareness of radiation dose and possible risks. Radiology 231, 393­398.

Lee, D. and F. Levy (2012). The sharp slowdown in growth of medical imaging: an early analysis suggests
  combination of policies was the cause. Health Affairs 31, 1876­1884.

Lichtenstein, S., P. Slovic, B. Fischhoff, M. Layman, and B. Combs (1978). Judged frequency of lethal
  events. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory 4, 551­57.

Mahesh, M. (2016). What is the ct dose check standard, and why do ct scanners need to be in compliance?
 Journal of the American College of Radiology 13, 64­66.

Mayo-Smith, W., A. Hara, M. Mahesh, D. Sahani, and W. Pavlicek (2014). How i do it: managing radiation
 dose in ct. Radiology 273, 657­672.

Miao, Q. and D. Popp (2014). Necessity as the mother of invention: Innovative responses to natural disasters.
 Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 68, 280­295.

Pelc, N. (2014). Recent and future directions in ct imaging. Annals of biomedical engineering 42, 260­268.

Popp, D. (2019). Environmental policy and innovation: a decade of research. National Bureauof Economic
  Research (w25631).

Porter, M. (1990). The competitive advantage of nations. Free Press.

Ramirez-Giraldo, J., K. L. Grant, and R. Raupach (2018). Admire: Advanced modeled iterative reconstruc-
  tion. Siemens Healthcare white paper.

Schmookler, J. (1966). Invention and economic growth. Harvard University Press,.

Slovic, P., B. Fischhoff, and S. Lichtenstein (1982). Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases,
  Chapter Facts versus fears: Understanding perceived risk. Cambridge University Press.

Thrall, J. (2012). Radiation exposure in ct scanning and risk: Where are we? Radiology 264, 325­328.

Utterback, J. and W. Abernathy (1975). A dynamic model of product and process innovation. Omega 3,
  639­656.

Viscusi, K. (1985). A bayesian perspective on biases in risk perception. Economics Letters 17, 59­62.

Viscusi, K. (1993). The value of risks to life and health. Journal of Economic Literature 31, 1912­1946.

Viscusi, K. and M. Moore (1993). Product liability, research and development, and innovation. Journal of
  Political Economy 101, 161­184.

Von Hippel, E. (1986). Lead users: a source of novel product concepts. Management Science 32, 791­805.

Zwank, M., M. Leow, and C. Anderson (2014). Emergency department patient knowledge and physician
  communication regarding ct scans. Journal of Emergency Medicine 31, 824­826.




                                                     28
          Figure 1: Patenting in RMT subclasses vs. other subclasses in radiation diagnostic devices




Note: raw data. Average number of patents in risk-mitigating technology subclasses versus other subclasses in radiation diagnostic
devices (i.e., CPC group A61B6).




                        Figure 2: Dynamic effects of the over-radiation shock on patenting




Note: year-specific DID coefficients estimated from equation (2). The treatment group includes RMT subclasses, and the control
group includes other subclasses in radiation diagnostic devices (i.e., CPC group A61B6).




                                                               29
                                                 Table 1: Summary statistics


                                                       (a) Patent applications
                                                Obs.       Mean        Std. Dev.        Min       Max
                          Patents               1540       2.962         6.185           0        97

                          Year                  1540       2010          3.163          2005      2015

                          RMT subclass          1540       0.057         0.232             0          1

                                                       (b) FDA applications
                                                        Obs.          Mean       Std. Dev.       Min        Max
                 Applications                          19,201         1.803        5.331          0         110

                 Year                                  19,201         2011         3.742        2005        2017

                 Ionizing diagnostic devices           19,201         0.013        0.113          0           1


Note: Patents = the number of patent applications in a subclass-year. RMT subclass = 1 for subclasses reducing the risk of
over-radiation, controlling the level of patient exposure, and detecting faults or malfunctions. Applications = number of class II
510k applications in a product code-year. Ionizing diagnostic devices = 1 for product codes related to diagnostic devices in
radiology that emit ionizing radiation.




                             Table 2: Effects of the over-radiation shock: patent analysis


       Dependent variable           Patents             Patents                    Patents                    Patents
                                       (1)                 (2)                        (3)                       (4)
       RMT × After 2010             1.783**             1.785**                    2.650**                    0.828*
                                    (0.809)             (0.814)                    (1.166)                    (0.456)

       Year effects                     Y                   Y                          Y                          Y
       Subclass effects                 Y                   Y                          Y                          Y

       Note                         Baseline       Drop if all zeros          Start at first patent       Only CT patents

       Observations                   1540                1507                       1001                      1298

Note: OLS regressions. Patents = the number of patent applications in a subclass-year. RMT = 1 for patent subclasses involving
risk-mitigating technologies. Column 2 drops subclasses with zero patents during the entire sample period; column 3 uses an
unbalanced panel that includes only observations for which we observe at least one patent in this particular subclass in previous
years; and column 4 uses only CT patents (that is, those referring to subclass A61B6/032 as either primary or secondary
classification). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the subclass level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                 30
                              Table 3: Alternative control groups for the patent analysis


         Dependent variable                Patents           Patents            Patents        Patents             Patents
                                              (1)               (2)               (3)             (4)                (5)
         RMT × After 2010                  1.522**           1.648**            1.229*         1.423**             0.360*
                                           (0.719)           (0.717)            (0.720)        (0.719)             (0.201)

         Year effects                        Y                  Y                 Y                 Y                  Y
         Subclass effects                    Y                  Y                 Y                 Y                  Y

         Control group                      A61B5            A61B5               A61F            A61F                 A61F
                                           & A61B8          & A61B8

         Drop common patentees               NO            from control          NO          from control      from treatment
                                                                                                                 and control

         Observations                       8756              8756               8767            8767                 8767

Note: OLS regressions. Patents = the number of patent applications in a subclass-year. The control group used in columns 1-2
includes diagnostic medical devices that do not use radiation or ultrasound (CPC group A61B5) and diagnostic devices that use
ultrasound (CPC group A61B8). The control group used in columns 3-5 includes medical implant patents (CPC subsection A61F).
Common patentees are assignees that patent in both treatment and control groups. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at
the subclass level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                       Table 4: Effects of the over-radiation shock: FDA application analysis


Dependent variable             Apps                Apps                  Apps                Apps               Apps              Apps
                                                                                           (w/o dose)         (w/ dose)         (w/ dose)
                                (1)                 (2)                (3)                    (4)                 (5)               (6)
Ionizing diagnostic           1.247*               0.868             1.897*                  0.231             1.088**           1.102**
devices × After 2010          (0.690)             (0.873)            (1.076)                (0.580)            (0.442)           (0.441)

Year FE                         Y                    Y                    Y                     Y                 Y                Y
Product code FE                 Y                    Y                    Y                     Y                 Y                Y

Treatment group            All radiation     Low radiation       High radiation           All radiation     All radiation    All radiation
                            diagnostic        diagnostic          diagnostic               diagnostic        diagnostic       diagnostic

Control group             Non-radiation      Non-radiation       Non-radiation            Non-radiation     Non-radiation    Non-radiology
                          diagnostic and     diagnostic and      diagnostic and           diagnostic and    diagnostic and
                          non-radiology      non-radiology       non-radiology            non-radiology     non-radiology

Observations                  19201                19110                 19045               19201             19201             18876

Note: OLS regressions. Apps = the number of FDA applications in a product code-year. In column 4, the dependent variable for
the treatment group (i.e., radiation diagnostic devices in radiology) counts only applications not containing the word `dose' in the
summary files, whereas in columns 5 and 6, the dependent variable for the treatment group counts only applications containing the
word `dose' in the summary files. Ionizing diagnostic devices = 1 for product codes of diagnostic devices in radiology that emit
ionizing radiation. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the product code level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                    31
                                                 Table 5: Firm-level analysis


                                                  Patent applications                           FDA applications
                                             All       Top-5       Non top-5            All        Top-5      Non top-5
                                           Patents    Patents       Patents            Apps        Apps          Apps
                                              (1)        (2)          (3)               (4)          (5)          (6)
     RMT × After 2010                      0.152**     0.217*       0.146*
                                           (0.062)    (0.127)       (0.076)

     Ionizing diagnostic devices                                                      0.079**      0.329**          0.052
     × After 2010                                                                     (0.032)      (0.141)         (0.035)


     Year FE                                   Y            Y             Y              Y             Y              Y
     Subclass (or product code) FE             Y            Y             Y              Y             Y              Y
     Firm FE                                   Y            Y             Y              Y             Y              Y

     Observations                           17567         4389           13178        152399         2652          149747

Note: OLS regressions. Patents = the number of patent applications in a firm×patent subclass×year. The control group used in
columns 1-3 includes non-RMT subclasses of radiation diagnostic devices (the same as our baseline analysis in Table 2). Apps =
the number of FDA applications in a firm×product code×year. Control devices in columns 4-6 are class-II devices outside
radiology (the same as column 6 in Table 4). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the subclass (or product code) level.
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.



                                  Table 6: Demand effects of the over-radiation shock


                                                                  Equipment use                               Equipment upgrade
Dependent Variable                                      log(Services)        log(Services)                 Assembly      Assembly
                                                                                                            reports       reports
                                                             (1)                        (2)                   (3)           (4)
High-radiation procedures ×                               -0.214**                   -0.189*
After 2010                                                 (0.096)                   (0.100)

CT Scanners × After 2010                                                                                   0.004***          0.003***
                                                                                                            (0.001)           (0.001)

Year effects                                                    Y                        Y                    Y                  Y
Procedure (or site-equipment type) effects                      Y                        Y                    Y                  Y

Control group                                       Low radiation X-ray          MRI & ultrasound       Chest X-ray        Dental X-ray

Observations                                                3042                       2054                 715330            715330

Note: OLS regressions. Services = number of Medicare services reported for the procedure (i.e., a CPT code) in a given year.
High-radiation procedures include CT, PET/CT, and fluoroscopy. Control procedures in column 1 are standard X-ray procedures
with low radiation; and control procedures in column 2 are non-radiation procedures (that is, MRI and ultrasound). Assembly
reports = the number of assembly reports related to a specific equipment type in a site-year. Control equipment type in column 3 is
low-radiation chest X-ray systems, and that in column 4 is low-radiation dental X-ray systems. Standard errors (in parentheses)
are clustered at the procedure (or site-equipment type) level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                    32
Online Appendices (not for publication)




                  33
A. Appendix Tables and Figures

                    Figure A1: Timing of the over-radiation shock


                      (a) Media mentions of CT scan and X-ray radiation




                               (b) FDA approval time (months)




                     (c) Google Trends of keyword "CT Scan Radiation"




                                             34
           Figure A2: Dynamic effects of the over-radiation shock on FDA pre-market notifications




Note: year-specific DID coefficients estimated from a specification analogous to equation (2). The sample is the same as in
column 6 in Table 4, where the treatment group includes all product codes of diagnostic devices in radiology that emit ionizing
radiation, and the control group includes all product codes of class-II devices in non-radiology medical specialities. The dependent
variable for the treatment group counts only applications containing the word `dose' in the summary files. The model includes
year and product code fixed effects.




                                                                35
                               Figure A3: Risk-mitigating technologies in CT Scanners


                                                (a) Dose check and dose efficiency




                                                        (b) Dose Reduction




                                                    (c) Iterative Reconstruction




Note: percentages of applications in a given year, including a certain type of safety-related features in the summary files. The data
are based on 294 510k applications in the product code JAK (CT scanners).




                                                                 36
         Figure A4: Risk-mitigating technologies in CT Scanners: top five firms versus smaller firms


                                                (a) Dose check and dose efficiency




                                                        (b) Dose Reduction




                                                    (c) Iterative Reconstruction




Note: percentages of applications in a given year, including a certain type of safety-related features in the summary files. The data
are based on 294 510k applications in the product code JAK (CT scanners). Top-5 firms are GE, Siemens, Toshiba, Philips, and
Hitachi.




                                                                 37
                  Figure A5: Iterative reconstruction in CT Scanners: each of the top five firms


                                          (a) Iterative Reconstruction (GE and Siemens)




                                   (b) Iterative Reconstruction (Toshiba, Philips, and Hitachi)




Note: percentages of applications in a given year, including IR algorithm. The data are based on 510k applications in the product
code JAK (CT scanners).




                                                               38
        Figure A6: Year-specific effects on the number of CT services relative to MRI and ultrasound




Note: The treatment group includes Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes for high-radiation procedures, including CT,
PET/CT, and fluoroscopy; and the control group includes CPT codes for MRI and ultrasound that match to the treated CPT codes
in terms of pre-trends. The dependent variable of the difference-in-differences regression is log(number of services), and the
regression controls for CPT and year fixed effects.




                                                              39
           Figure A7: Estimated numbers of CT and MRI exams per million people (OECD data)


                                                      (a) United States




                                                     (b) Other coutries




Note: https://data.oecd.org/healtheqt/computed-tomography-ct-scanners.htm. The data in the U.S. are based on IMV benchmark
reports that extrapolate data to the national level based on a survey of over 200 sites.




                                                            40
                       Table A1: Patenting response to the over-radiation shock: robustness


  Dependent variable         log(Patents+1)              Patents              Patents            Patents           Patents
                                   (1)                      (2)                 (3)                 (4)               (5)
  RMT × After 2010               0.219*                  0.476**             0.708***            4.607**           1.783**
                                 (0.118)                 (0.205)              (0.248)            (2.104)           (0.817)

  Year effects                      Y                       Y                    Y                  Y                  Y
  Subclass effects                  Y                       Y                    Y                  Y                  Y

  Model                            OLS             Negative binomial           Poisson      Weighted OLS          Bootstrap

  Observations                     1540                   1507                  1507              1540               1540

Note: Patents = the number of patent applications in a subclass-year. Column 4 weights each observation by the (square root of)
total patenting in the subclass during the pre-sample period of 1995-2004. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the
subclass level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                        Table A2: Keyword approach to identifying RMT patent subclasses


        Dependent variable                      Patents              Patents             Patents         Patents
                                                   (1)                  (2)                 (3)            (4)
        RMT × After 2010                        1.509**              1.688**             1.614**        1.845***
                                                (0.714)              (0.743)             (0.699)         (0.681)

        Year effects                               Y                    Y                    Y              Y
        Subclass effects                           Y                    Y                    Y              Y

        RMT-patent fraction threshold           Top 5%           Top 5% and              Top 10%         Top 15%
        for defining treatment group                          drop mixed classes

        Observations                              1540                1320                 1540            1540

Note: OLS regressions. Patents = the number of patent applications in a subclass-year. RMT = 1 for patent subclasses involving
risk-mitigating technologies. Column 2 defines the treatment group in the same way as column 1, but drops subclasses from the
control group if more than two percent of their patents are RMT patents. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the
subclass level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                41
               Table A3: Effects of the over-radiation shock using secondary patent classification


    Dependent variable                          At least one RMT           At least one RMT           At least one RMT
                                               secondary subclass         secondary subclass         secondary subclass
                                                        (1)                        (2)                        (3)
    Year 2005                                         -0.014                     -0.008                     0.021
                                                     (0.020)                    (0.021)                    (0.034)

    Year 2006                                          -0.007                     0.003                      -0.001
                                                      (0.020)                    (0.020)                    (0.031)

    Year 2007                                          -0.018                    -0.004                      0.015
                                                      (0.020)                    (0.020)                    (0.030)

    Year 2008                                          -0.021                    -0.017                      -0.028
                                                      (0.020)                    (0.020)                    (0.030)

    Year 2010                                          0.031                     0.040*                      0.044
                                                      (0.023)                    (0.023)                    (0.033)

    Year 2011                                         0.058**                   0.063***                    0.063*
                                                      (0.023)                    (0.024)                    (0.036)

    Year 2012                                        0.085***                   0.094***                   0.097***
                                                      (0.024)                    (0.024)                    (0.037)

    Year 2013                                        0.090***                   0.111***                    0.100**
                                                      (0.027)                    (0.027)                    (0.040)

    Year 2014                                        0.120***                   0.143***                   0.126***
                                                      (0.027)                    (0.027)                    (0.043)

    Year 2015                                         0.059*                     0.075**                     0.033
                                                      (0.033)                    (0.032)                    (0.050)

    Number of secondary subclasses                   0.016***                   0.017***                   0.020***
                                                      (0.002)                    (0.002)                    (0.003)

    Number of claims                                   -0.001                     0.001                      0.001
                                                      (0.001)                    (0.001)                    (0.001)

    Primary subclass effects                             N                          Y                          Y
    Assignee effects                                     N                          N                          Y

    Observations                                       4,131                      4,131                      4,131

Note: Patent-level linear probability regressions. Sample includes all patents in radiation diagnostic medical devices (A61B6) for
which the primary subclass is not RMT. Dependent variable = 1 if patent lists at least one RMT subclass as secondary subclass.
Robust standard errors (in parentheses). * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                42
                                 Table A4: FDA Pre-market notifications: robustness


Dependent variable           Apps (with dose)           Apps (with dose)         log[Apps (with dose)+1]           Apps (with dose)
                                   (1)                        (2)                          (3)                           (4)
Ionizing diagnostic             0.829**                    1.373**                      0.145**                       1.774***
device×After 2010                (0.368)                    (0.536)                     (0.072)                        (0.370)

Year FE                               Y                          Y                            Y                             Y
Product code FE                       Y                          Y                            Y                             Y

Control group                  Non-radiology             Non-radiology                 Non-radiology                Non-radiology

Note                        Only years 2005-15          Drop codes with                   Log DV                        Poisson
                                                        no applications

Observations                        15972                     18824                         18876                        18824

Note: OLS regressions. Apps (with dose) = the number of FDA applications in a product code-year, counting only radiation
diagnostic device applications (the treatment group) containing the word `dose' in the summary files. Ionizing radiology device =
1 for product codes related to radiology devices emitting radiation. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered at the product code
level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                43
                               Table A5: Firm-level analysis: each of the top five firms


                                                           (a) Patent analysis
                   Firm                         GE            Siemens        Toshiba        Philips      Hitachi
                   Dependent variable         Patents         Patents        Patents        Patents      Patents
                                                (1)              (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)
                   RMT × After 2010           0.198*          0.397**         0.166          0.104        0.066
                                              (0.118)         (0.179)        (0.100)        (0.071)      (0.062)

                   Year FE                        Y               Y              Y            Y            Y
                   Subclass FE                    Y               Y              Y            Y            Y
                   Firm FE                        Y               Y              Y            Y            Y

                   Observations                 1122            1155             803         913          396

                                                            (b) FDA analysis
              Firm                                   GE           Siemens         Toshiba      Philips      Hitachi
              Dependent variable                    Apps           Apps            Apps         Apps         Apps
                                                     (1)             (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)
              Ionizing diagnostic devices           0.203          0.467           0.587        0.449        0.156
              × After 2010                         (0.199)        (0.297)         (0.342)      (0.345)      (0.107)

              Year FE                                  Y               Y               Y           Y            Y
              Product code FE                          Y               Y               Y           Y            Y
              Firm FE                                  Y               Y               Y           Y            Y

              Observations                            637             1209             91         546          169


Note: OLS regressions. In panel (a), patents = the number of patent applications in a firm×patent subclass×year. The control
group includes non-RMT subclasses of radiation diagnostic devices (the same as our baseline analysis in Table 2). In panel (b),
apps = the number of FDA applications in a firm×product code×year. Control devices are class-II devices outside radiology (the
same as column 6 in Table 4). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the subclass (or the product code) level. * p < 0.10,
** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                  44
                  Table A6: Entry and unique number of firms active in the market (FDA data)


                                                      Number of entrants         Unique number of firms
                                                            (1)                           (2)
                  Ionizing diagnostic devices              0.236                        0.801*
                  × After 2010                            (0.188)                       (0.409)

                  Year FE                                       Y                             Y
                  Product code FE                               Y                             Y

                  Observations                                18876                         18876

Note: OLS regressions. Dependent variable in column 1 is the number of new firms entering a product code-year. A firm's entry
year is defined as the first year in which the firm shows up in a given product code based on the entire 510 k application data
(starting from the 1970's). Dependent variable in column 2 is the number of unique FDA applicants in a given product code-year.
Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered at the product code level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                         Table A7: Equipment usage in Medicare data: state-level analysis


Dependent Variable                     log(Services)           log(Services)            log(Services)           log(Services)
                                             (1)                     (2)                      (3)                     (4)
High-radiation procedures ×              -0.262***               -0.275***                -0.271***               -0.270***
After 2010                                 (0.016)                 (0.018)                  (0.017)                 (0.018)

High-radiation procedures ×              -0.126**                   -0.108*               -0.113**                 -0.108**
After 2010 × FDA States                   (0.050)                   (0.063)                (0.065)                  (0.051)

Year effects                                 Y                        Y                       Y                        Y
State-procedure effects                      Y                        Y                       Y                        Y
Sate controls                                N                        N                       Y                        Y

Control group                         Low radiation        MRI and ultrasound          Low radiation        MRI and ultrasound

Observations                               51568                    42196                   48862                   40062

Note: OLS regressions. Services = number of Medicare services reported for the procedure in a given year. High-radiation
procedures are CT, PET/CT, and fluoroscopy. Control procedures in columns 1 and 3 are standard X-ray procedures with low
radiation; and control procedures in columns 2 and 4 include non-radiation procedures (that is, MRI and ultrasound). FDA States
are California and Alabama, in which the six hospitals involved in the FDA's investigation are located. State controls include
dummies for cap on non-economic damages, joint and several liability rule, and a dummy indicating Republican-controlled
government and legislature. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered at the procedure-state level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01.




                                                               45
                              Table A8: Equipment upgrade: location-specific analysis


Dependent variable                   Assembly reports         Assembly reports        Assembly reports         Assembly reports
                                           (1)                       (2)                    (3)                      (4)
CT Scanners X After 2010                0.003***                  0.002**                0.005***                 0.004***
                                         (0.001)                  (0.001)                 (0.001)                  (0.001)

CT Scanners X After 2010                 0.206***                                          0.233***
X FDA Hospital                            (0.034)                                           (0.039)

CT Scanners X After 2010                                            0.006***                                         0.005**
X FDA State                                                          (0.002)                                         (0.002)

Year effects                                  Y                        Y                        Y                        Y
Site-equipment type effects                   Y                        Y                        Y                        Y
Location controls                             N                        N                        Y                        Y

Observations                              715330                    715330                  526700                   526700

Note: OLS regressions. Assembly reports = the number of assembly reports related to a specific equipment type in the site-year.
The control group includes low-radiation dental X-ray systems. FDA hospitals are six hospitals involved in FDA investigation.
FDA States are California and Alabama, in which the six hospitals are located. Location controls include dummies for state-level
tort liability systems, including cap on non-economic damages and joint and several liability rule; a dummy indicating
Republican-controlled government and legislature; and unemployment rate at the county level. Standard errors clustered at the site
(clinic or hospital) level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                               46
B. Theoretical model
In this appendix, we develop a simple theoretical model to explore the effects of an increase in consumer risk

perception on innovation incentives. The framework builds on Galasso and Luo (2017) and considers prod-

ucts that are characterized by multi-dimensional heterogeneity (Weyl and Tirole (2012)). Risk perception

affects technological progress through its impact on technology adoption, which, in turn, shapes upstream

R&D investments.

B.1 Basic framework

There are a representative (consumer) hospital and an innovator. A radiation diagnostic device, i, is charac-

terized by two parameters: bi and ri , where bi captures the quality of the image, speed and other non-safety

related features of the product, and ri captures the safety aspect of the product (e.g., the required dose level

if properly configured and the probability of overdose accidents). Note that a lower value of ri indicates a

safer product. Overdose accidents may happen due to the malfunctioning of the machine or operator errors.

In the following, we use `over-radiation' to broadly refer both to overdose accidents (if the dose amount

is above the correctly-specified amount) and to other medical risks potentially arising from products that

generally use high dose levels (even with the right specifications).

    The expected cost of over-radiation for the hospital is H . One way to micro-found H is H = pC + L,

where p is the perceived probability that radiation will lead to cancer; C is the monetary and non-monetary

costs of cancer to the patient (which is, at least partially, internalized by the hospital and its physicians be-

cause they care about their patients' well-being); and L captures the likelihood and expected costs (monetary

and non-monetary) associated with malpractice disputes in an overdose event.

    We model an increase in risk perception resulting from the over-radiation shock that we study in the

paper as an increase in H , which captures the combined effect on the perceived risk of cancer for the

patient, p, and the likelihood and expected costs of malpractice litigation faced by the hospital, L.

    The hospital's utility, when it adopts product i is


                                                 Ui = bi - ri H .                                           (A1)


    The innovator has an idea for a new radiation device, which we denote as N . The hospital can buy a

standard product, O, at a price that we normalize to zero. We assume that there is a feasible set of quality-


                                                          47
risk combinations, bi  [0, 1] and ri  [0, 1]. This captures the possible directions of development notionally

allowed by science, as in Dosi (1982). We model the idea-generation process following Scotchmer (1999)

and assume that bN and rN are independent draws from the uniform distribution over the interval [0, 1] .

    We assume that bO and rO are exogenously given and that UO > 0 and UO < 1 - H . These assumptions

rule out extreme outcomes and ensure that there are no regions in which the old technology is dominated or

dominant for all values of rN .

    An idea can be developed into a new product through an R&D process. Successful development takes

place with probability p(x) = x if the innovator incurs a research cost C(x) = x2 /2. As in Aghion et al.

(2016), we refer to x as the "innovation intensity," which captures the likelihood of successfully developing

a new product.

    The timing of the game is as follows. The innovator draws the idea, observes bN and rN and decides

whether and how much to invest in R&D to develop the new product. If the new product is developed, the

innovator makes a take-it-or-leave-it offer to the hospital, which then decides whether to adopt N or O. If N

is not developed, the hospital adopts O.

B.2 The over-radiation shock and technology adoption

If new product N is developed, the innovator makes a take-it-or-leave-it offer to the hospital for a transfer,

t . The hospital decides whether to accept the offer, which yields a payoff to UN - t , or to adopt the old

standard product, which yields UO . This implies that the payoff of the innovator will be either UN - UO or

zero, depending on whether the new product offers the hospital higher utility than the old technology does.36

    For a fixed level of (perceived) expected costs of over-radiation, H , the hospital trades off the safety

dimension of a product with other quality dimensions. Riskier products (rN > rO ) are adopted as long as

their quality (bN - bO ) is large enough. Conversely, safer products are adopted only if their quality is not too

low. The following proposition identifies the threshold in rN , below which the new product will be adopted.

Proposition 1. The hospital will adopt the new product when rN is below the following threshold:


                                                                  bN - bO
                                                     rN = rO +            .                                                  (A2)
                                                                     H


                                                                         .
Proof. Adoption of N occurs when UN  UO , which can be rewritten as rN  rN
  36 Ourresults are robust to replacing the take-it-or-leave it offer with a Nash bargaining protocol in which the surplus is split
between the innovator and the hospital.


                                                               48
               Figure A8: The effect the over-radiation shock on hospital's adoption decision




    The over-radiation shock increases H and shifts the adoption threshold. The effect on adoption depends

on the characteristics of the new product. First, there is an decrease in the adoption of high-quality but

riskier products. Second, in contrast, there is an increase in the adoption of low-quality but safer products.

Finally, there is no effect on the adoption of high-quality/low-risk or low-quality/high-risk products. These

results are summarized in the figure below.

    The overall effect of an increase in H on adoption is, therefore, ambiguous. The following proposition

shows that when the old product is sufficiently risky, the increased incentive to adopt safer products domi-

nates the chilling effect generated by the higher perception of radiation risk. As a result, the increase in risk

perception would result in an overall increase in the propensity to adopt new products. That is,

Proposition 2. An increase in H generates an overall increase in the propensity to adopt new products if

and only if the old product is sufficiently risky (i.e., rO > 1/2).

Proof. The area above the adoption threshold in the (bN , rN ) space is equal to

                                                     1
                                      AD =               (1 - bO + H (rO - x))dx
                                                 0
                                                              1
                                            = 1 - bO + H (rO - ),
                                                              2

                  dAD
with derivative       = rO - 1
                             2 which is positive if rO > 1/2.
                  dH

                                                             49
B.3 The over-radiation shock and innovation incentives

So far, our analysis has focused on the effect of an increase in H on the hospital's adoption decision. Its

impact on innovation incentives, however, combines the effect on adoption with the effect on the incentives

to invest in R&D, which depend not only on whether the product will be adopted, but also on the expected

profitability of the product if it is adopted. Note that for products that will be adopted, the expected prof-

itability from a successful innovation is UN - UO . The innovator invests in R&D, x, to the point at which

the marginal cost of R&D equals its marginal benefits (recall that x captures the likelihood of successfully

developing a new product).

    Similar to its impact on adoption, an increase in H may have a positive or a negative effect on inno-

vation incentives, depending on the characteristics of the new products. For marginal products, because

risk perception affects the hospital's adoption decision, some products become profitable after the change

in risk perception, while others are no longer profitable. The former experience an increase in the innova-

tion intensity, while the latter experience a drop. For infra-marginal products--that is, products that will

be adopted both before and after--the over-radiation shock also affects their profits, which, in turn, affect

R&D incentives. Recall that the profit from a successful innovation is equal to bN - bO - H (rO - rN ). An

increase in H , therefore, increases innovation intensity for safer products (those with rN < rO ) and decreases

innovation intensity for less-safe products (those with rN > rO ). The following proposition shows this result

more formally.

Proposition 3. An increase in H increases the research intensity for products that are safer than the current

standard (i.e., rN < rO ).

Proof. The optimal innovation intensity for an innovator with idea (bN , rN ) solves

                                                                            x2
                                     max x (bN - bO - H (rN - rO )) -          ,
                                       x                                    2

which is equal to x (bN , rN ) = bN - bO - H (rN - rO ), which is positive as long as bN  bO + H (rN - rO ).
                                              1 - bO
For a fixed rN , we have that when 0  rN             + rO , the expected investment is
                                                H

                                             1
                             x (rN ) =                        (y - bO - H (rN - rO ))dy
                                            bO +H (rN -rO )
                                           1
                                      =      (bO + HrN - HrO - 1)2 .
                                           2

                                                        50
The proposition follows from

                                 dx (rN )
                                          = (rO - rN ) (1 - bO - H (rN - rO )),
                                   dH

                                                            1 - bO
which is positive when rO  rN . In the case in which rN >          + rO , we have the corner solution x (rN ) =
                                                              H
0, so the change in H has no effect.


    The relative magnitudes of the opposing effects on innovation incentives would depend on how the

quality of the new product compares to that of the old (standard) product, as the relative importance of

safety consideration is different.

    In the following proposition, we show that when rO > 1/2, the positive effect dominates regardless of

the quality of the new product, and, hence, the overall net effect of an increase in H is positive. Recall that

in this simple model, we assume that the possible risk-quality combinations are uniformly distributed in the

unit square of [0, 1] × [0, 1]. Intuitively, rO > 1/2 implies that the safety level of the standard products is

sufficiently different from the maximum safety level technologically allowed (i.e., r = 0). Thus, there are a

large number of safer products that are technologically possible and can be developed. In such situations,

an increase in H will result in a net increase in innovation incentives.

    When the standard product is already sufficiently safe relative to the technological frontier (that is, if

rO < 1/2), we show that the negative effect of an increase in H on innovation intensity dominates for

products of high quality, rendering the overall effect ambiguous.

Proposition 4. The impact of an increase in H on innovation intensity is positive when the old technology

is sufficiently risky (rO > 1/2) and ambiguous otherwise (i.e., when rO  1/2).

Proof. The optimal innovation intensity for an innovator with idea (bN , rN ) solves

                                                                          x2
                                       max x (bN - bO - H (rN - rO )) -      ,
                                        x                                 2

which is equal to x = UN - UO . Consider an innovator with an idea with expected quality bN . She will invest

in R&D as long as

                                            bN - bO - H (rN - rO )  0,



                                                       51
or
                                                            bN - bO
                                                    rN              + rO  r .
                                                               H

The innovation intensity for firms at bN is

                                              r                                   Hr2
                                                  bN - bO - H (x - rO )dx =           .                      (A3)
                                          0                                        2

Considering the corner solutions when r is outside the unit interval in (3), we obtain the expected innovation

intensity for a fixed level of
                                
                                              0                             if bN < b0 - Hr0
                                                                2
                                
                                 H   bN - bO
                                
            bN : i(bN , H ) =                + rO                           if b0 - Hr0  bN < H + b0 - Hr0
                                 2      H
                                
                                 bN - bO + H (rO - 1 )
                                
                                                                            if bN  H + b0 - Hr0 .
                                                   2


We exploit the above formula to study the impact of an increase in H on innovation, as well as the hetero-

geneity in the impact across technologies with different levels of expected effectiveness. To compute the

total expected innovation investment, we integrate i(bN , H ) for each value of bN . The total effect comprises

three parts. The first part is
                                                           bO -Hr0
                                                                     0dbN = 0.
                                                       0

The second part is
                                   H +bO -HrO                               2
                                                  H     bN - bO                       1
                                                                + rO             dbN = H 2 ,
                                                  2        H                          6
                                   bO -HrO

The third part of the innovation intensity is


                            1                           1
                                      bN - bO + H (rO - ) dbN
                           H +bO -HrO                   2
                          1 2 2 1 2                   1       1   1         1
                     =      H rO - H rO - HbO rO + HbO + HrO - H + b2
                                                                    O - bO + .
                          2         2                 2       2   2         2

This implies that the expected innovation intensity as a function of (bO , rO ) is equal to

                           1        1        1              1           1   1         1
         I (H , bO , rO ) = H 2 rO
                                 2
                                   - H 2 rO + H 2 - HbO rO + HbO + HrO - H + b2
                                                                              O - bO + ,
                           2        2        6              2           2   2         2


                                                                 52
The following derivative captures that the impact of an increase in radiation risk is:

                              I  1   1                          2  1
                                = H + bO + rO - HrO - bO rO + HrO - .
                              H  3   2                             2

                                                                 2 I
When rO = 0.5, we have that I /H = H /12 > 0. Moreover,                = 1 - H - bO + 2HrO , which is
                                                               H rO
increasing in rO for every value of bO if rO  1/2. We now look at the effect across various levels of bN .
                                     i             2 i
When bN < bO - HrO , we have that        = 0 and         = 0. When bO - HrO  bN  H + bO - HrO , we
                                     H           H bN
have that
                                        i     r2 (bN - bO )2
                                            = O-               0.
                                       H       2       2H 2

The positive inequality follows because bO - HrO < bN implies bO - bN < HrO , which, in turn, implies that
                                     2 i       bN - bO
(bN - bO )2 < (HrO )2 . Moreover,         =-            which is increasing when bN - bO < 0 and decreasing
                                  bN H           H2
when bN - bO > 0. Thus, the derivative is maximized at bN = bO . Finally, when bN  H + bO - HrO , we
           i                     2 i                                              i             r2
have that      = (rO - 21
                          ) and         = 0. Notice that the maximum value that      can take is O because
          H                     H bN                                             H               2
 2
rO
   > rO - 1 2 for any rO  1.
 2



References

Aghion, Philippe, Antoine Dechezlepr^
                                    etre, David Hemous, Ralf Martin, and John Van Reenen (2016) "Car-
bon taxes, path dependency and directed technical change: evidence from the auto industry," Journal of
Political Economy, 124: 1-51.

Dosi, Giovanni (1982) "Technological paradigms and technological trajectories: a suggested interpretation
of the determinants and directions of technical change," Research Policy 11: 147-162.

Galasso, Alberto and Hong Luo (2017) "Tort Reform and Innovation," Journal of Law and Economics 60:
385-412.

Scotchmer, Suzanne (1999) "On the optimality of the patent renewal system," RAND Journal of Economics
30: 181-196.

Weyl, Glenn and Jean Tirole (2012) "Market Power Screens Willingness to Pay," Quarterly Journal of
Economics 127: 1971-2003.




                                                      53
C. Data appendix

C.1 Risk-mitigating technology subclasses

The following lists the subclasses that we manually classify as Risk-mitigating Technology subclasses:

   A61B 6/10 "Application or adaptation of safety means"

   A61B 6/107 "Protection against radiation--e.g. shielding (techniques for handling radiation not other-

wise provided for G21K)"

   A61B 6/54 "Control of devices for radiation diagnosis"

   A61B 6/542 "involving control of exposure"

   A61B 6/544 "dependent on patient size"

   A61B 6/545 "involving automatic set-up of acquisition parameters"

   A61B 6/58 "Testing, adjusting or calibrating devices for radiation diagnosis"

   A61B 6/586 "Detection of faults or malfunction of the device".

   Theses subclasses were chosen by exploiting a two-stage process. First, reading the description of

the subclasses from the USPTO website, we identified subclasses A61B6/107, A61B6/542, A61B6/544,

A61B6/545 and A61B6/586 as subclasses including risk-mitigating technologies. Second, for each of these

subclasses, we also included its related higher-level `parent' subclasses. We did so because a parent subclass

contains residual patents that cannot be easily categorized into a specific children subclass and, therefore,

may include broader patents that involve features of various lower-level children subclasses.

C.2 Keyword analysis

The keywords in the dictionary are: "safety monitor," "radiation shield," "radiation blocking," "dose control"

"reducing electromagnetic radiation" "reducing radiation," "dose modulation," "exposure control," "radia-

tion protection," "low-dose" "x-ray intensity," "radiation exposure," "x-ray exposure," "x-ray dose" "radia-

tion attenuation," "x-ray emissions," "dose rate control," "radiation dose" "radiation minimization" "x-ray

irradiation," "dosage detection," "radiation shielding," "dose distribution," "dose information," "x-ray re-

duction."




                                                     54
