                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 CHINA'S IMPACT ON GLOBAL FINANCIAL MARKETS

                                       Isha Agarwal
                                      Grace Weishi Gu
                                      Eswar S. Prasad

                                     Working Paper 26311
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26311


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2019




We are grateful to Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti and participants at a Banco Central de Chile-IMF
conference for helpful comments. We thank Thomas Bowen, Brandon Lang, Michael Wenye Li,
and Kaiwen Wang for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Isha Agarwal, Grace Weishi Gu, and Eswar S. Prasad. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
China's Impact on Global Financial Markets
Isha Agarwal, Grace Weishi Gu, and Eswar S. Prasad
NBER Working Paper No. 26311
September 2019
JEL No. F2,F3,F4

                                          ABSTRACT

We analyze shifts in the structure of China's capital outflows over the past decade. The
composition of gross outflows has shifted from accumulation of foreign exchange reserves by the
central bank to nonofficial outflows. Unlocking the enormous pool of domestic savings could
have a significant impact on global financial markets as China continues to open up its capital
account and as domestic investors look abroad for returns and diversification. We analyze in
detail the allocation patterns of Chinese institutional investors (IIs), which constitute the main
channel for foreign portfolio investment outflows. We find that, relative to benchmarks based on
market capitalization, Chinese IIs underweight developed countries and high-tech sectors in their
international portfolio allocations but overinvest in high-tech stocks in developed countries. To
further examine Chinese IIs' joint decisions on destination country-sector pairs, we construct
continuous measures of revealed relative comparative advantage and disadvantage in a sector for
a country based on trade patterns. We find that, in their foreign portfolio allocations, Chinese IIs
overweight sectors in which China has a comparative disadvantage. Moreover, Chinese IIs
concentrate such investments in countries that have higher relative comparative advantage in
those sectors. Diversification and information advantages related to foreign imports to China
seem to influence patterns of foreign portfolio allocations, while yield-seeking and learning
motives do not.

Isha Agarwal                                     Eswar S. Prasad
Sauder School of Business                        Dyson School of Applied Economics and
University of British Columbia 869               Management
Henry Angus Building                             Cornell University
2053 Main Mall, Vancouver                        301A Warren Hall
BC V6T 1Z2                                       Ithaca, NY 14853
Canada                                           and NBER
isha.agarwal@sauder.ubc.ca                       eswar.prasad@cornell.edu

Grace Weishi Gu
Economics Department
University of California - Santa Cruz
463 Engineering 2
1156 High Street
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
grace.gu@ucsc.edu
                                                -1-

1. Introduction
Our objective in this paper is to provide an overview of the status of and prospects for China's
integration into international financial markets, both from a macro perspective as well as from the
perspective of institutional investors. We then analyze the implications for the Chinese economy
itself, other emerging market economies, and the global financial system. Although it is now the
second-largest economy, and also has the third-largest fixed-income markets in the world in terms
of market capitalization (after the U.S. and Japan), China's footprint in global finance has been
relatively modest. By contrast, China's impact on international trade has been large, and its effects
on the U.S. and world economies have been studied extensively. This paper will attempt to
complement such studies by focusing on cross-border financial flows. In particular, we study the
foreign portfolio allocation of Chinese institutional investors' investment and the potential impact
of changes in the volume and structure of China's capital outflows on global financial markets.
       We first analyze China's international investment position and show how the structure of
China's capital outflows has changed over time.1 In 2008, foreign exchange reserves held by the
central bank, the People's Bank of China (PBC), accounted for two-thirds of the country's total
stock of external assets of $3 trillion. In the ensuing decade, external assets rose to more than $7
trillion but foreign exchange reserves accounted for only 44 percent of these assets at the end of
2018. The sharp fall in this ratio is in part because the PBC used nearly $1 trillion of its stock of
reserves to cushion depreciation pressures on the renminbi (RMB) that started in July 2014 and
intensified during 2015-16. However, the Chinese government has also put in place a number of
measures over the last decade to free up capital outflows as part of its broader move towards capital
account liberalization.
       There are two major incentives for China to liberalize capital outflows, notwithstanding
the risks associated with a more open capital account. First, due to the composition of its external
assets, the return on China's vast stock of such assets has been low, both in absolute terms and
relative to the returns that foreign investors have earned on their investments in China, which have
largely been in the form of FDI and portfolio investments. Second, China has a large pool of
domestic savings, with bank deposits alone amounting to about 170 percent of GDP. The return
on these deposits has typically been low or negative in inflation-adjusted terms, and this was true


1
 An important complement to our paper is the recent work of Horn, Reinhart, and Trebesch (2019), who
analyze China's official overseas lending.
                                                    -2-

even before the global financial crisis drove down interest rates worldwide. Hence, from a
household welfare perspective, there would be merit to giving households access to foreign
investment opportunities. We speculate about how much capital could flow out of China as
Chinese investors look to foreign assets for diversification as well as higher returns.
        We then describe the steps that China has taken to liberalize the capital account in a
controlled manner that attempts to manage the associated risks of capital outflows for an economy
with a managed exchange rate and significant financial system risks. Such outflow schemes
include the Qualified Domestic Institutional Investor Scheme (QDII) and various stock connect
and mutual fund connect schemes. All of these provide a safety valve in that they are for specific
amounts, which can be increased or decreased over time, and allow the government to calibrate
the timing and quantum of outflows.
        Next, we provide a descriptive analysis of China's foreign portfolio investments. We first
draw upon the CDIS and CPIS databases for an initial exploration. However, China does not report
outward direct investment data to the IMF (for the CDIS), which requires us to use information
from destination countries for China's outflows. It started reporting data on outward portfolio
investments (for the CPIS) only in 2015, but the coverage of these databases is in any event not
ideal. Hence, we also draw upon a different dataset, the FactSet Lionshares database of institutional
investors, to examine the determinants of the international portfolio allocation patterns of Chinese
institutional investors (IIs). While this sample may not necessarily be representative or
comprehensive, the rising importance of such institutional investors as channels that enable retail
investors to allocate their savings to foreign assets makes it useful for the purposes of shedding
some light on portfolio choices of Chinese investors.2
        Relative to the benchmark of a market-capitalization-weighted portfolio, we find that
Chinese IIs' portfolios underweight developed countries and those are farther away from China,
while they overweight countries that have weak governance. Across sectors, we find that Chinese
IIs underinvest in high-tech sectors in their international portfolio allocations but overinvest in
high-tech stocks in developed countries. To further analyze Chinese IIs' joint decisions on
destination country-sector pairs, we construct measures of revealed relative comparative advantage
and disadvantage at the country-sectoral level based on trade patterns. If the share of a particular


2
  We build on the work of Karolyi, Ng, and Prasad (2019), who use this dataset to shed light on the
international portfolio allocation patterns of institutional investors domiciled in major emerging markets.
                                                -3-

sector in a given country's exports is larger (smaller) than that sector's share in global exports, we
classify that sector as one in which that country has a relative comparative advantage
(disadvantage).
        We find that, in their foreign portfolio allocations, Chinese IIs overweight sectors in which
China has a comparative disadvantage. We then explore whether Chinese IIs investments in those
sectors are concentrated in countries that have higher relative comparative advantage in those
sectors. This is indeed the case. Further, in their domestic portfolio allocation, Chinese IIs
overinvest in sectors in which China has a comparative advantage. We explore four broad
categories of possible motives that could explain the above investment patterns of Chinese IIs:
yield-seeking, diversification, information advantage, and learning. We confirm that
diversification motives and information advantages related to foreign imports to China influence
patterns of foreign portfolio allocations, while yield-seeking and learning motives do not play a
significant role.
        In particular, this paper makes an important contribution to the literature by decomposing
the information content in trade into a country-specific component and a sector-specific
component. We show that foreign investment decisions of Chinese funds entail a joint decision
about investment in a destination country and in a sector. This joint decision is guided not only by
funds' familiarity with a destination country or with a given sector but also by their knowledge
about the sector-destination country pair. Hence, the information content from imports guides
Chinese funds' investments abroad while the information content from exports guides their
investment decisions at home.
        In the final section of the paper, we provide some speculative thoughts on China's impact
on global financial markets. For many developing countries, China has become an important
provider of foreign direct investment and portfolio capital. Moreover, as the capital account
opening process continues, more domestic savings flow abroad, and the current account balance
shifts to smaller surpluses or even deficits, there could be important repercussions for both fixed
income and equity markets worldwide.


2. China's Integration Into International Finance
Table 1 shows China's official international investment position. Gross external assets have
increased rapidly over the past decade and a half, from $929 billion in 2004 to $7.3 trillion in 2018,
                                                -4-

while gross external liabilities rose from $693 billion to $5.2 trillion over the same period. China's
net asset position rose sharply from $236 billion in 2004 to nearly $2 trillion in 2013; it then
declined in 2014-15 before rising back up to $2.1 trillion in 2018. China is the world's third largest
creditor--Japan and Germany had net asset positions of $3.1 and $2.4 trillion, respectively, at the
end of 2018.
        A few points are worth noting. First, although China's seemingly inexorable march toward
becoming the world's largest creditor ran aground in 2014, its external assets and liabilities have
continued to rise. As a result, China's de facto financial openness has increased significantly over
the past decade and a half. Based on a widely-used measure--the ratio of gross external assets plus
gross external liabilities to nominal GDP--China's financial openness had reached 92 percent by
2018.
        Second, the composition of external assets and liabilities has changed substantially since
the beginning of this decade. From 2004-2010, even as China's overall external assets climbed,
the share of foreign exchange reserves in total assets rose, peaking at 71.4 percent in 2009. Over
the next four years, this share fell to 64.8 percent and has plunged since 2014, down to 43.3 percent
in 2018. China's use of nearly a quarter of its stock of foreign exchange reserves (which peaked at
almost $4 trillion in June 2014) to protect the RMB from depreciation pressures during 2014-16 is
an important reason for this drop, but the change was already in motion after 2010 when the
government started opening the capital account more aggressively.
        Figure 1, which shows the composition of China's gross capital outflows, reinforces these
points. In this figure, we add in net errors and omissions (E&O), which represent unaccounted
capital flows, to the gross outflows recorded in the balance of payments. We show negative net
E&O, which reflect net outflows, as positive numbers.
        In principle, E&O, calculated as a residual in the balance of payments, could just be a
reconciling item that reflects misreporting, misinvoicing, and various types of errors. However, in
China, E&O follow a very specific pattern suggesting that they are unaccounted capital flows that
represent attempts to evade capital controls. During the period 2000-2008, when there were
appreciation pressures on the RMB and the government was trying to stanch inflows that were
intensifying those pressures (as indicated by the substantial amount of foreign exchange reserves
accumulated through PBC intervention in foreign exchange markets), E&O were positive. In other
words, there were more unaccounted inflows than outflows, exactly as would be expected. That
                                                    -5-

changed after 2008 and, particularly since depreciation pressures on the RMB started intensifying
in late 2014, net E&O turned substantially negative and have averaged about $220 billion annually
over the period 2015-17.
        Figure 1 shows that, after rising rapidly from 2000 to 2006, gross outflows leveled off until
2014, before falling in 2015 and then picking back up in 2016-17. However, much of the change
since 2014 has been driven by changes in official reserve accumulation. The figure shows that
non-reserve outflows, which had been modest until 2009, rose steadily and substantially through
2016. In 2017, as the government tightened up on capital controls to protect the currency, even
non-reserve outflows fell.


3. Incentives for Outflows
This section discusses two issues relevant to understanding the motives for liberalization of capital
outflows, one from an official perspective and the other from the perspective of retail investors.
This discussion also has implications for potential capital outflows from China if and when China
pursues further capital account liberalization.


3.1. Structure of and Returns on External Portfolio
The composition of China's external assets has had an important implication for the average
returns on those assets. Reserve managers around the world typically use three criteria in making
investment decisions--safety, liquidity, and yield. Given one of the key purposes of foreign
exchange reserves for emerging market economies that are not issuers of a reserve currency--the
ability to deploy those reserves to insulate these economies from balance of payments pressures--
the first two of these criteria tend to dominate reserve managers' investment decisions.
        While China does not publicly reveal the currency composition of its stock of foreign
exchange reserves, it is widely believed that about 60 percent of China's foreign exchange reserves
are held in U.S. dollar-denominated assets, along with about one-fifth in euro-denominated assets
and the remainder in other major reserve currencies.3 Most of these reserves are presumably held




3
  The 2018 annual report of the State Administration of Foreign Exchange, which manages China's
international reserves, for the first time revealed that 58 percent of its foreign exchange reserves were
held in dollar-denominated assets in 2014. Prasad (2019) discusses why that number might have gone
back up above 60 percent in the succeeding years.
                                                 -6-

in advanced economy sovereign bonds which, especially since the global financial crisis, have
yielded low nominal rates of return.
       The penultimate (from the bottom) panel of Table 1 shows gross and net incomes on
investment taken from the BOP. One crude way of calculating the overall return on China's
external assets is to take the inward investment income flow in a given year and express that as a
ratio of the stock of gross external assets at the beginning of the year. Similar calculations can be
done for the overall return earned by foreign investors on China's external liabilities. In principle,
China's official IIP is marked to market so that it captures valuation effects, both in terms of
currency and asset price movements.
       The bottom panel of Table 1 shows that, over the period 2005-2018, the average annual
return on China's external assets has been 3.6 percent in US dollar terms (the IIP and investment
income data are all reported in US dollars).4 The overall return on assets in RMB terms has been
more volatile but yields an even lower annual average of 2.3 percent because of the renminbi's
substantial appreciation relative to the dollar over this period (about 25 percent).
       The overall return on China's external liabilities has been higher than the return on assets
in every year shown in the table, often substantially higher. The average annual return was about
7 percent in dollar terms. The return differential has been large enough to offset the much larger
stock of external assets relative to liabilities, with the result that China has experienced a negative
net investment income position in every year since 2009.
       Thus, while China has been a net creditor relative to the rest of the world, it has paid out
more in investment income to foreign investors than it has earned on its large stock of investments
abroad. This is of course a consequence of the composition of its external assets, which until 2013
were heavily weighted towards safe but low-yielding assets. By contrast, foreign capital inflows
into China have been in relatively high-risk high-average return forms such as FDI and portfolio
equity. These two categories together accounted for 66.4 percent of China's total external liabilities
in 2017, with FDI alone accounting for 53.2 percent of the share.




4
 The 2018 SAFE annual report indicates that China earned an average annual return of 3.68 percent (in
dollar terms) on its foreign exchange reserve portfolio over the period 2005-2014.
                                                   -7-

        The composition of external liabilities also reflects China's policies towards capital
account liberalization, which have tended to favor FDI. In 2009, the year before China started
opening up to capital inflows, FDI accounted for as much as 61.5 percent of external liabilities.5
        One implication of the discussion above is that the Chinese government might have
realized the benefits of allowing for private capital outflows that could generate higher returns,
without additional risk being carried on the central bank balance sheet. Indeed, one indication of
the dissatisfaction with the low rate of return on China's external assets was the setting up of a
sovereign wealth fund, the China Investment Corporation (CIC), in 2007 with registered capital of
$200 billion, drawn (indirectly) from the PBC's stock of foreign exchange reserves.6 As noted on
the company's website, it "was established as a vehicle to diversify China's foreign exchange
holdings and seek maximum returns for its shareholder within acceptable risk tolerance." The CIC
reported that, at the end of 2017, it had more than $940 billion of assets under management. Its
international investment portfolio had achieved a cumulative annualized return of 5.94 percent (in
U.S. dollar terms) in the decade since its inception.


3.2. Domestic Savings
China has traditionally had a high domestic savings rate, with the household and corporate sectors
accounting for the bulk of this saving. The availability of financial assets for retail investors has,
however, been relatively limited in scope and depth. Stock market capitalization in China was $6.3
trillion at the end of 2018 while bond market capitalization, including both central government and
corporate bonds, stood at $7.8 trillion (Figures 2 and 3).7 However, given the extensive corporate
cross-holdings of equities and bonds, it is not evident what proportion of these stocks are held by




5
  Scissors (2018) documents that the private sector share of China's outward FDI has risen from about 10
percent in 2010 to about 45 percent in 2018. He, Cheung, Zhang, and Wu (2012) make the case that
China's private sector will turn its external net liability position into a balanced position, and that the
official sector will reduce its net asset position significantly, relative to the country's GDP.
6
  Technically, the capital was raised through the issuance of Ministry of Finance bonds in the amount of
RMB 1,550 billion. One subsidiary of the CIC, Central Huijin, undertakes equity investments in key
state-owned financial institutions in China. It is not clear from the CIC's annual report how much of its
investments are domestic rather than foreign.
7
  Stock market capitalization is based on the valuation of all stocks listed on the Shanghai and Shenzhen
exchanges. The USD equivalent is calculated using the end-December 2018 exchange rate of 1 USD to
6.876 RMB. Bonds issued by financial corporations are not included in the calculations reported here. At
the end of 2018, the market value of those bonds was $4.7 trillion.
                                                   -8-

final investors, once cross-corporate holdings are netted out. Central government bonds are, to a
large extent, held by commercial banks to meet regulatory guidelines.
        Bank deposits account for a substantial fraction of domestic savings. At the end of 2018,
total deposits in the Chinese banking system amounted to $22.4 trillion, or 171 percent of GDP
(see Figures 2 and 3). Household and corporate deposits stood at $10.5 trillion and $11.9 trillion,
respectively. The returns on these deposits have been very low. The nominal return on one-year
deposits, a benchmark rate set by the PBC, has averaged 2.36 percent over this decade. Adjusted
for inflation (trailing CPI inflation), returns have been negative or close to zero over most of this
period. Bank deposits of course represent safe assets, which in part accounts for their low yield,
and China is hardly an exception in terms of its low interest rate environment.8
        One thought experiment in terms of potential capital outflows from China can be gleaned
from the numbers discussed in this section. Assuming that even 10 percent of bank deposits move
offshore in search of higher returns, the resulting outflows could, over a few years, amount to as
much as $2 trillion. One of the reasons the government is proceeding gradually on liberalizing
outflows is the risk that, in the event of concerns about domestic financial stability, such outflows
could take place within a short period and prove enormously disruptive to the banking system and
to foreign exchange markets.
        An alternative view about potential capital outflows can be gleaned from a capital markets
perspective.9 Taking a very conservative estimate that only 50 percent of the capitalization of stock
and bond markets represents liquid investments by retail investors, one could then construct
benchmarks based on which to discern the potential for capital outflows. For instance, a crude

8
  There is a widely-held view that deposits in the banking system, which is mostly state-owned, are
implicitly fully backed by the government. The government has fully liberalized bank deposit rates to
foster competition among deposit-taking institutions and, in 2017, the government introduced an explicit
deposit insurance system with the aim of creating more market discipline. It is not clear these policy
changes have had the intended effect--most banks still pay a deposit rate close to the PBC's benchmark
rate.
9
  Bayoumi and Ohnsorge (2013), using evidence from capital outflow liberalization episodes in other
countries, argue that China could experience significant outflows from domestic equity and bond markets
if outflow restrictions were eased. Hooley (2013) suggests that, conditional on further capital account
opening, China's gross international investment position could increase from about 5 percent to 30
percent of world GDP by 2025. Krueger and Pasricha (2016) provide various scenarios for the size and
composition of capital flows that would ensue if China were to open its capital account and its gross
international investment position were to begin converging to the G-20 average. Cunningham, Hatzvi, and
Mo (2018) argue that, if China had had no restrictions on portfolio outflows, its overseas portfolio assets
in 2015 could have ranged from $1.5 trillion to $3.2 trillion in 2015, relative to the actual figure of $281
billion.
                                                   -9-

assumption that domestic investors might choose to take 10 percent of their equity and fixed
income investments offshore for diversification purposes would yield additional outflows of about
$700 billion (as mentioned above, total capitalization of stock and bond markets was about $14.1
trillion at the end of 2018). Again, these outflows could be smooth and spread out over a number
of years or could be much more abrupt in the event of stock market or other financial turmoil in
China.
         It is precisely such concerns about the potentially destabilizing effects of outflows that has
led the Chinese government to open the capital account in a gradual and cautious manner, as we
describe in the next section.


4. Controlled Liberalization of Outflows
China has taken a controlled and calibrated approach to liberalization of both inflows and
outflows.10 In this section, we focus on measures to liberalize outflows. Some non-reserve
outflows are intermediated through the sovereign wealth fund, as noted earlier, and also through
financing provided for offshore projects by the China Development Bank and the Export-Import
Bank of China. Some of the projects under the Belt and Road Initiative, for instance, have been
funded by such institutions.11 The list below excludes such official institutions and is limited to
channels for non-reserve outflows that occur through institutional investors or are undertaken
directly by retail investors.


4.1. Outflows
The Qualified Domestic Institutional Investor (QDII) scheme was launched in 2006. The scheme
allows Chinese domestic financial institutions--commercial banks, securities companies, fund
management companies, and insurance companies--to invest in offshore financial products such



10
   See Miao and Deng (2019) for an overview of China's motivations for opening its capital account and
the approach it has followed.
11
   According to Scissors (2018), BRI has had a relatively minor impact on China's FDI and, thus, its
overall foreign investment. He notes that the set of countries involved in the BRI accounts for less than 25
percent of China's FDI since the program's inauguration in 2013, amounting to a total of about $150
billion. He argues that BRI partially amounts to a rebranding of projects that were already underway
before the initiative was announced. According to EIU (2017), Chinese SOEs are likely to remain the
main participants in the BRI. Private companies are more aware of the risks associated with BRI
investments and lack the insurance buffers that the government can provide to SOEs.
                                               - 10 -

as securities and bonds. As of February 2019, a total quota of $103.2 billion had been granted to
152 financial institutions.
       In 2013, the government proposed the Qualified Domestic Individual Investor (QDII2)
Scheme, which would have permitted individual retail investors with at least RMB 1 million
($160,000) in assets to invest in offshore financial products such as securities and bonds. However,
with capital outflow pressures starting to build by mid-2014, this scheme never got off the ground.


4.2. Two-Way Flows
The government has tended to favor channels for capital flows in both directions. For instance,
free trade zones (FTZs) are seen as a way of liberalizing the capital account but limiting such
liberalization to specific geographic areas. The Shanghai FTZ was launched in September 2013,
followed by the ones in Guangdong, Tianjin, and Fujian in April 2015. During 2016-2018, eight
new FTZs were approved in Liaoning, Henan, Zhejiang, Hubei, Chongqing, Sichuan, Shanxi, and
Hainan. The FTZs use a "negative list" approach to regulate foreign investment--there are few
restrictions on foreign investment in industries not on the list. Cross-border capital transactions
and establishment of financial institutions within the zones have been liberalized. In March 2019,
the National People's Congress approved the new Foreign Investment Law, which will come into
effect in 2020. The new law will replace three foreign capital laws: the Law on Sino-Foreign
Equity Joint Ventures, the Law on Sino-Foreign Contractual Joint Ventures ,and the Law on
Foreign Capital Enterprises.
       Some schemes carefully control both the source and destination of capital inflows and
outflows, along with short-term and overall flows. The Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect,
launched in 2014, allows mainland Chinese investors to purchase shares of select Hong Kong and
Chinese companies listed in Hong Kong, and lets foreigners buy Chinese A shares listed in
Shanghai. When this scheme was launched, the authorities imposed an annual aggregate quota of
RMB 300 billion ($47 billion) on HK-to-Shanghai (northbound) transactions and set the daily
quota at RMB 13 billion ($2 billion). The Shanghai-to-HK (southbound) annual quota was set at
RMB 250 billion ($39 billion), with a daily quota of RMB 10.5 billion ($1.6 billion). The annual
quotas were scrapped in August 2016 when the Shenzhen-Hong Kong Stock Connect was
launched, but daily quotas remained in place. In May 2018, the daily quotas for northbound and
southbound transactions were raised to RMB 52 billion and RMB 42 billion respectively.
                                                    - 11 -

        To allow institutional investors to play a more prominent role in capital flows, the Mutual
Fund Connect was launched in July 2015.12 This scheme allows Mainland and Hong Kong funds
to be distributed in each other's markets through a streamlined vetting process. The initial
aggregate investment quota was set at RMB 300 billion ($47 billion) each for inward and outward
fund flows.13
        The Shenzhen-Hong Kong Stock Connect was launched in 2016. This scheme seeks to
replicate the main elements of the Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect. It allows mainland
Chinese investors to purchase shares of select Hong Kong and Chinese companies listed in Hong
Kong, and lets foreigners buy Chinese A shares listed in Shenzhen. There is no aggregate trading
quota and the daily trading quotas were set identical to those of the Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock
Connect: RMB 13 billion and RMB 10.5 billion for Northbound and Southbound transactions,
respectively. In May 2018, the daily quotas for northbound and southbound transactions were
raised to RMB 52 billion and RMB 42 billion respectively.
        The Shanghai-London Stock Connect was proposed in 2015 and launched in June 2019. In
principle, it provides eligible companies listed in either of the two countries a platform to issue
depository receipts, and to list and trade them on the other's market. In January 2019, the
government proposed a Shanghai-Germany Stock Connect, which would be a replication of the
Shanghai-London Stock Connect.

4.3. Capital Flow Restrictions
The government has often undertaken capital account tightening through administrative and other
restrictions rather than directly changing capital controls. One specific example is related to
changes in requirements for individuals to take money offshore. Since 2007, annual foreign
exchange purchases and sales quota for individuals have been set at US$ 50,000 to meet their
needs for holding and using foreign exchange. As the government faced rising outflow and


12
   There is little literature studying the motives of Chinese IIs' foreign portfolio investments but there are
a few studies examining the determinants and motives of their domestic equity investments. For instance,
Chan, Ding, and Hou (2014) find that Chinese mutual funds can effectively monitor domestic corporate
decisions and enhance Chinese firms' financial reporting quality, especially for privately-owned
enterprises. They conclude that Chinese mutual funds' investments appear to be return driven for the
investors, rather than being driven by government strategic objectives.
13
   A related initiative, the ETF Connect, which would give Chinese investors exposure to overseas assets
through exchange-traded funds (ETF) listed in Hong Kong, was proposed in 2016 but remains stalled for
"technical reasons."
                                                    - 12 -

currency depreciation pressures, administrative controls were tightened. While the annual quota
for individual foreign exchange purchases was kept at the same level as before, individuals who
wanted to buy foreign currencies at banks were required to fill out an application form specifying
the purpose of the purchase, among other information. Starting in January 2018, it was stipulated
that Chinese individuals traveling internationally were allowed to withdraw a maximum of RMB
100,000 ($15,000) a year from their domestic bank accounts.14
        A consistent theme across the capital outflow liberalization measures discussed in this
section is that, rather than throwing open the doors to outflows, the government has proceeded in
a cautious manner. It has stuck to its time-tested learning-by-doing approach, wherein a reform or
liberalization is initially introduced in a limited way and then scaled up and fine-tuned based on
experience with its operation. This has allowed the government to manage the risks associated
with rapid capital account opening. However, it has also limited both the direct and collateral
benefits of capital account opening. The possibility of outflow restrictions being re-imposed at
times of exchange market pressure has resulted in relatively modest inflows into China's equity
and bond markets. In addition, foreign non-official investors have remained wary of the durability
of the Chinese government's commitment to allowing unfettered repatriation of capital invested
in and earnings from financial and other assets in China.


5. Allocations of Foreign Portfolios
In the preceding sections, we have shown that the structure of China's capital outflows is shifting
from official reserve accumulation to nonreserve (private) capital outflows.15 These flows, while
still constrained by capital account restrictions, are rising and have the potential to become
substantial in the coming years. Capital market development could also provide opportunities for
retail investors to diversify their portfolios beyond domestic investments. Institutional investors
are likely to play a key role in intermediating the flows of domestic investors into external
investments. In this section, we undertake a detailed examination of the external portfolio
allocation patterns of Chinese institutional investors. We first examine patterns of country

14
   The relevant press releases can be found on the SAFE website:
http://m.safe.gov.cn/safe/2007/0105/5320.html ; https://www.safe.gov.cn/fujian/2017/0417/431.html
http://m.safe.gov.cn/safe/2017/1230/8129.html
15
   Hatzvi, Meredith, and Nixon (2015) note that capital account liberalization will change the composition
of China's external assets and highlight the potential financial stability risks for China. Other authors such
as Hooley (2013) and Krueger and Pasricha (2016) also discuss these risks.
                                                 - 13 -

allocations and then examine sectoral allocations. This could provide some insights into the
eventual global allocation of China's capital outflows across countries and sectors.


5.1. Data
We use Factset Ownership data (LionShares v4) to analyze the determinants of foreign equity
holdings of institutional investors domiciled in China. This dataset provides information on
domestic and international equity holdings of institutional investors and mutual funds domiciled
in developed countries as well as emerging markets. LionShares has two packages ­ the unadjusted
13F holdings and the unadjusted fund holdings. The unadjusted 13F holdings package reports
aggregate holdings of institutional investors such as investment banks and insurance companies
while the unadjusted fund holdings package reports equity holdings of fund investors such as
mutual funds, pension funds, etc.16 Both packages contain data on active as well as terminated
securities and funds/institutions to obviate survivorship bias (the "adjusted" packages include only
active securities, which is why we use the unadjusted ones). We combine data from both packages
for our analysis.17
        We merge Factset data with Worldscope data using ISIN/CUSIP/SEDOL of securities to
get information on the country in which a firm issuing a given security is domiciled.18 We classify
a given holding position of a fund/institution as "foreign" if the country of domicile of the issuer
firm is not China. Thus, we exclude holdings of Chinese firms' ADRs trading in international stock
markets. Using this approach yields 42 destination countries in our sample, classified into 25
developed economies and 17 emerging markets based on the IMF World Economic Outlook 2018
country classification. See Table A1 in the online appendix for the full list of countries in our
sample and their classification.
        Even though Factset data on Chinese institutional investors goes back to 2000, our sample
starts from 2008 as the coverage of the dataset is limited before 2008. Table A2 in the online
appendix shows the number of institutional investors each year over the 2000-2017 period, the top

16
   Institutional holdings of U.S.-traded securities are sourced from 13F filings with the Securities and
Exchange Commission. For the U.S., data on mutual funds' holdings comes from regulatory filings (N-Q,
N-CSR, and form 485BPOS) while for non-U.S. funds, data on funds' holding positions are from a
combination of regulatory filings, funds' annual reports, the regulatory authority or mutual funds
association in the country.
17
   We use the terms fund and institutional investor interchangeably in this paper.
18
   For securities traded in the U.S., we use CUSIP as the primary identifier to merge Factset with
Worldscope data. For international securities, we use ISIN or SEDOL as main identifiers.
                                                 - 14 -

5 institutional investors based on their foreign equity holdings, and the total value of their assets
under management every year.19 The coverage of institutional investors increases over time, from
only one institutional investor in 2000 to over 100 institutional investors in 2017. Over the period
2008-2017, the average number of institutional investors per year is 71, which is about the same
as the average number of institutional investors (73) in emerging markets documented in Karolyi,
Ng, and Prasad (2019).20
        According to the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC), there were 109 fund
management companies in China in March 2017 with a total capital of about 3.4 trillion RMB.21
We were able to match 95 fund management companies from the FactSet data with those on the
CSRC list. These 95 fund management companies constitute 93.5 percent of the total capital of
fund management companies in 2017. For our final sample, we retain only those institutional
investors that have positive foreign investment in at least one year in the sample. This leaves us
with 42 institutional investors over the entire sample period. They are mainly affiliated with either
banks, securities companies, or trust companies. Of these 42, 27 are Sino-foreign joint venture
fund management companies but the majority stake is owned by Chinese funds.22 Table A3 in the
online appendix lists these 42 funds, their Sino-foreign joint venture status, and their capital in
2017. It is worth noting that in our sample foreign shareholders tend not to hold the majority share,
which is typically held by state-(directly/indirectly)-controlled enterprises.
        The total foreign investment of Chinese institutional investors in 2017 in the Factset
database is about 8 percent of foreign portfolio equity investment of China reported in the CPIS
database.23 According to Karolyi, Ng, and Prasad (2019), the median ratio of emerging market
institutional investors' foreign investment to CPIS foreign investment is 0.11. Hence, the coverage
of Chinese institutional investors' foreign investment is not too far from the median ratio for
emerging market institutions in the Factset data. While this does not necessarily mean that the

19
   The assets under management include domestic as well as foreign investments.
20
   This number also includes those institutions for which we have information only on their generic
positions (those that do not disclose the securities in which they invest).
21
   These numbers have been rising slowly but steadily. As of February 2019, there were 123 fund
management companies registered with the CSRC with a total capital of 3.6 trillion RMB.
22
   Sino-foreign status is determined based on CSRC data for 2017. Hang Seng Qianhai Fund Management
Co. Ltd acquired the Sino-fund joint venture status in 2019 so it is not classified as Sino-fund joint
venture in our sample. The Chinese Securities Regulatory Commission requires foreign ownership in the
Sino-foreign joint fund venture to be capped at 49 percent. This limit was relaxed to 51 percent in April
2018. See http://www.csrc.gov.cn/pub/zjhpublic/zjh/201804/t20180428_337509.htm for more details.
23
   This number includes funds' generic investment positions.
                                                - 15 -

coverage of the Factset data is comprehensive, at least it indicates that the dataset's coverage of
institutional investors in China is similar to that of its coverage in other emerging market
economies.
       To understand the role played by destination country characteristics in the foreign portfolio
allocation decisions of Chinese funds, we collected data on the most frequently used variables in
the literature on the determinants of foreign portfolio allocations. The four broad sets of destination
country variables that we use are as follows: gravity variables, market depth measures, proxies for
yield-seeking and diversification, and governance measures. Gravity variables include those such
as distance between China and the destination country, whether China and the destination country
share a common language, and whether they share a common border. Market depth variables
include GDP per capita, number of listed firms per capita, and market turnover. Variables that
measure yield-seeking and diversification include the difference in returns between Chinese and
destination country stock markets in the previous year, the correlation of Chinese and destination
country stock market returns in the previous year, and the volatility of Chinese stock returns
relative to that of the destination country in the previous year. Measures of governance include the
rule of law, government effectiveness, and regulatory burden.
       In addition to these four categories, we also explore the role of information endowment
variables, which have been the subject of a recent literature. van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp
(2009) propose a theoretical model of information immobility in which investors face a choice in
deciding about which assets to acquire information when there are multiple risky assets in the
investment opportunity set. Rather than relying on information asymmetries, which should in
principle decline over time, their theoretical model implies that investors would prefer to invest in
foreign countries where they had an initial information endowment. We use the trade share of a
destination country in China's total trade as our proxy of information endowment, based on
Karolyi, Ng, and Prasad (2019).
       We also study determinants of funds' portfolio allocations at the destination country-sector
level. We assign firms to sectors using the Fama-French 49 industry classification based on 4-digit
SIC codes of firms from the Worldscope database. The main variables for the sector-destination
country level analysis are as follows: sector returns, correlation in sector returns, revealed
comparative advantage (RCA) and revealed comparative disadvantage (RCD) of each destination-
country-sector pair, share of a sector in China's inward foreign direct investment, share of a sector
                                                - 16 -

in China's outward foreign direct investment, and research and development intensity for each
sector in China.
       Using the universe of firms in Worldscope database for the period 2008-2017, we compute
returns at the sector-destination country level as the market cap weighted average of returns of all
firms in a given sector in a given destination country for each year in the sample. Correlation in
sector returns is computed between each sector in China and destination country in the sample
using monthly data on stock prices from the Worldscope database. The sectoral RCA (RCD) for
each country is measured as a sector's export (import) share in a country's total exports (imports)
divided by that sector's export (import) share in total world exports (imports). Data from RCA and
RCD is from the WTO data portal and COMTRADE. See Table A4 in the online appendix for
variable definitions and data sources for all variables used in the analysis.


5.2. Foreign Portfolio Allocations of Chinese Funds Across Countries
We begin with a descriptive analysis of China's outward investments using CPIS and CDIS data.
As noted earlier, China does not report outward direct investment data to the IMF (for the CDIS)
and started reporting data on outward portfolio investments (for the CPIS) only in 2015. However,
since most countries that receive direct investment or portfolio investment from China do report
data to the IMF for these two surveys, it is possible to construct measures of China's outflows.
       Figure 4 shows the share of each destination country in China's outward equity investment
in 2017 based on the CPIS sample. In terms of raw portfolio allocations, we see that a bulk of the
equity investment from China is going to developed countries, with Hong Kong and the U.S.
together accounting for about 70 percent of total equity investment. Countries like Japan,
Switzerland, Luxembourg, and the U.K. are also important destinations.
       The set of major destination countries for China's outward direct investment (ODI) appears
to be slightly different (Figure 5). We see some developing countries such as Kazakhstan, Pakistan,
and Zambia that are in the top 20 list for ODI but are not major destination countries for Chinese
equity investment. China's ODI also appears to be slightly less diversified across countries than
its equity investment. More than three quarters of the outward direct investment seems to be
concentrated in Hong Kong in the beginning of the sample.24 However, Hong Kong's share has

24
  2009 is the earliest year for which we have outward direct investment data for China in the CDIS
database. Hong Kong was a key source of inward FDI for China due to "round-tripping" of funds in order
to take advantage of the lower corporate income tax rate for foreign-financed versus domestically-
                                                   - 17 -

fallen significantly over the last decade, from more than 80 percent in 2009 to less than 60 percent
in 2017. Hence, China's ODI has become more diversified over time. The share of other advanced
countries has been rising (Figure 6). The U.S. was the third most important destination for Chinese
ODI in 2017 after Hong Kong and Singapore.25
        After a preliminary exploration of China's international portfolio allocation across
countries using the CPIS and CDIS databases, we now turn to the Factset database, which allows
us to examine foreign equity investments of individual institutional investors. Figure 7 shows the
portfolio allocations of Chinese institutional investors (IIs) for the top 20 destination countries
over the entire sample period. Hong Kong and the U.S. together account for more than 50 percent
of total foreign investment of Chinese IIs. The share of the U.S. in total foreign investment has
increased from just over 10 percent in 2008 to more than 30 percent in 2017 (see Figure B1 in the
online appendix).26 In 2017, advanced economies accounted for 96 percent of China's total foreign
equity investment.
        To better understand the factors driving foreign portfolio allocations of institutional
investors at the country level, we use the following regression specification based on Karolyi, Ng,
and Prasad (2019):
                                                  *             .
                                !",$,% = ' + )* +$,% +  +  ). +$,% + /",$,%
The dependent variable is excess investment of institutional investor i in country j at time t. Excess
investment of an institutional investor i in country j is defined as the share of total portfolio
allocation of institutional investor i accounted for by country j relative to the share of country j in
world stock market capitalization (where "world" excludes China). This is a conventional
benchmark but we do not necessarily intend it to be interpreted as the optimal portfolio, especially


financed firms (16 percent versus 33 percent). In 2008, this differential was removed and the corporate
income tax rate was unified at 25 percent. We are not aware of such tax or other incentives that could
account for the earlier concentration of China's outward direct investment.
25
   Casanova, Garcia-Herrero, and Xia (2015) contend that the reported allocations of Chinese outward
direct investment flows in 2013 may have been distorted by flows to "stop-over destinations" such as
Hong Kong and offshore financial centers. They conclude that, after correcting for these distortions,
China's actual outward direct investment may be more diversified than suggested by official data, with
developed markets such as Europe and North America featuring more prominently.
26
   Similar to what we see in the CPIS database, Hong Kong and the U.S. together account for about 70
percent of total portfolio allocation of Chinese IIs in 2017 and almost all the top 20 destination countries
in 2017 based on the Factset data also appear in the top 20 list based on the CPIS database. This gives us
some reassurance about the coverage of the Factset data. Even though the coverage may be limited in
terms of absolute amounts, at least the patterns of investment seem to be consistent across the two
databases.
                                                - 18 -

for a country that is just gradually liberalizing outflows. The excess investment variable simply
measures to what extent investors overinvest or underinvest in a given destination country relative
to the market capitalization-weighted portfolio.
                                                        *            .
       We use a large set of country-level variables (+$,% , ... , +$,% ) that have been previously
employed in the literature to study cross-border trade and financial flows. As noted above, these
variables can be classified into the following categories: gravity, market depth,
yield/diversification, governance, and information endowments.
       Figure 8 shows the average excess investment of Chinese IIs by destination country over
the entire sample period. Only the top 10 overweighted and top 10 underweighted countries are
displayed. We first calculate the excess investment in each destination country and each year and
then take a simple average across years. Hong Kong is the most overweighted country with an
average excess investment of about 20 percent while the U.S. is the most underweighted country
with an average underinvestment of about 20 percent. However, the underinvestment in the U.S.
has come down from more than 20 percent in the beginning of the sample to around 10 percent in
2017.27 With the exception of South Africa, 9 out of the 10 most underweighted countries are
developed countries. This descriptive analysis shows that Chinese investors are underinvesting in
developed countries. Four of the countries in which Chinese IIs are overweight relative to domestic
market capitalization are India, Indonesia, Thailand, and Russia.
       Next, we formally explore the country-level factors that can potentially explain these
patterns of portfolio allocations. Table 2 shows summary statistics for all variables used in the
country-level analysis. The average (unweighted) excess investment for the sample is around 7
percent but there is wide variation in excess investment across destination countries, with a
standard deviation of about 24 percent. Our baseline regression framework tests the importance of
various country-level factors that have been discussed in the literature as potential drivers of cross-
border investment.
       Table 3 shows the results for the baseline specification, which we first estimate at the fund-
country level. We work with an unbalanced sample in the baseline specification ­ some fund-
country pairs may be observed only once in the sample. Columns (1) through (6) in Table 3 show
different model specifications. Column (1) includes gravity variables, Column (2) controls for

27
  Figure B2 in the online appendix shows the top ten underweighted and overweighted countries in 2008
and 2017. The top ten underweighted countries include one emerging market country in 2008 (South
Africa) and two in 2017 (India and South Africa).
                                                - 19 -

market depth, Column (3) has variables that reflect yield-seeking and diversification, Column (4)
controls for country-level governance measures, and Column (5) controls for information
endowments. Column (6) includes all controls listed in columns (1) through (5). The number of
observations differs across columns depending upon data availability for control variables at the
country level. All specifications include year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the
destination country-year level since variation in the control variables is at the country-year level.
       Column (1) shows that gravity variables, which measure the extent of similarity between
China and destination country, matter for institutional investors' international portfolio allocation
decisions. In particular, we find that excess investment in a given country is positively correlated
with the destination country sharing a common language with China. Countries that share a
common language with China receive approximately 13 percentage points higher excess
investment as compared to countries that do not share a common language with China. Sharing a
border with China is also positively associated with excess investment in a destination country,
while geographic distance is negatively associated with excess investment. These results are
consistent with the results of previous studies on the role of gravity variables in explaining cross-
border investment patterns of institutional investors (see, e.g., Portes and Rey, 2005; Ferreira and
Matos, 2008; and Karolyi, Ng, and Prasad, 2019).
       Column (2) shows results for market size/depth variables. We find that level of
development, measured by GDP per capita, is negatively associated with excess investment. This
supports the discussion from our descriptive analysis that developed countries are underweighted
by Chinese investors. Conditional on the level of development, market depth does seem to have a
positive association with portfolio allocations. Excess investment is higher for destination
countries with a larger number of listed firms. The extent of stock market turnover in destination
countries does not affect excess investment.
       Column (3) shows results for returns-based measures. If Chinese investors are seeking
higher returns, then we would expect excess investment to be positively associated with difference
in stock market returns of China and destination country. However, we find that differences in
returns do not explain excess investment of Chinese institutional investors. Somewhat
surprisingly, we find that past year correlation in stock market returns between China and
destination country is positively correlated with excess investment. This suggests that the
diversification motive may not explain foreign portfolio allocations of Chinese institutional
                                                  - 20 -

investors, at least at the level of country allocations. Interestingly, we find that the stock market
volatility of destination country relative to that of China is positively correlated with excess
investment. In other words, riskiness of foreign equity markets does not appear to be a deterrent
to Chinese IIs' portfolio allocation decisions.
        Column (4) shows results for governance measures. We find that rule of law, a measure of
the quality of contract enforcement, is negatively correlated with excess investment. Countries
with higher regulatory burden are also overweighted by Chinese investors. These results appear
contradictory to those in the prior literature, which has generally found that investors prefer
countries with better governance. However, most of that literature has focused on the portfolio
allocations of developed country investors. Dollar's (2016) analysis of China's outward direct
investment patterns yields results similar to ours. In particular, Dollar (2016) suggests that China
seems to be indifferent to the governance environment to the extent that it is making major
investments in countries with weak governance environments where other investors fear to tread.28
        Column (5) shows results using the information endowment variable. We find that the past
trade share of a destination country in China's total trade is positively associated with excess
investment in that country. The magnitude of the coefficient is quite large. A one percentage point
increase in the trade share of a destination country is associated with a 1.4 percentage point
increase in excess investment in that country.
        Column (6) shows results for a composite specification that includes all variables used in
the specifications reported in columns (1) through (5). Most of the variables retain their sign but
some lose statistical significance in the joint estimation. Geographic distance and contiguous
border still remain statistically significant. Level of development loses its statistical significance
but market size, as measured by the number of listed firms, remains positive and statistically
significant. Governance measures continue to play in important role. Government effectiveness
and rule of law are negatively associated with excess investment while regulatory burden is
positively associated with excess investment. The coefficient on the information endowment
variable becomes smaller but remains statistically significant.




28
   Ramaswamy, Yeung, and Laforet (2012) analyze the outward direct investment location decisions of
Chinese firms and find that while local government controlled firms are attracted to natural resource rich
countries which may have weak political systems, private Chinese firms are more risk averse and more
likely to provide value added services rather than to exploit the resource itself.
                                                - 21 -

        To summarize, the fund-country level analysis suggests that Chinese institutional investors
underinvest in developed countries and those that are farther away from China, while overinvesting
in countries that have weak governance, that have a high level of market depth and that have had
trade relationships with China in the past. In the next section, we dig deeper into these patterns by
exploring sector-level holdings of institutional investors.
        In the online appendix, we conduct a battery of robustness tests to examine if our results
are contingent on the choice of sample period, variable definitions, and/or regression
specifications. We start by excluding the 2008-2010 period from the sample. This is useful for two
reasons: (i) it allows us to look at the period when China opened up its capital account more
substantially (i.e., after 2010); and (ii) it mitigates concerns that our results may be influenced by
the period during and right after the global financial crisis.
        Table B1 shows the results. We estimate the same regression described in Section 5.2 but
start the sample in 2011. Comparing columns (1) and (2) across Table 3 and Table B1, we see that
there is almost no change in the significance, sign, and magnitude of gravity variables and market
depth variables. For returns-based variables, the coefficient on difference in returns becomes
negative and significant, suggesting that Chinese investors are overweighting countries whose
stock markets generated lower returns than Chinese stock market in the previous year. The
coefficients on the governance measures and information endowment variable (column (4) and
(5)) also remain unchanged. In the joint estimation (column (6)), the coefficient on the information
endowment proxy--strength of past trade relationship--becomes larger and more statistically
significant.
        Next, we examine whether our results for different explanatory variables (models) differ
because of differences in the number of observations for each group of control variables. To check
this, we construct a restricted sample that contains only those observations that have non-missing
values for all control variables as well as the dependent variable. Results based on this common
sample for all specifications are shown in Table B2. Our main results remain robust to using a
restricted sample.
        While in the previous text we focus on excess investment of Chinese institutional investors,
which is constructed relative to a market capitalization-based benchmark, it is also of interest to
explore what drives the raw portfolio allocations of Chinese investors. Table B3 shows results for
country-level regressions with the raw share of a destination country in total foreign investment of
                                               - 22 -

China, with no adjustment for size of the destination country or depth of its equity markets, as the
dependent variable. A few interesting differences emerge.
       Among the set of gravity variables, distance becomes insignificant, while common
language and border continue to be positive and significant. For market depth variables, level of
development, proxied by GDP per capita, becomes insignificant but market size variables (number
of firms and market turnover) remain significant and positive. This suggests that market size
matters for both raw investment and excess investment but level of development is negatively
related to excess investment and does not matter for raw portfolio allocations. For returns-based
measures, we see that correlation in stock returns between China and destination country continues
to be positively associated with raw portfolio allocations. Unlike the result for excess investment,
we find that volatility of stock market returns of the destination country does not matter for raw
portfolio allocations. Governance measures affect excess investment and raw investment similarly
­ countries with weak governance measures receive more investment. The information endowment
variable, measured as the trade share of a destination country in China's total trade, also affects
raw portfolio allocations positively.
       The results from the joint estimation with a full set of controls (column 6) are also
consistent with our results for excess investment with two main differences--the coefficient on
the distance variable becomes positive and significant and that on market turnover becomes
negative and significant. We tested if the positive coefficient on distance could be driven by
China's investment in the U.S. since the U.S. is the second most important destination for Chinese
IIs. If we exclude the U.S. from the sample, the coefficient on distance becomes insignificant,
suggesting that this is indeed the case. The coefficient on turnover also becomes insignificant once
we exclude the U.S. and the coefficient on home country-destination country correlation in stock
market returns becomes positive and significant.
       Next, we test if our results are sensitive to the choice of the benchmark against which we
compute excess investment. Instead of using the market capitalization-weighted world portfolio,
we construct a benchmark based on investment by emerging markets in a given destination
country. In particular, we define excess investment by a Chinese institutional investor i in country
j as the share of total portfolio allocation of institutional investor i accounted for by country j
relative to the share of country j in total investment from emerging market institutional investors
(excluding those in China). This measure captures the extent to which Chinese institutional
                                                      - 23 -

investors are overinvesting in a given country relative to institutional investors from other
emerging markets. We use Factset data on institutional investment from other emerging markets
to compute this alternative benchmark ratio.29
        Results based on this alternative benchmark index are shown in Table B4. We find that our
main results remain robust to the use of this alternative benchmark ratio, although there are a few
minor differences. Gravity variables have the same effect on excess investment irrespective of
which benchmark we use. Comparing column (2) across Table 3 and Table B4, we see that market
turnover is an important factor for excess investment relative to other emerging markets while it
does not matter for excess investment relative to the world portfolio. Governance measures are
more significant for excess investment relative to the world portfolio as compared to the emerging
market benchmark. Information endowments, proxied by bilateral trade, are more significant for
investment relative to the emerging markets benchmark.
        One residual question is whether our analysis accurately reflects global portfolio
allocations of Chinese IIs if a significant portion of these allocations are intermediated by
subsidiaries of Chinese funds in Hong Kong or other offshore centers. We do not have the data to
answer this question directly but, as an indirect approach, replicate our baseline country-level
results using Factset data on foreign portfolio investments of funds domiciled in Hong Kong. If
many mainland Chinese funds are investing abroad through Hong Kong and if there is little
difference between direct investment and intermediated investment, then the country-level analysis
using data on Hong Kong funds should produce results similar to our country-level analysis for
Chinese funds. Table B6 replicates Table 3 using data on foreign portfolio investment of funds
domiciled in Hong Kong. There are some important differences in results. For instance,
governance variables do not matter for excess investment of funds domiciled in Hong Kong
(column 6) but they play an important role for Chinese funds. These results are difficult to interpret.
They might simply reflect differential allocation patterns of institutional investors in Hong Kong
versus those in China rather than significant differences between the pattern of investments
undertaken directly from China compared to Chinese II investments intermediated through Hong




29
  We include institutional investors from the following emerging markets (based on the MSCI index) to compute
the benchmark ratio: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Czech Republic, Egypt, Greece, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa,
Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, and the United Arab Emirates.
                                                    - 24 -

Kong. We cannot tell these apart given the lack of data on how much of Chinese II outflows to
Hong Kong are then redirected to other equity markets.


5.3. Foreign Portfolio Allocations of Chinese Funds Across Sectors
We turn next to an analysis of the sectoral allocation patterns of Chinese funds' foreign
investments. Figure 9 shows portfolio allocations of Chinese institutional investors across nine
sectors, where each sector is defined on the basis of two-digit SIC codes.30 We merge the Factset
dataset with the Worldscope database to get information on the sector of the firms in which Chinese
institutional investors invest. The top and bottom panels of Figure 9 show the sectoral distributions
of Chinese equity investments in developed countries and emerging markets, respectively. The
white bars correspond to the share of a given sector in total foreign equity holdings while the red
bars correspond to the share of a given sector in total market capitalization. If we assume that
portfolio allocation across sectors should follow the distribution of market capitalization across
sectors, then we find certain sectors are underweighted while others are overweighted. Further, the
extent of underinvestment or overinvestment differs across emerging markets and developed
countries. For instance, the manufacturing sector is in general underweighted but the extent of
underinvestment is higher in emerging markets as compared to developed countries. Similarly,
mining is overweighted in emerging markets but it is underweighted in developed countries.
        To formally examine sectoral investment patterns, we compute a measure of excess
investment for each fund i in a given sector j and country k as follows:
                                          3456789648"$2    9<=>$2
                                 !"$2 =                  -
                                          $ 3456789648"$2 $ 9<=>$2
We estimate the following specification:
                    !"$2% = ' +  )* ?2 + )@ 86<$ +  )B ?2  86<$ + D+2% + /"$2% 
where the dependent variable is excess investment of each fund at the sector-country level as
defined above. ?2 is a dummy variable that equals one for developed countries, 86<$ is a dummy
variable that equals one for high-technology stocks.31 E2% is a vector of country-level control

30
   Firms with two-digit SIC codes in the range 01-09 are in the agriculture sector, range 10-14
corresponds to the mining sector, range 15-19 is for the construction sector, 20-39 corresponds to the
manufacturing sector, 40-49 is for transport and communications sector, 50-59 is for trade and retail
services, 60-67 is for finance and real estate, 70-89 is for services, and 90-99 is for public administration
services.
31
   Stocks are classified as high-tech or low-tech based on Kwon (2002).
                                               - 25 -

variables. The main independent variable is the interaction between ?2 and 86<$ , which measures
if there is a systematic difference in investment in high-tech stocks across developed countries
versus emerging markets. The unit of observation for this regression is fund-sector-country-year,
where sector is defined at the 3-digit SIC code level.
         Table 4 shows the results. Column (1) does not include country-level controls. Column (2)
includes country-level controls such as geographic distance, past year correlation in returns
between China and destination country, past year ratio of stock market volatility of returns in China
and destination country, and a measure of the rule of law in the destination country. Column (3)
shows the results only for the subset of investments in listed firms in the manufacturing sector.
Columns (4) through (6) replicate the first three columns but with fund fixed effects included. All
columns include year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the SIC 3-digit sector-year
level.
         Column (1) suggests that Chinese funds underinvest in developed countries. This is
consistent with our country-level results from the previous section. However, it appears that
Chinese funds overinvest in high-tech sectors in developed countries. After we include country-
level controls in column (2), the coefficient on the high-tech sector becomes negative and
significant. Hence, column (2) suggests that Chinese funds underinvest in developed countries as
well as high-tech sectors, but high-tech sectors in developed countries are overweighted. The
extent of overweighting of high-tech sectors in developed countries becomes stronger if we focus
on the manufacturing sector (column (3)). Even if we include fund fixed effects, our main results
do not change ­ the coefficient on the interaction term between the developed country dummy and
high-tech sector remains positive and significant, although slightly smaller.


5.4. Foreign Portfolio Allocations of Chinese Funds Across Sectors and Countries
In the previous sections, we studied the patterns of foreign portfolio allocations of Chinese
institutional investors by country and by sector, respectively, treating these as separate decisions.
In this section, we examine the allocation patterns across sectors and countries jointly. We also
extend the discrete high-tech/low-tech sectoral classification and developed/emerging country
classification from the last section to a continuous measure of the competitiveness of a country in
a sector, using the concept of revealed comparative advantage (RCA) and revealed comparative
disadvantage (RCD). This way, we can take into account the destination-country-sector
                                                         - 26 -

competitiveness that are attributed to not only technology advantages but also other factors and
study its impact on foreign portfolio allocations.
         The sectoral RCA for each country is measured as a given sector's export share in a
country's total exports divided by that sector's export share in total world exports. This variable
captures the "excess" exports in a given sector by a country relative to world exports accounted
for by that sector and reflects the extent to which a country is better at producing goods/services
in a given sector relative to other countries (Balassa, 1965). The idea is that if country i is better
than country j at producing good x, then country i's exports of good x to the rest of the world will
exceed country j's exports of good x to the rest of the world. The construction of this variable
parallels our measurement of excess investment. To capture comparative disadvantage in trade,
we construct RCD based on measures of sectoral import shares for a given country relative to
corresponding sectoral shares in global imports. Thus, RCD reflects the extent to which a given
country is worse than other countries at producing goods/services in a given sector.
         The top panel of Figure B3 shows the top 10 sectors with highest RCA in China and the
bottom panel shows the top 10 sectors with highest RCA for the United States in 2017. China has
a high RCA value for sectors such as apparel, textiles, and computer hardware while the U.S. has
a high RCA value for sectors that produce aircraft, computer software, measuring and control
equipment, and medical equipment. China has a high RCD value for sectors such as mining,
computer software, measuring and control equipment, and chemicals. These are the sectors in
which China imports more goods/services relative to the rest of the world, suggesting that China
is worse than other countries at producing goods/services in these sectors. Similarly, the U.S
imports more goods/services relative to the rest of the world in sectors such as defense,
automobiles, computer hardware, and apparel, to name a few.32
         We start with the following specification, based on Shumacher (2017), to investigate the
relationship between RCD of a sector in China and excess foreign investment in that sector
                      !"$2% = ' +  )* F+?$% + GH IJKLMN + GO PJQLRSTMUN + /"$2% 
where !"$2% is excess investment of a fund i in sector j in country k at time t, as described in section
5.3.33 RCD is the main independent variable that captures the extent to which China is worse than


32
   See Figure B4 for the top 10 RCD sectors for China and the U.S. in 2017.
33
   Table B5 in the online appendix estimates this equation using an alternative benchmark ratio based on investment
from emerging markets. Similar to its definition in the country-level analysis, the alternative excess investment ratio
at the sector-level is defined as the share of a given sector in total portfolio allocation of a Chinese fund in a given
                                                        - 27 -

the rest of the world at producing good in sector j.34 home is a set of control variables capturing
sector-level characteristics in China including the size of the sector, its leverage ratio, price to book
ratio, return on equity, and returns of the sector. Each variable at the sector level is created using
a market capitalization-weighted average of that variable for individual firms in that sector.
Similarly, foreign is a set of control variables that captures sector-level characteristics for each
destination country in the sample. In addition to the corresponding sector-level variables for China
such as size, leverage, etc., foreign also includes a variable capturing correlations in sectoral
returns between each destination country and China.
         Table 5 shows the results. Column (1) includes the main independent variable and home
sector controls. We find that RCD of a sector in China is positively associated with excess
investment in that sector abroad. This suggests that Chinese investors overinvest in those sectors
abroad for which China imports more goods/services relative to the rest of the World. This result
could be driven by characteristics of a sector in destination countries that are correlated with RCD
of a sector in China. For instance, it is plausible that sectors in which China imports a lot are also
relatively large sectors in destination countries and excess foreign investment in high RCD sectors
in China is driven by the size of the foreign sector. Hence, to control for all sector-level
characteristics in the destination countries, we include foreign sector controls in column (2),
including correlations in sector returns between China and each destination country. Column (3)
includes both home and foreign sector controls. Columns (2) and (3) suggest that even after
controlling for size, returns, and other sector-level characteristics at home and abroad, the
coefficient on RCD remains positive and statistically significant. In terms of economic magnitude,
a one standard deviation in the RCD measure is associated with about a 4.5 percentage point
increase in excess investment, which is roughly one-third of average sector excess investment.
         Column (4) replaces the time varying RCD variable in column (3) with a time invariant
variable based on RCD values at the beginning of the sample. The coefficient on this time invariant
variable is almost 80 percent of the coefficient on the time varying RCD variable in column 3.
This suggests that a large proportion of the positive relationship between RCD and excess foreign



destination country relative to the share of that sector in total portfolio investment of all emerging markets in that
country. We find that our results remain robust to this alternative benchmark ratio.
34
   When including both China's sectoral RCD and RCA variables in the same regression (see Table B7 in the online
appendix), the coefficient on RCD remains significantly positive and the coefficient on RCA is significantly
negative as in Table 8. Here, we investigate the relation with RCD variable first, and RCA in a latter section.
                                                 - 28 -

investment can be attributed to the cross-sectional difference in RCD across sectors rather than
evolution of RCD over time.
       Columns (5) and (6) use alternative measures to identify high RCD sectors in China.
Column (5) includes a dummy variable that takes a value 1 if a sector is among the 5 highest RCD
sectors in China. The independent variable in column (6) is a dummy variable that takes a value 1
for sectors with RCD values higher than the 90th percentile of RCD every year. Results suggest
that sectors in the top 5 RCD list receive an additional 9 percentage point excess investment and
those in the top decile of RCD distribution in China receive close to 10 percentage point excess
foreign investment.
       So far, we have found robust evidence that Chinese IIs invest more abroad in sectors in
which China is at a comparative disadvantage relative to other countries. But conditioning on their
propensity to invest more in those sectors, in which countries do they invest more? Our hypothesis
is that Chinese IIs invest relatively more in high RCD sectors in countries that are better than China
at producing goods/services in those sectors. To formally test this proposition, we compare the
revealed comparative advantage of each destination country and China for each sector. We classify
countries that have a higher value of RCA than China for a given sector as the ones that are better
at producing goods/services in that sector relative to China. Using this approach, for each sector,
we construct a dummy variable that takes a value 1 for countries that have a higher RCA value
than China. We allow for this set of countries to differ across years but note that there is strong
persistence in the relative ranking of countries. For instance, the U.S. is better than China at
producing measuring and control equipment for all years in the sample.
       To test if the positive coefficient on high RCD sectors in China is driven by countries that
are better than China at producing goods/services in those sectors, we estimate the following
regression:
      !"$2% = ' +  )* VWXYZ F+?$% +  )@ V[XYZ F+?$% + GO IJKLMN +  G\ PJQLRSTMUN + /"$2% 
where VWXYZ is an indicator variable for countries that are better than (or as good as) China at
producing goods/services in sector j. V[XYZ is an indicator variable for countries that are worse than
China at producing goods/services in sector j.
       Column (7) of table 5 shows the results for this specification. The coefficient on
VWXYZ F+?$% is positive and significant, implying that Chinese IIs disproportionately invest abroad
                                                - 29 -

in high RCD sectors and in countries that are better than China at producing goods/services in
those sectors.


6. Possible Motives for Foreign Portfolio Allocations
Two facts emerged from the analysis in the previous section. First, Chinese investors overinvest
in sectors abroad in which China has a revealed comparative disadvantage. Second, higher excess
investment in high RCD sectors is driven by countries that are better than China at producing
goods/services in that sector. These investment patterns can be consistent with a number of
investment motives. In this section, we discuss four broad categories of possible motives that could
explain the investment patterns of Chinese IIs: search for returns, diversification, information
advantage, and learning.


6.1. Do high RCD sectors earn higher returns abroad?
One possible reason for excess foreign investment in high RCD sectors is the prospect of earning
higher returns in those sectors abroad. Also, conditional on foreign investment in a given sector,
returns in a sector may be higher for countries that are better than China at producing
goods/services in those sectors. If this is true, then search for returns could explain the investment
patterns observed in the previous section.
       To test for this motive, we regress risk-adjusted returns for each sector on the RCD of
sectors in China using the following specification:
                 F37]__`ab786`_F68bc47"$% = ' + dF+?"% + GPJQLRSTRMN +  /"$%
The dependent variable is risk-adjusted returns of sector i in destination country j at time t. The
main independent variable is RCD of sector i in China at time t. PJQLRST is a set of control
variables that captures sector-specific characteristics, excluding returns, for each destination
country as described in section 5.4. The sample contains all destination countries in the Factset
database and all sectors. Table 6 presents the results.
       We use two measures of risk-adjusted returns. In columns (1) through (3) in Table 6, risk-
adjusted returns for each sector (in each destination country) are computed as returns of a sector
divided by the sample standard deviation of returns for that sector. In columns (4) through (6), we
use a weighted average of risk-adjusted returns. We first compute risk-adjusted returns for each
                                                       - 30 -

firm in a sector as returns of the firm divided by the price volatility of the firm.35 Then, a risk-
adjusted measure for each sector is computed as the market-capitalization weighted average of
risk-adjusted returns of all firms in that sector.
         Columns (1) and (4) of Table 6 show the relationship between RCD of a sector in China
and risk-adjusted returns of that sector abroad. We find that there is no significant relationship
between RCD of a sector and its risk-adjusted returns. In columns (2) and (5), we add other foreign
sector controls that could affect sector returns. We find that the insignificant relationship between
RCD of a sector in China and returns in those sectors abroad remains unchanged even after
controlling for other factors that could affect returns.
         Finally, we check whether for high RCD sectors in China, foreign returns are positively
associated with RCA of destination countries. In other words, conditional on investing in a given
sector, are foreign returns higher for countries that are better at producing goods/services in those
sectors, especially for high RCD sectors in China. To check this, in columns (3) and (6), we include
sector fixed effects, so that for each sector, we focus on the variation across countries. We find
that risk-adjusted returns are uncorrelated with RCA of destination countries using the weighted
average measure of risk-adjusted returns (column 6) while there is a small negative relationship
between risk-adjusted returns and RCA of destination countries using the first measure of risk-
adjusted returns (column 3). The sample is restricted to high RCD sectors, defined as sectors with
RCD values higher than the median RCD value in China.
         These results suggest that search for returns may not be a major driver of foreign
investment allocation patterns documented in section 5.4.


6.2. Diversification Motive
Chinese funds may view the opening up of the country's capital account as an opportunity to
benefit from international diversification. Hence, they may overinvest abroad in sectors in which
China is not as competitive (i.e., high RCD sectors) to diversify their portfolios, with the ultimate
objective of lowering risk of their portfolios. Riskiness of a fund's portfolio will depend not only
on the return volatility of home and foreign sectors, but also on correlation in returns of those



35
  Price volatility in the Worldscope database is a measure of a stock's average annual price movement to a high and
low from a mean price for each year. For example, a stock's price volatility of 20% indicates that the stock's annual
high and low price has shown a historical variation of +20% to -20% from its annual average price.
                                                - 31 -

sectors. Hence, to test whether diversification is a potential explanation for overinvestment abroad
in high RCD sectors, we first need to look at funds' domestic portfolio allocations.
       We begin by investigating the relationship between the revealed competitiveness of a
sector and domestic excess investment in that sector in China. To do so, we estimate the following
regression:
                                !"$% = ' +  )* e$% + GH IJKLMN + +/"$%
where the dependent variable is excess investment of fund i in sector j at time t in China, and is
constructed as follows:
                                         3456789648"$    9<=>$
                                 !"$ =                 -
                                         $ 3456789648"$ $ 9<=>$
Analogous to its foreign counterpart, excess investment in a given sector in China is measured as
the share of investment in a given sector by a fund relative to the market cap share of that sector
in China. e$% in the above regression can be RCA or RCD of a sector j at time t in China. The
variable IJKLMN includes sector-specific control variables as described in section 5.4. This
regression is estimated for the sample of Chinese funds that have positive foreign investment.
Table 7 presents the results.
       Columns (1) and (2) have RCA of sectors in China as the main independent variable and
columns (3) and (4) have RCD of sectors in China as the main independent variable. Columns (1)
and (3) don't include controls while columns (2) and (4) include home sector controls. All columns
include fund and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at sector-year level since the
independent variables and control variables vary at the sector-year level. We find that excess
investment in China is positively associated with RCA of a sector in China (columns 1 and 2) and
is not correlated with RCD of a sector in China. This suggests that Chinese funds overinvest in
those sectors at home in which China has a revealed comparative advantage, such as textiles,
computer hardware, etc.
       If Chinese IIs intend to diversify their portfolios, they would not invest in sectors abroad
that are positively correlated with their Chinese investments. So now we test the return correlation
between high RCA sectors in China and the same sectors abroad. Using monthly data, we find that
the correlation between returns of high RCA sectors in China and those of their foreign
counterparts is 0.13. This implies that Chinese funds would not invest abroad in sectors for which
                                                    - 32 -

China has high RCA since they are already overinvesting in high RCA sectors at home and
investing in the same sectors abroad could increase portfolio risk.
        We test this formally by looking at the relationship between excess foreign investment and
RCA of a sector in China. We estimate the regression equation in section 5.4 with RCA of a sector
as the main independent variable instead of RCD. Table 8 replicates columns (1) through (6) of
Table 6 replacing RCD with RCA. We find that there is a negative and statistically significant
relationship between foreign excess investment in a sector and its RCA value in China. This
negative relationship is robust to including just home sector controls (column 1), just foreign sector
controls (column 2), including home and foreign sector controls (column 3), using different
measures to capture high RCA sectors in China (columns 4, 5, and 6).
        The negative relationship between China's sectoral RCA and foreign investment abroad
combined with (1) higher domestic excess investment in high RCA sectors at home and (2) positive
association in sector returns between high RCA sectors at home and corresponding sectors abroad,
shows that Chinese IIs have reduced risk by investing less in foreign sectors that are positively
correlated with their major domestic investments. This suggests that diversification could be a
plausible motive for foreign investment patterns of Chinese funds.
        Furthermore, can diversification motives justify Chinese IIs' overinvestment in certain
destination-country-sector pairs that we observe in section 5.4, where the sectors are those in which
China is not competitive (i.e., high RCD sectors) and the countries are those that are better than
China in those high RCD sectors? An indirect way to test if such investment patterns are driven
by diversification motives is to see whether, conditional on investment in high RCD sectors, there
is a negative (or low) correlation between sector returns in China and in countries with higher RCA
values than China for those high RCD sectors. We use the following regression specification to
test this formally:
             +fcc"$2 = ' +  )* gF+?$2 + )@ gF+_$2 + )B gF+?$2  × gF+_$2 + /"$2
where the dependent variable is correlation in returns between sector i in China and sector j in
destination country k. gF+?$2 is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 for country k's sector j
for which China has a high RCD value.36 gF+_$2 is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 for
country k's sector j that have a higher RCA value than China's counterpart sector. The main


36
  High RCD sectors in China are those that have an average RCD value higher than the median RCD value for the
sample.
                                                 - 33 -

variable of interest is the interaction between high RCD sectors and the dummy variable indicating
the set of countries that are better than China at producing goods/services in a given sector. Results
from this regression are presented in Table 9.
       Column (1) shows the results for the full sample. The negative and significant coefficient
on the interaction term suggests that foreign return correlation with China is lower for our observed
destination-country-sector pairs, where the foreign sectors are those in which China is not
competitive (i.e., high RCD sectors) and the countries are those that are better than China in those
high RCD sectors. This negative coefficient becomes even more pronounced if we restrict the
sample of home sectors to high RCA sectors in China (column 2). This suggests that returns from
those observed destination-country-sector pairs have lower correlations with high RCA sectors in
China. According to the diversification motive, this low-correlation result is consistent with our
earlier result that Chinese funds overinvest in high RCA sectors at home and overinvest abroad in
the observed destination-country-sector pairs. As China gradually opens up its international capital
flows, a low correlation with the returns of existing domestic investments could incentivize funds
to overinvest in such destination-country-sector pairs abroad.


6.3. Familiarity or Information Advantage
Prior studies have shown the importance of information endowment in cross-border investment
flows. For instance, Karolyi, Ng, and Prasad (2019) show that institutional investors in emerging
markets overinvest in countries which have had stronger trade (or direct investment) relations with
the host countries in the past. Similarly, in the context of foreign investment across sectors,
Shumacher (2017) shows that institutional investors overinvest in sectors abroad that are large in
their home country. While he largely attributes this foreign industry bias to specialized learning,
he suggests that this relationship is partly driven by a familiarity or information advantage theory.
In this section, we test whether information advantage or familiarity motives can explain the
country-sector patterns of Chinese institutional investors.
       In column 6 of Table 3, which uses past trade shares as a proxy for country-specific
information advantage, we show that Chinese fund investment is strongly positively correlated
with trade. For the analysis at the sector-destination country level in this section, we use three
proxies to measure sectoral information advantage --- domestic market capitalization share of a
sector in China (based on Schumacher, 2017), foreign direct investment share of a sector in China
                                               - 34 -

(based on Karolyi, Ng, and Prasad, 2019), and RCA of a sector in China. Chinese investors should
know more about sectors in which China is a leading exporter, i.e., sectors for which China has a
high RCA. We test whether excess foreign investment is positively related to any of these three
variables that capture sectoral informational advantage. We present the results in Table 10.
       Columns (1) through (3) do not include fund fixed effects while columns (4) through (6)
include year as well as fund fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the sector-destination
country-year level. There is no significant relationship between excess foreign investment and
information advantage measured by domestic market cap share of a sector (column 1 and 4) and
FDI share of a sector in China (column 2 and 5) while there is a negative relationship between
RCA of a sector in China and foreign investment in that sector (column 3 and 6). The latter result
indicates that Chinese IIs actually invest less abroad in sectors in which China has an information
advantage.
       These results suggest that sector-specific information does not play a role in explaining
foreign portfolio allocations of Chinese funds. Moreover, had sector-specific information been
important, we would have found excess investment to be higher in similar types of sectors at home
and abroad; however, we observe that Chinese IIs invest more in high RCA sectors at home and
high RCD sectors abroad, which are largely different sectors for China.
       With the above results in mind, we conjecture that perhaps information about a sector at
home does not necessarily translate into knowledge about that sector abroad. That is, it is not
having information about or expertise on a sector that matters but having information about a sector
of a foreign country. Hence, now we discuss country-sector specific information advantage. In
fact, our earlier findings in section 5.4 that Chinese IIs invest more in foreign sectors in which
China imports more (i.e., the high RCD sectors) and more in foreign countries that are best at such
sectors (i.e., countries with high RCA) are consistent with such country-sector specific information
advantage theory.
       In particular, investors can obtain information about a sector of a foreign country through
using/examining its products coming from imports. Therefore, the more China imports in this
sector, the more information Chinese investors have on the sector. Moreover, the more a foreign
country exports in a sector, the more likely China imports its goods/services, and thus the more
information Chinese investors could have on that particular country and its sector. For instance,
our trade data show that China imports a lot of foreign software, especially from the U.S., a large
                                                 - 35 -

exporter of software in the world. This import exposure to U.S. software sector can allow Chinese
investors to have information on U.S. software companies, and thus incentivizes them to
overinvest in this particular sector in the U.S., which we do find in our fund investment data.


6.4. Learning by Investing
Our last hypothesis is that Chinese investors overinvest in high RCD sectors abroad because they
want to learn more about those sectors. Compared to FDI, this motive might be less relevant for
equity investments, although such outflows could be seen as initial investments that are then
increased over time and, in effect, turn into FDI.37 Under this hypothesis, foreign investment in
such sectors will be disproportionately higher in countries that are better than China at producing
goods/services in those sectors because this strategy will maximize learning.
        To test this proposition, we collect data on Research and Development intensity of all
sectors in China and test whether or not sectors with a high share of outward foreign portfolio
investment see a higher growth in R&D intensity and whether these gains are higher for high RCD
sectors in China. We estimate the following regression:
     F&?jcfk8"%
                    = ' +  )* lm<677!456789648"2% +  )@ gF+?"%
                    +  )B lm<677!456789648"2% egF+?"% +  )@ n?!"% + GO IJKLRN + +/"%
Results are shown in Table 11. Column (1) includes only year fixed effects, column (2) includes
year and fund effects, and column (3) is the specification with the main interaction term. Results
suggest that there is a weak positive relationship between excess foreign investment in a given
sector and R&D growth in that sector, even after controlling for FDI share of a sector in China
(columns 1 and 2). However, the interaction term between Foreign Excess Investment and high
RCD sectors (those in the top decile of the RCD distribution in China) is not significant, implying
that there are no additional gains to learning from investment in high RCD sectors.
        The results in this section provide weak evidence of a positive correlation between learning
and foreign equity investment in high RCD sectors. Further, it is hard to distinguish between




37
  FPI is seen as a passive form of investment while FDI provides managerial control. When a foreign
investor's equity interest in a foreign firm exceeds 10 percent of the ownership interest, which usually
confers some degree of managerial control, such investment is classified as FDI. Thus, FPI can eventually
turn into FDI when it exceeds a certain threshold.
                                               - 36 -

learning as an outcome of foreign portfolio investment versus a motive for overinvestment in high
RCD sectors.
        To sum up, we find diversification and country-sector information/familiarity to be the
most important determinants of Chinese IIs' equity investment patterns that we document in
section 5.4. We find little evidence that the other motives--return-seeking and learning--matter
much.


7. Implications and Concluding Remarks
This paper takes stock of China's efforts to liberalize capital outflows and documents new facts
on capital outflows from China, both from a macro perspective as well as from the perspective of
institutional investors. We note that the composition of China's capital outflows has shifted from
foreign exchange reserve accumulation by the central bank to nonofficial outflows. Low returns
on external assets, a vast majority of which have been in the form of foreign exchange reserves,
combined with a vast pool of domestic savings with a potential to earn higher returns abroad, may
have incentivized China to liberalize capital outflows. As the world's second largest economy
continues to open up its capital account and domestic investors look abroad for returns and
diversification, capital outflows from China can have a significant impact on global financial
markets.
        To understand the potential impact of capital outflows from China on global financial
markets, we analyze the foreign portfolio allocations of Chinese institutional investors, which
constitute the main channels of portfolio investment outflows. Using micro data on foreign
portfolio allocations of Chinese funds from the Factset database, we find that Chinese funds
underweight developed countries in their foreign portfolio allocations but overinvest in high-tech
sectors in developed countries. At the country-level, foreign portfolio allocation decisions seem to
be driven by (i) gravity variables such as geographic distance between China and the destination
country, (ii) market depth variables such as the number of listed firms in the destination market,
(iii) governance variables such as rule of law and regulatory burden, and (iv) information
endowment variable such as a destination country's trade share in China's total trade.
        We further investigate Chinese funds' foreign portfolio allocations at the destination
country-sector level and find evidence of overweighting of sectors in which China has a
                                               - 37 -

comparative disadvantage. Moreover, Chinese IIs concentrate such investments in countries that
have higher relative comparative advantage in those sectors.
       We explore four broad sets of investment motives that could explain the investment
patterns of Chinese IIs: search for returns, diversification, information advantage, and learning.
We find that higher returns cannot explain why Chinese funds overinvest in sectors in which China
has a comparative disadvantage since high RCD sectors in China do not earn higher risk-adjusted
returns abroad. Diversification motives and destination country-sector specific information
advantages seem to be the most important drivers of Chinese funds' foreign portfolio allocations.
In particular, we show that foreign investment decisions of Chinese funds entail a joint decision
about investment in a destination country and in a sector. This joint decision is guided not only by
funds' familiarity with a destination country or with a given sector but also by their knowledge
about the sector-destination country pair. Hence, the information content from imports guides
Chinese funds' investments abroad while the information content from exports guides their
investment decisions at home. Further, we find limited evidence for learning as a possible motive
for excess investment in sectors in which China has a high RCD.
       China has become an important provider of foreign direct investment and portfolio capital
for many developing countries and for various sectors. For instance, China accounts for more than
40 percent of the total FDI received by Tajikistan. More than one-third of total FDI received by
countries like Niger and Myanmar is from China. China accounts for almost a quarter of total FDI
received by Kyrgyz Republic, Mongolia, and Hong Kong. While the share of these countries in
China's outward direct investment may not be significant, the absolute amounts are large,
especially relative to the size of the recipient economies. For instance, the ratio of FDI received
from China to nominal GDP of recipient countries is as high is 40 percent for Mongolia and close
to 30 percent for Niger. Similarly, China is a major source of portfolio equity investments for
countries like Cuba, Mongolia, Hong Kong, and Macao. As China continues to open up its capital
account and liberalize portfolio outflows, it will over time increase its impact on both fixed income
and equity markets worldwide.
                                              - 38 -

                                           References

Andrade, Sandro C., and Vidhi Chhaochharia, 2010, "Information Immobility and Foreign
      Portfolio Investment," The Review of Financial Studies 23, no. 6: 2429-2463.

Balassa, Bela, 1965, "Trade Liberalisation and `Revealed' Comparative Advantage," The
       Manchester School, no. 33: 99-123.

Bayoumi, Tamim, and Franziska Ohnsorge, 2013, "Do Inflows or Outflows Dominate? Global
      Implications of Capital Account Liberalization in China," IMF Working Paper No. 13-
      189.

Casanova, Carlos, Alicia Garcia-Herrero, and Le Xia, 2015, "Chinese Outbound Foreign Direct
      Investment: How Much Goes Where after Round-tripping and Offshoring?" BBVA
      Working Paper No. 15/17.

Chan, Ann Ling-Ching, Rong Ding, and Wenxuan Hou, 2014, "Does mutual fund ownership
       affect financial reporting quality for Chinese privately-owned enterprises?" International
       Review of Financial Analysis, Volume 36, Pages 131-140.

Chan, Kalok, Vicentiu Covrig, and Lilian Ng, 2005, "What Determines the Domestic Bias and
       Foreign Bias? Evidence from Mutual Fund Equity Allocations Worldwide," The Journal
       of Finance 60, no. 3: 1495-1534.

Cunningham, Rose, Eden Hatzvi, and Kun Mo, 2018, "The Size and Destination of China's
      Portfolio Outflows," Manuscript, Bank of Canada.

Dollar, David, 2016, "China as a Global Investor," In China's New Sources of Economic
        Growth: Vol. 1: Reform, Resources, and Climate Change, Edited by Ligang Song, Ross
        Garnaut, Cai Fang, and Lauren Johnston, pp. 197-214, Australia: ANU Press.

Economist Intelligence Unit, 2017, "China Going Global Investment Index 2017."

Ferreira, Miguel A., and Pedro Matos, 2008, "The Colors of Investors' Money: The Role of
        Institutional Investors around the World," Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 88, 499-
        533.

Gaulier, Guillaume, and Soledad Zignago, 2010, "BACI: International Trade Database at the
       Product-Level. The 1994-2007 Version," Working Papers 2010-23, CEPII Research
       Center.

Hatzvi, Eden, Jessica Meredith and William Nixon, 2015, "Chinese Capital Flows and Capital
       Account Liberalisation," Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin, December Quarter.

He, Dong, Lillian Cheung, Wenlang Zhang, and Tommy Wu, 2012, "How Would Capital
      Account Liberalisation Affect China's Capital Flows and the Renminbi Exchange Rate?"
      Working Paper No. 09/2012, Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research.
                                              - 39 -

Hooley, John, 2013, "Bringing Down the Great Wall? Global Implications of Capital Account
      Liberalisation in China," Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q4.

Horn, Sebastian, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch, 2019, "China's Overseas
       Lending," NBER Working Paper No. 26050.

Karolyi, Andrew, David Ng, and Eswar Prasad, 2019, "The Coming Wave: Where Do Emerging
       Market Investors Put Their Money," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis,
       forthcoming.

Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2009, "Financial
       Globalization: A Reappraisal," IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 56(1), 8-62.

Kruger, Mark, and Gurnain Kaur Pasricha, 2016, "What to Expect When China Liberalizes its
       Capital Account," Bank of Canada Staff Discussion Papers No. 2016-10.

Kwon, Sung S., 2002, "Financial Analysts' Forecast Accuracy and Dispersion: High-Tech versus
      Low-Tech Stocks," Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting, Vol. 19(1), 65-91.

Lane, Philip, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 2005, "The International Equity Holdings of Euro
       Area Investors," Discussion Paper, The Institute for International Integration Studies.

Lane, Philip, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 2008, "International Investment Patterns," The
       Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 90, Issue 3, 538-549.

Miao, Yanliang, and Deng Tuo, 2019, "China's Capital Account Liberalization: A Ruby Jubilee
       and Beyond," in Handbook of China's Financial System, edited by Marlene Amstad and
       Wei Xiong, forthcoming.

Portes, Richard, and Helene Rey, 2005, "The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows,"
        Journal of International Economics, Vol. 65, 269-296.

Prasad, Eswar, 2016, Gaining Currency: The Rise of the Renminbi, Oxford University Press:
       Oxford, U.K.

Prasad, Eswar, 2019, "Has the Dollar Lost Ground as the Dominant International Currency,"
       NBER Working Paper, forthcoming.

Prasad, Eswar, and Raghuram Rajan, 2008, "A Pragmatic Approach to Capital Account
       Liberalization," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 22(3), 149-72.

Ramasamy, Bala, Matthew Yeung, and Sylvie Laforet, 2012, "China's Outward Foreign Direct
      Investment: Location Choice and Firm Ownership," Journal of World Business, Vol.
      47(1), 17-25.

Schumacher, David, 2017, "Home Bias Abroad: Domestic Industries and Foreign Portfolio
      Choice," The Review of Financial Studies 31, no. 5: 1654-1706.
                                            - 40 -

Scissors, Derek, 2018, "China's Global Investment: Neither the US nor Belt and Road."
       American Enterprise Institute.

van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn, and Laura Veldkamp, 2009, "Information Immobility and the Home
       Bias Puzzle," The Journal of Finance 64, no. 3: 1187-1215.

Wang, Mei, Zhen Qi, and Jijing Zhang, 2017, "China's Rising Outbound Investment: Trends and
      Issues," International Journal of Public Policy Vol 13(3-5), 171-190.
                                                                                            41

Table 1: International Investment Position of China (in USD billions)

Data for this table are from the State Administration of Foreign Exchange. Return on assets/liabilities represents relevant income flow in a given year as a share of assets/liabilities in
the previous year, expressed as a percent. Return on assets in RMB is the return on assets in USD for a given year adjusted for the change in the renminbi-dollar exchange rate from
beginning to end of that year.
                                       2004      2005      2006      2007      2008      2009      2010      2011      2012      2013      2014      2015      2016      2017      2018
  Net Position                          236       352       516       942     1,390     1,299     1,478     1,526     1,675     1,809     1,603     1,673     1,950     2,101     2,130

  Assets                                929     1,223     1,690     2,416     2,957     3,437     4,119     4,735     5,213     5,986     6,438     6,156     6,507     7,149     7,324
   Direct                                53        64        91       116       186       246       317       425       532       660       883     1,096     1,357     1,809     1,899
   Portfolio                             92       117       265       285       253       243       257       204       241       259       263       261       367       492       498
     Equity                               0         0         1        20        21        55        63        86       130       153       161       162       215       298       270
     Debt                                92       117       264       265       231       188       194       118       111       105       101        99       152       195       228
   Financial derivatives                  0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0        36        52        59        62
   Other                                166       216       254       468       552       495       630       850     1,053     1,187     1,394     1,389     1,680     1,606     1,753
   Reserve assets                       619       826     1,081     1,547     1,966     2,453     2,914     3,256     3,388     3,880     3,899     3,406     3,098     3,236     3,168

  Liabilities                           693       872     1,174     1,474     1,567     2,138     2,641     3,209     3,538     4,177     4,836     4,483     4,557     5,048     5,194
   Direct                               369       472       614       704       916     1,315     1,570     1,907     2,068     2,331     2,599     2,696     2,755     2,726     2,762
   Portfolio                             97       133       245       393       272       382       434       411       528       573       796       817       811     1,099     1,096
     Equity                              83       120       230       375       254       366       416       374       453       485       651       597       580       762       684
     Debt                                13        13        14        18        17        15        18        37        74        89       145       220       232       337       412
   Financial derivatives                  0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0        53        60        34        60
   Other                                227       268       315       378       380       442       637       891       943     1,272     1,440       964       984     1,220     1,329

  Net Income                              -6       -18        -7         4       22       -16       -38       -85       -35       -95       -12       -69       -65       -25       -61
    Inward                                19        36        50        77      103        99       129       128       150       166       209       189       198       265       215
    Outward                               24        54        57        73       80       115       167       213       185       261       222       258       263       291       276

  Net Return (%)                                  -7.5      -2.0       0.7       2.4      -1.1      -2.9      -5.8      -2.3      -5.6      -0.7      -4.3      -3.9      -1.3      -2.9
   Return on assets                                3.9       4.1       4.5       4.2       3.3       3.7       3.1       3.2       3.2       3.5       2.9       3.2       4.1       3.0
   Return on liabilities                           7.7       6.6       6.2       5.5       7.3       7.8       8.1       5.8       7.4       5.3       5.3       5.9       6.4       5.5
   Return on assets (RMB)                          1.3       0.7      -2.2      -2.6       3.4       0.3      -1.5       1.9       0.3       6.1       7.6      10.5      -2.5       8.9
                                                         42!
                                                          !

Table 2: Summary Statistics

This table shows the summary statistics for the variables used in the analysis. The sample period is 2008-2017.


 Variable                          Mean           Std. Dev       25th              Median             75th         N
                                                  Country-level analysis
 Excess investment                  0.073           0.243           -0.014           0.001           0.039        1188
 Excess Investment, EM
 benchmark                          0.082           0.249           -0.002           0.007           0.053        1418
 Trade                              0.038           0.042            0.009           0.019            0.07        1375
 Common language                    0.286           0.452              0               0                1         1418
 Distance                           8.573           0.827            7.713           9.007           9.095        1418
 Common border                      0.194           0.396              0               0                0         1418
 GDP per capita                    10.555           0.634           10.456          10.704          10.899        1345
 Market Turnover                    3.926           1.186            3.537           4.117           4.548        1052
 Number of Firms                    3.184           1.495            2.079           3.326           4.457         899
 Difference in returns             -0.003           0.025           -0.022           0.002           0.015        1189
 Correlation in returns             0.282           0.327            0.063           0.327           0.538        1189
 Return Volatility Ratio            0.551           0.218            0.386           0.501           0.667        1189
 Rule of Law                        1.219           0.776            0.856           1.596           1.767        1349
 Govt Effectiveness                 1.328           0.677            1.174           1.533           1.789        1349
 Regulatory Burden                  1.322         0.733          0.989               1.628           1.817        1349
 RCD for China                      1.023         0.998          0.367               0.787           1.227        5078
 RCA for China                      0.974         1.091          0.275               0.391           1.406        4918
                                               Country-sector level analysis
 Excess Investment (%)             15.086          27.279           -0.119           2.908          17.149        5982
 Excess Investment, EM
 benchmark (%)                     14.141          27.376           -0.047           2.947          17.058        5555
 Size, home                        25.853            1.26           25.076          25.943          26.789        5955
 ROE, home                         11.506           9.032            8.884          12.091          15.393        5955
 PB Ratio, home                     3.464           2.539            1.881            3.02           4.079        5955
 Leverage, home                    21.115           7.987           15.832          20.512          25.338        5955
 Returns, home                     24.581          47.068           -4.056          14.793          45.153        5943
 Size, foreign                     25.255            1.69           24.037          25.382          26.588        5989
 ROE, foreign                      14.919          26.688            8.167          13.452          20.128        5986
 PB Ratio, foreign                  3.063           8.474            1.244           2.094            3.62        5980
 Leverage, foreign                 24.951          13.46            15.915          23.924           31.98        5989
 Returns, foreign                  49.402         423.451            2.455          16.946          35.528        5986
 Correlation in returns             0.309          0.339             0.081           0.346           0.587        5940
                                                                                43

Table 3: Determinants of Excess Investment Across Destination Countries
This table reports results for the regression in section 5.1. The dependent variable is excess investment of fund i to a destination country j at time t. Excess
investment is defined as the share of a given destination country in total portfolio allocation of a fund in a given year relative to a benchmark, where the
benchmark is defined as the share of a destination country in world market capitalization in a given year. We exclude China to calculate world market
capitalization. Column (1) includes gravity variables as controls. These variables measure the extent of similarity between China and the destination country.
In particular, we include presence of common language, common border, and the geographic distance between China and destination country as our gravity
variables. Column (2) includes variables that measure market size of the destination country. These variables are GDP per capita, number of listed firms in
the destination country, and stock market turnover in the destination country. Column (3) controls for variables that measure differences in stock market
returns between China and destination country. In particular, we control for past year differences in market returns between China and destination country,
past year correlation in returns of China and destination country, and past year ratio of stock market return volatility of destination country and China. Column
(4) includes destination country governance measures such as the rule of law, government effectiveness, and regulatory burden. Column (5) includes our
information endowment variable Trade defined as sum of exports and imports between China and the destination country in the past five years divided by
the total exports and imports of China in the past five years. Column (6) includes all variables in column (1) through (5). All columns include year fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered at the destination country-year level. The superscripts *, **, and *** indicate that a coefficient is statistically significant
at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent level, respectively.


                                              (1)               (2)                    (3)                   (4)                  (5)                  (6)
                                                               Market
 Controls:
                                          Gravity              Depth               Returns            Governance                Trade                  All

 Common language                         0.126***                                                                                                   0.018
                                          (0.026)                                                                                                  (0.025)
 Distance                               -0.046***                                                                                                -0.039***
                                          (0.011)                                                                                                  (0.011)
 Common border                           0.208***                                                                                                0.185***
                                          (0.041)                                                                                                  (0.029)
 GDP per capita                                              -0.076***                                                                              -0.017
                                                               (0.019)                                                                             (0.022)
 Number of firms                                              0.085***                                                                             0.015**
                                                               (0.019)                                                                             (0.006)
 Market turnover                                                -0.003                                                                              -0.005
                                                               (0.005)                                                                             (0.004)
 Difference in returns                                                             -1.590                                                           0.807
                                                                                   (1.270)                                                         (0.643)
 Correlation in returns                                                           0.315***                                                          0.054
                                                                                   (0.108)                                                         (0.037)
 Return volatility ratio                                                          0.246**                                                           0.012
                                                                                   (0.095)                                                         (0.045)
 Rule of Law                                                                                           -0.281***                                  -0.072**
                                                                                                         (0.078)                                   (0.035)
 Govt Effectiveness                                                                                       -0.034                                 -0.129***
                                                                                                         (0.053)                                   (0.040)
 Regulatory Burden                                                                                      0.385***                                 0.230***
                                                                                                         (0.092)                                   (0.034)

 Trade                                                                                                                        1.401**               0.402*
                                                                                                                              (0.665)               (0.220)

 Observations                               1,180                792                 1,092                 1,130               1,183                  789
 Year FE                                     Yes                 Yes                  Yes                   Yes                 Yes                   Yes
 Adjusted R-squared                         0.352               0.174                0.121                 0.169               0.0590                0.376
                                                                   44

Table 4: Foreign Excess Investment in High-tech vs Low-tech Sectors

This table reports results for the regression in section 5.2. The dependent variable is excess investment of fund i in a sector j in
destination country k at time t. Excess investment is defined as the share of a given sector in total portfolio allocation of a fund in
a given year and a given country relative to a benchmark, where the benchmark is defined as the share of the sector in total market
cap of the destination country in a given year. Column (1) does not include country-level controls. Column (2) includes country-
level controls, such as geographic distance, past year correlation in returns between China and destination country, past year ratio
of stock market volatility of returns in China and destination country, and the rule of law measure in the destination country.
Column (3) shows the results only for the subset of manufacturing sector. Column (4) through (6) replicate results in columns (1)
to (3) but add fund fixed effects. All columns include year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the SIC 3-digit sector-year
level. The superscripts *, **, and *** indicate that a coefficient is statistically significant at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent
level, respectively.

                                 (1)                (2)                (3)                  (4)             (5)             (6)
 Sector:                         All                All                Manufacturing        All             All             Manufacturing


 Developed                       -0.240***          -0.305***          -0.294***            -0.245***       -0.232***       -0.242***
                                 (0.017)            (0.055)            (0.088)              (0.019)         (0.054)         (0.085)
 High-tech                       -0.059             -0.101**           -0.235***            -0.022          -0.083**        -0.184***
                                 (0.046)            (0.044)            (0.045)              (0.043)         (0.041)         (0.041)
 Developed X High-tech           0.106**            0.143***           0.246***             0.077*          0.134***        0.203***
                                 (0.052)            (0.051)            (0.049)              (0.046)         (0.046)         (0.042)
 Distance                                           -0.004             -0.006                               0.030***        0.022
                                                    (0.006)            (0.008)                              (0.010)         (0.019)
 Correlation in returns                             -0.449***          -0.425***                            -0.422***       -0.412***
                                                    (0.052)            (0.052)                              (0.050)         (0.051)
 Return volatility ratio                            0.210***           0.231***                             0.107**         0.144**
                                                    (0.052)            (0.062)                              (0.054)         (0.064)
 Rule of law                                        0.102***           0.118***                             0.053*          0.092**
                                                    (0.030)            (0.043)                              (0.030)         (0.044)


 Observations                    9,874              8,996              3,557                9,862           8,984           3,538
 Adjusted R-squared              0.0484             0.0998             0.0827               0.207           0.269           0.267
 Year FE                         Yes                Yes                Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes
 Fund FE                         No                 No                 No                   Yes             Yes             Yes
 Country Controls                No                 Yes                Yes                  No              Yes             Yes
                                                 45

Table 5: Foreign Excess Investment: The Role of Revealed Comparative Disadvantage

                         (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)
Controls                 home       foreign     all         all         all         all         all


RCD, China               4.135***   3.539***    4.466***
                         (0.897)    (0.821)     (0.871)
RCD 2008, China                                             3.459***
                                                            (0.824)
Top 5 RCD Sectors                                                       9.065***
                                                                        (2.433)
Top Decile RCD Sectors                                                              9.772***
                                                                                    (2.592)
!"#$% X RCD, China                                                                              2.911
                                                                                                (2.566)
!&#$% X RCD, China                                                                              5.240***
                                                                                                (1.495)
Size, home               2.102***               3.739***    3.296***    3.753***    3.650***    3.370***
                         (0.586)                (0.637)     (0.629)     (0.650)     (0.646)     (0.633)
ROE, home                -0.099                 -0.098      -0.106      -0.131**    -0.127*     -0.088
                         (0.070)                (0.067)     (0.068)     (0.067)     (0.067)     (0.068)
PB Ratio, home           -0.118                 -0.064      0.098       -0.097      -0.032      -0.384
                         (0.279)                (0.260)     (0.242)     (0.282)     (0.277)     (0.269)
Leverage, home           -0.088                 -0.132      -0.065      -0.065      -0.041      -0.211***
                         (0.086)                (0.082)     (0.085)     (0.085)     (0.084)     (0.080)
Returns, home            -0.003                 -0.015      -0.006      -0.006      -0.008      -0.013
                         (0.019)                (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.018)     (0.017)
Size, foreign                       -2.042***   -3.066***   -2.950***   -2.994***   -2.980***   -2.904***
                                    (0.402)     (0.445)     (0.446)     (0.453)     (0.450)     (0.451)
ROE, foreign                        -0.056**    -0.016      -0.020      -0.025      -0.024      -0.025
                                    (0.024)     (0.020)     (0.022)     (0.021)     (0.021)     (0.020)
PB Ratio, foreign                   0.101       0.099       0.090       0.113*      0.111*      0.054
                                    (0.067)     (0.060)     (0.060)     (0.058)     (0.059)     (0.059)
Leverage, foreign                   -0.080      -0.012      0.001       -0.015      -0.008      -0.019
                                    (0.057)     (0.054)     (0.052)     (0.054)     (0.053)     (0.055)
Returns, foreign                    -0.001*     -0.001***   -0.001***   -0.002***   -0.002***   -0.001***
                                    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
Correlation in returns              -3.565*     -5.468***   -5.577***   -4.990**    -5.164**    -7.673***
                                    (2.028)     (2.032)     (2.004)     (2.051)     (2.066)     (2.163)


Observations             5,022      5,009       5,009       5,009       5,009       5,009       4,771
Fund & Year FE           Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Adjusted R-squared       0.0663     0.0807      0.101       0.0949      0.0904      0.0918      0.103
                                              46

Table 6: Foreign Excess Investment and Returns

                         (1)       (2)         (3)              (4)        (5)           (6)
Dep. Variable: Risk-                                 Risk adjusted using
adjusted return
                         Sample Standard Deviation             Yearly Price Volatility

RCD, China               -0.0122   -0.0113                     0.0075      0.0212
                         (0.008)   (0.008)                     (0.035)     (0.036)
RCA                                          -0.0037***                                  -0.0098
                                             (0.001)                                     (0.006)
Size, foreign                      -0.0014   -0.0012                       0.0197**      -0.0113
                                   (0.003)   (0.005)                       (0.009)       (0.018)
ROE, foreign                       0.0000*** 0.0000                        0.0000        0.0002
                                   (0.000)   (0.000)                       (0.000)       (0.000)
PB Ratio, foreign                  0.0011    0.0002                        0.0032        0.0010
                                   (0.001)   (0.001)                       (0.002)       (0.002)
Leverage, foreign                  -0.0000   -0.0000                       -0.0000       -0.0000
                                   (0.000)   (0.000)                       (0.000)       (0.000)
Correlation in returns             -0.0125   0.0170                        -0.0941       0.1484
                                   (0.033)   (0.049)                       (0.219)       (0.296)

Observations             16,643    15,417      7,487           15,999      15,003        7,294
Fund FE                  Yes       Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes
Year FE                  Yes       Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes
Sample                   All       All         High RCD        All         All           High RCD
                                               Sectors                                   Sectors
Adjusted R-squared       0.0464    0.0481      0.0644          0.0262      0.0258        0.0300
                                         47

Table 7: Domestic Excess Investment in China and Revealed Comparative Advantage


                       (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)
Dependent Variable:                     Excess investment in China

RCA, China             0.452***       0.289***
                       (0.112)        (0.090)
RCD, China                                            0.166          0.198
                                                      (0.115)        (0.123)
Size, home                            -0.503***                      -0.576***
                                      (0.161)                        (0.174)
ROE, home                             0.002                          0.003
                                      (0.012)                        (0.012)
PB Ratio, home                        0.120**                        0.111**
                                      (0.050)                        (0.045)
Leverage, home                        0.003                          -0.000
                                      (0.003)                        (0.002)
Returns, home                         0.015***                       0.015***
                                      (0.004)                        (0.004)

Observations           13,139         13,139          13,289         13,289
Fund FE                Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
Year FE                Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
Adjusted R-squared     0.0214         0.0844          0.000842       0.0776
                                                 48

Table 8: Foreign Sectoral Allocations and Revealed Comparative Advantage

                         (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
Controls                 home        foreign     all         all         all         all


RCA, China               -1.678***   -2.788***   -2.353***
                         (0.550)     (0.511)     (0.564)
RCA 2008, China                                              -2.122***
                                                             (0.507)
Top 5 RCA Sectors                                                        -2.804*
                                                                         (1.556)
Top Decile RCA                                                                       -5.919***
Sectors
                                                                                     (1.586)
Size, home               1.311**                 2.464***    2.258***    3.255***    3.046***
                         (0.649)                 (0.716)     (0.718)     (0.671)     (0.678)
ROE, home                -0.147**                -0.144**    -0.143**    -0.140**    -0.118*
                         (0.071)                 (0.068)     (0.069)     (0.068)     (0.068)
PB Ratio, home           -0.016                  0.085       0.053       0.303       0.257
                         (0.292)                 (0.276)     (0.278)     (0.259)     (0.259)
Leverage, home           -0.032                  -0.030      -0.026      -0.009      -0.023
                         (0.083)                 (0.086)     (0.089)     (0.087)     (0.088)
Returns, home            0.025                   0.020       0.019       0.010       0.012
                         (0.020)                 (0.018)     (0.019)     (0.018)     (0.018)
Size, foreign                        -2.017***   -2.554***   -2.398***   -2.821***   -2.797***
                                     (0.412)     (0.475)     (0.489)     (0.470)     (0.471)
ROE, foreign                         -0.064***   -0.041*     -0.043*     -0.036      -0.036
                                     (0.024)     (0.023)     (0.024)     (0.023)     (0.024)
PB Ratio, foreign                    0.051       0.064       0.062       0.101*      0.108*
                                     (0.065)     (0.060)     (0.061)     (0.060)     (0.059)
Leverage, foreign                    -0.119*     -0.073      -0.091      -0.043      -0.044
                                     (0.062)     (0.062)     (0.066)     (0.058)     (0.058)
Returns, foreign                     -0.002***   -0.002***   -0.002***   -0.002***   -0.002***
                                     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
Correlation in returns               -6.366***   -7.355***   -7.791***   -5.680***   -5.721***
                                     (2.046)     (2.043)     (2.096)     (2.046)     (2.036)
Observations             4,863       4,851       4,851       4,756       5,009       5,009
Fund & Year FE           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Adjusted R-squared       0.0513      0.0752      0.0836      0.0828      0.0802      0.0818
                                         49

Table 9: Correlation in Sector Returns and Revealed Comparative Advantage

                                     (1)                        (2)
Dependent Variable                      Correlation in Sector
                                              Returns

HRCD                                 0.028***                   0.037***
                                     (0.002)                    (0.003)
HRCD * HRCA                          -0.019***                  -0.031***
                                     (0.002)                    (0.005)
HRCA                                 0.014***                   0.015***
                                     (0.001)                    (0.002)

Observations                         68,354                     14,240
home sector FE                       Yes                        Yes
Sample                               All                        Only high RCA sectors at
                                                                home
Adjusted R-squared                   0.105                      0.0743
                                               50

Table 10: Information Advantage and Foreign Excess Investment

                             (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)
Dependent Variable                                    Excess investment

Market Cap Share, China     -0.189                                -0.243
                           (0.175)                               (0.167)
FDI share, China                       -0.133                                -0.116
                                       (0.086)                               (0.078)
RCA, China                                          -2.511***                           -2.353***
                                                      (0.579)                             (0.564)
Size, home                3.922***    3.165***      2.294***     4.205***    2.864**    2.464***
                            (0.868)     (1.187)       (0.722)     (0.834)     (1.140)     (0.716)
ROE, home                   -0.123*    -0.236*       -0.137**     -0.127*    -0.231*     -0.144**
                            (0.069)     (0.129)       (0.069)     (0.067)     (0.128)     (0.068)
PB Ratio, home               0.274       0.201         0.012       0.351       0.283        0.085
                            (0.256)     (0.347)       (0.272)     (0.257)     (0.339)     (0.276)
Leverage, home               0.041      -0.057        -0.016       0.016       0.009       -0.030
                            (0.090)     (0.151)       (0.089)     (0.087)     (0.142)     (0.086)
Returns, home                0.001       0.049         0.019       0.000       0.046        0.020
                            (0.019)     (0.034)       (0.019)     (0.018)     (0.032)     (0.018)
Size, foreign             -2.498***   -2.768***     -2.343***   -2.733***   -3.170***   -2.554***
                            (0.453)     (0.559)       (0.455)     (0.470)     (0.569)     (0.475)
ROE, foreign                 -0.042     -0.000       -0.049**      -0.034      0.001      -0.041*
                            (0.026)     (0.024)       (0.024)     (0.024)     (0.022)     (0.023)
PB Ratio, foreign           0.104*    0.527***         0.042     0.122**    0.488***        0.064
                            (0.060)     (0.197)       (0.061)     (0.059)     (0.183)     (0.060)
Leverage, foreign            -0.046      0.059        -0.089       -0.033      0.036       -0.073
                            (0.056)     (0.082)       (0.063)     (0.055)     (0.086)     (0.062)
Returns, foreign          -0.001***    -0.001*      -0.002***   -0.002***   -0.001***   -0.002***
                            (0.000)     (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
Correlation in returns     -4.858**     -3.124      -6.821***   -5.423***     -3.098    -7.355***
                            (2.132)     (2.958)       (2.158)     (2.021)     (2.772)     (2.043)

Observations               5,012       2,522         4,854       5,009       2,520       4,851
Fund FE                      No          No            No         Yes         Yes         Yes
Year FE                     Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Adjusted R-squared         0.0357      0.0349        0.0405      0.0796      0.0903      0.0836
                                             51

Table 11: Learning Motive and Foreign Investment

                                                    (1)            (2)         (3)
Dependent Variable                                               Growth in R&D

Foreign Excess Investment                           0.0002*        0.0002*      -0.0000
                                                    (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)
Top Decile RCD Sector                                                           -0.2179**
                                                                                (0.094)
Top Decile RCD Sector X Foreign Excess Investment                               -0.0002
                                                                                (0.000)
FDI Share, China                                    0.0347*        0.0374*      -0.0500
                                                    (0.019)        (0.019)      (0.038)
Size, home                                          -0.0453        -0.0446      0.0268
                                                    (0.033)        (0.032)      (0.043)
ROE, home                                           0.0017         0.0025       -0.0003
                                                    (0.003)        (0.003)      (0.004)
Leverage, home                                      0.0014         0.0017       0.0203**
                                                    (0.003)        (0.003)      (0.008)
PB Ratio, home                                      0.0372         0.0415       0.0292
                                                    (0.042)        (0.041)      (0.028)
Returns, home                                       -0.0033***     -0.0034***   -0.0020*
                                                    (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.001)

Observations                                        654            650          516
Fund FE                                             No             Yes          Yes
Year FE                                             Yes            Yes          Yes
Adjusted R-squared                                  0.522          0.524        0.617
                                                                              52

Figure 1: Structure of Gross Outflows

This figure shows the composition of gross outflows of China using balance of payments data from the IMF BOP statistics database. Net errors and omissions are
shown as positive values.
                                                                53

Figure 2. Indicators of Domestic Financial Wealth in China

This figure shows the evolution of bank deposits (top panel) and capitalization of stock and bond markets (bottom
panel) in China, using data from CEIC and PBC. USD equivalent calculated using end of year exchange rate
obtained from FRED. Stock market capitalization is based on Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges. Bonds
issued by financial corporations not included in this figure.


                                                           Bank Deposits
                      25


                      20
   Trillions of USD




                      15


                      10


                      5


                      0
                           2010   2011         2012      2013         2014       2015        2016    2017   2018

                                                 Household Deposits     Corporate Deposits



                                                          Capital Markets
                      18


                      14
   Trillions of USD




                      10


                      6


                      2

                           2010   2011         2012      2013         2014       2015        2016    2017   2018
                      -2

                                         Stock Market    Government Securities     Corporate Bonds
                                                      54

Figure 3. Financial Market Wealth Relative to GDP (in percent)

Data for GDP and capitalization of stock and bond markets is from the PBC and CEIC. Stock market capitalization
is based on Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges. Bonds issued by financial corporations not included in this
figure.

 90%

 80%

 70%

 60%

 50%

 40%

 30%

 20%

 10%

  0%
          2010        2011         2012      2013        2014           2015     2016        2017      2018

                             Stock Market       Government Securities          Corporate Bonds
                                                        55

Figure 4: Outward Equity Investment of China: 2017 (CPIS Sample)

This figure plots the share of each destination country in China's foreign equity investment in 2017 based on CPIS
data. Only the top 20 destination countries are displayed.
                                                         56

Figure 5: Outward Direct Investment of China
The top and bottom panel of this figure show the share of each of the top 20 destination countries in outward direct
investment of China in 2009 and 2017, respectively. Data on outward direct investment is from the CDIS dataset.
Outward direct investment data for China is available 2009 onwards in the CDIS dataset.
                                                                               57

Figure 6: Outward Direct Investment in Major Destination Countries Over Time

This figure shows the evolution of shares of major destination countries in China's outward direct investment using CDIS database.
                                                          58

Figure 7: Portfolio Allocations of Chinese Institutional Investors by Country
This figure shows the share of each of top 20 destination countries in Chinese institutional investors' international
equity investment over the period 2008-2017 using the Factset database. We aggregate Chinese funds' equity
holdings of firms domiciled in each destination country over the entire sample period and divide the sum by the
aggregate holdings of Chinese funds' in all destination countries over the sample period.
                                                            59

Figure 8: Excess Investment of Chinese Institutional Investors by Destination Country

This figure shows the average excess investment of Chinese institutional investors by destination country over the
period 2008-2017 using the Factset database. We first compute the excess investment in a given country in a given
year as the share of total investment in a country in total international portfolio allocation of an institutional investor
relative to the share of that country in the world stock market capitalization. Then we compute a simple average of
excess investment for each country across all years in the sample. The figure displays excess investment for only the
top 10 overweighted and underweighted destination countries.
                                                         60

Figure 9: Sectoral Portfolio Allocation of Chinese IIs in 2008

This figure shows the sectoral distribution of Chinese institutional investors' equity holdings and market cap in 2008
using the Factset database and the Worldscope database respectively. The top panel is for developed countries and
the bottom panel is for emerging markets. Each sector is defined on the basis of two digit SIC codes: SIC codes in
the range 01-09 correspond to the agriculture sector, range 10-14 corresponds to the mining sector, range 15-19 is
for the construction sector, 20-39 corresponds to the manufacturing sector, 40-49 is for transport and
communications sector, 50-59 is for trade and retail services, 60-67 is for finance and real estate, 70-89 is for
services, and 90-99 is for public administration services.
                                                       61

                 Online Appendix: China's Impact on Global Financial Markets

                           Isha Agarwal, Grace Weishi Gu, and Eswar Prasad

Appendix A: Data Description

Table A1: List of Destination Countries in Lionshares Data

This table lists the countries that appear in Lionshares data as destination countries for Chinese institutional
investors. Country classification into developed or emerging market is based on IMF's country classification
(WEO 2018).

 Argentina                          Emerging                Luxembourg                     Developed
 Australia                          Developed               Malaysia                       Emerging
 Austria                            Developed               Mexico                         Emerging
 Belgium                            Developed               Netherlands                    Developed
 Bermuda                            Emerging                New Zealand                    Developed
 Brazil                             Emerging                Norway                         Developed
 Canada                             Developed               Pakistan                       Emerging
 Cayman Islands                     Developed               Peru                           Emerging
 Chile                              Emerging                Philippines                    Emerging
 Colombia                           Emerging                Poland                         Developed
 Cyprus                             Developed               Portugal                       Developed
 France                             Developed               Russian Federation             Emerging
 Germany                            Developed               Singapore                      Developed
 Hong Kong                          Developed               South Africa                   Emerging
 India                              Emerging                Spain                          Developed
 Indonesia                          Emerging                Switzerland                    Developed
 Ireland                            Developed               Thailand                       Emerging
 Israel                             Developed               Turkey                         Emerging
 Italy                              Developed               United Arab Emirates           Emerging
 Japan                              Developed               United Kingdom                 Developed
 Korea (South)                      Developed               United States                  Developed
                                                         62

Table A2: Coverage of Factset data for China

This table reports the number of institutional investors in China by year. It also lists the top 5 institutional
investors each year by total value of foreign equity holding and their total assets under management.

 year            count Top 5 institutional investors                                               Assets Under
                                                                                                   Management
                                                                                                   (USD Billion)
 2001            1         China Asset Management Co., Ltd.                                        0.00
 2002            1         China Asset Management Co., Ltd.                                        0.00
 2003            2         Open Door Investment Management Ltd. (China)                            0.03
                           China Asset Management Co., Ltd.                                        0.00
 2004            1         China Asset Management Co., Ltd.                                        0.00
 2005            3         Open Door Investment Management Ltd. (China)                            0.17
                           China Asset Management Co., Ltd.                                        0.00
                           MC China Ltd. (Investment Management)                                   0.04
 2006            2         Open Door Investment Management Ltd. (China)                            0.16
                           China Asset Management Co., Ltd.                                        0.01

 2007            1         China Asset Management Co., Ltd.                                        0.09
 2008            54        China Asset Management Co., Ltd.                                        15.53
                           China International Fund Management Co., Ltd.                           5.60
                           E Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                             9.64
                           Open Door Investment Management Ltd. (China)                            0.47
                           HuaAn Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                         5.95

 2009            58        China International Fund Management Co., Ltd.                           8.39
                           China Southern Asset Management Co., Ltd.                               14.17
                           China Asset Management Co., Ltd.                                        29.36
                           Invesco Great Wall Fund Management Co. Ltd. (Invt                       9.19
                           Mgmt)                                                                   18.67
                           Bosera Asset Management Co., Ltd.
 2010            61        China Asset Management Co., Ltd.                                        21.55
                           China International Fund Management Co., Ltd.                           5.88
                           Bosera Asset Management Co., Ltd.                                       13.89
                           China Southern Asset Management Co., Ltd.                               7.37
                           E Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                             18.39

 2011            61        China Asset Management Co., Ltd.                                        18.85
                           E Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                             14.45
                           HuaAn Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                         9.33
                           GF Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                            9.57
                           Open Door Investment Management Ltd. (China)                            0.20
                                    63

2012   40    China Asset Management Co., Ltd.                9.77
             Open Door Investment Management Ltd. (China)    0.45
             Harvest Fund Management Co., Ltd.               7.51
             ICBC Credit Suisse Asset Management Co., Ltd.   0.52
             Da Cheng Fund Management Co., Ltd.              0.40

2013   62    China International Fund Management Co., Ltd.   1.55
             China Southern Asset Management Co., Ltd.       1.21
             Open Door Investment Management Ltd. (China)    0.40
             China Asset Management Co., Ltd.                14.04
             CITIC-Prudential Fund Management Co., Ltd.      1.22

2014   74    China International Fund Management Co., Ltd.   6.16
             China Southern Asset Management Co., Ltd.       8.89
             GF Fund Management Co., Ltd.                    7.59
             Bosera Asset Management Co., Ltd.               11.80
             Open Door Investment Management Ltd. (China)    0.30

2015   87    China Asset Management Co., Ltd.                22.94
             China International Fund Management Co., Ltd.   5.89
             Hwabao WP Fund Management Co., Ltd.             4.77
             China Southern Asset Management Co., Ltd.       10.13
             HuaAn Fund Management Co., Ltd.                 8.18

2016   95    China Asset Management Co., Ltd.                24.34
             China International Fund Management Co., Ltd.   5.33
             Hwabao WP Fund Management Co., Ltd.             4.93
             Fullgoal Fund Management Co., Ltd.              17.82
             GF Fund Management Co., Ltd.                    8.36

2017   103   China Asset Management Co., Ltd.                28.03
             China International Fund Management Co., Ltd.   7.18
             Harvest Fund Management Co., Ltd.               21.60
             Hwabao WP Fund Management Co., Ltd.             4.97
             GF Fund Management Co., Ltd.                    11.23
                                                           64

Table A3: List of Funds in the Factset Database with Positive Foreign Investment

This table lists the funds in the Factset database that have positive foreign investment at least one year in the sample.
The second column indicates whether the fund is a Sino-foreign joint venture fund management company and the
third column reports the capital of each fund in RMB billions. Funds with missing capital are the ones that were not
on the CSRC fund management company list for 2017.

                                                                           Sino-foreign Joint              Capital (RMB
 Fund                                                                      Venture (1 = Yes)               Billion)
 AXA-SPDB Investment Managers Co., Ltd.                                                  1                          191.0
 China Merchants Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                               0                          131.0
 Fullgoal Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                                      1                           52.0
 Hang Seng Qianhai Fund Management Co. Ltd.                                              0                           50.0
 China Southern Asset Management Co., Ltd.                                               0                           30.0
 Ping An UOB Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                                   1                           30.0
 Bosera Asset Management Co., Ltd.                                                       0                           25.0
 China International Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                           1                           25.0
 Harfor Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                                        0                           25.0
 China Asset Management Co., Ltd.                                                        1                           23.8
 Yinhua Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                                        0                           22.2
 Franklin Templeton Sealand Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                    1                           22.0
 Bank of Communications Schroder Fund Management Co.,
 Ltd.                                                                                    1                          20.0
 CCB Principal Asset Management Co., Ltd.                                                1                          20.0
 CITIC-Prudential Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                              1                          20.0
 Da Cheng Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                                      0                          20.0
 First Seafront Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                                0                          20.0
 HSBC Jintrust Management Co., Ltd.                                                      1                          20.0
 Huatai-PineBridge Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                             1                          20.0
 ICBC Credit Suisse Asset Management Co., Ltd.                                           1                          20.0
 Changsheng Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                                    1                          18.9
 Manulife TEDA Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                                 1                          18.0
 Chang Xin Asset Management Co., Ltd.                                                    0                          16.5
 AEGON-INDUSTRIAL Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                              1                          15.0
 Harvest Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                                       1                          15.0
 HuaAn Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                                         0                          15.0
 Hwabao WP Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                                     1                          15.0
 Lion Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                                          0                          15.0
 Penghua Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                                       1                          15.0
 Zhonghai Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                                      1                          14.7
 China Universal Asset Management Co., Ltd.                                              0                          13.3
 Invesco Great Wall Fund Management Co. Ltd. (Invt Mgmt)                                 1                          13.0
 GF Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                                            0                          12.7
 Rongtong Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                                      1                          12.5
 E Fund Management Co., Ltd.                                                             0                          12.0
                                                65


Guotai Asset Management Co., Ltd.                    1   11.0
Bank of China Investment Management Co., Ltd.        1   10.0
Baoying Fund Management Co., Ltd.                    0   10.0
UBS SDIC Fund Management Co., Ltd.                   1   10.0
HFT Investment Management Co., Ltd.                  1
Orient Securities Asset Management Co. Ltd.
Zhong Ou Asset Management Co., Ltd
                                                        66

Table A4: Variable Definitions and Data Sources

This table gives a description of variables used in the analysis and their sources.

 Variable Name                Description                                             Source
 Benchmark Investment Ratio   Market capitalization of destination                    World Bank
                              country j scaled by world market
                              capitalization excluding China
 Lionshares Excess Investment Portfolio investment from institution                   FactSet LionShares,
 Allocation                   i to country j ] / [Portfolio investment                World Bank
                              from institution i to all countries] -
                              Benchmark Investment Ratio
 Trade                        [Sum of exports and imports between                     IMF Direction of
                              China and country j in the past five                    Trade Statistics
                              years] / [Sum of total exports and
                              imports of China in the past 5 years]
 Distance                     Log of population weighted distance                     Tamara Gurevich and
                              between China and destination                           Peter Herman, (2018)
                              country
 Common Language              Dummy equals 1 if residents of                          Tamara Gurevich and
                              China and destination country speak                     Peter Herman, (2018)
                              at least one common language
 Contiguity                   Dummy equals 1 if China and                             Tamara Gurevich and
                              destination country share a common                      Peter Herman, (2018)
                              border
 GDP Per Capita               Log of GDP Per Capita                                   World Development
                                                                                      Indicator
 Number of Firms                        Number of listed firms per 1,000,000          World Development
                                        people                                        Indicator
 Equity Market Turnover                 Ratio of the value of total shares            World Development
                                        traded to average real market                 Indicator
                                        capitalization
 Stock Price Volatility                 Stock price volatility is the average         World Development
                                        of the 360-day volatility of the              Indicator
                                        national stock market index.
 Stock Market Returns                   Stock market return is the growth             World Development
                                        rate of annual average stock market           Indicator
                                        index. Annual average stock market
                                        index is constructed by taking the
                                        average of the daily stock market
                                        indexes available at Bloomberg.
 Rule of Law                            Rule of Law captures perceptions of           World Development
                                        the extent to which agents have               Indicator
                                        confidence in and abide by the rules
                                        of society, and in particular the
                                        quality of contract enforcement,
                                        67

                           property rights, the police, and the
                           courts, as well as the likelihood of
                           crime and violence. Estimate gives
                           the country's score on the aggregate
                           indicator, in units of a standard
                           normal distribution, i.e. ranging from
                           approximately -2.5 to 2.5.
Government Effectiveness   Government Effectiveness captures        World Development
                           perceptions of the quality of public     Indicator
                           services, the quality of the civil
                           service and the degree of its
                           independence from political
                           pressures, the quality of policy
                           formulation and implementation, and
                           the credibility of the government's
                           commitment to such policies.
                           Estimate gives the country's score on
                           the aggregate indicator, in units of a
                           standard normal distribution, i.e.
                           ranging from approximately -2.5 to
                           2.5.
Regulatory Quality         Regulatory Quality captures              World Development
                           perceptions of the ability of the        Indicator
                           government to formulate and
                           implement sound policies and
                           regulations that permit and promote
                           private sector development. Estimate
                           gives the country's score on the
                           aggregate indicator, in units of a
                           standard normal distribution, i.e.
                           ranging from approximately -2.5 to
                           2.5.
Revealed Comparative       RCA is measured as a given sector's      WTO Data Portal for
Advantage                  export share out of total exports by a   service trade data, the
                           country being divided by that            BACI International
                           sector's export share out of total       Trade Database and
                           exports in the world. It captures the    the United Nations
                           excess exports in a given sector by a    Statistical Division
                           country relative to world exports in     (COMTRADE) for
                           that sector and implies the extent to    goods trade data
                           which a country is better at
                           producing goods/services in a given
                           sector relative to other countries.
Revealed Comparative        RCD is measured as a given sector's     WTO Data Portal for
Disadvantage               import share out of total imports by a   service trade data, the
                           country being divided by that            BACI International
                           sector's import share out of total       Trade Database and
             68

imports in the world. It captures the   the United Nations
excess imports in a given sector by a   Statistical Division
country relative to world imports in    (COMTRADE) for
that sector and implies the extent to   goods trade data
which a country is worse at
producing goods/services in a given
sector relative to other countries.
                                                                  69

Appendix B: Cross-country and Cross-sector Analyses

Table B1: Robustness: Excluding the 2008-10 Period

This table reports country-level regression results excluding the 2008-2010 period. The dependent variable and all control
variables are as described in Table 3. The superscripts *, **, and *** indicate that a coefficient is statistically significant at the 10
percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent level, respectively.


                                               (1)            (2)                (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
                                                             Market
 Controls:                                  Gravity          Depth            Returns        Governance           Trade             All

 Common language                           0.111***                                                                               -0.015
                                             (0.030)                                                                              (0.028)
 Distance                                  -0.044***                                                                             -0.033**
                                             (0.013)                                                                              (0.013)
 Contiguity                                0.198***                                                                             0.166***
                                             (0.050)                                                                              (0.030)
 GDP per capita                                             -0.065***                                                             -0.019
                                                              (0.022)                                                             (0.022)
 Number of firms                                            0.075***                                                            0.019***
                                                              (0.023)                                                             (0.006)
 Market Turnover                                              -0.000                                                              -0.003
                                                              (0.005)                                                             (0.004)
 Difference in returns                                                       -3.693**                                             -0.354
                                                                              (1.608)                                             (0.680)
 Correlation in returns                                                      0.293**                                               0.066
                                                                              (0.120)                                             (0.044)
 Return volatility ratio                                                     0.217**                                               0.004
                                                                              (0.106)                                             (0.047)
 Rule of Law                                                                                  -0.255***                           -0.060
                                                                                                (0.093)                           (0.041)
 Govt Effectiveness                                                                             -0.064                          -0.164***
                                                                                                (0.061)                           (0.046)
 Regulatory Burden                                                                            0.374***                          0.238***
                                                                                                (0.109)                           (0.045)
 Trade                                                                                                           1.315*          0.468**
                                                                                                                 (0.772)          (0.203)

 Observations                                 962              590              891              924               967              588
 Year FE                                      Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes
 Adjusted R-squared                          0.317            0.140            0.121            0.154            0.0531            0.308
                                                                70

Table B2: Robustness: Using a Restricted Sample with Non-missing Values for All
Variables

This table reports country-level regression results based on a restricted sample that includes only non-missing observation for all
variables. The dependent variable and all control variables are as described in Table 3. The superscripts *, **, and *** indicate
that a coefficient is statistically significant at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent level, respectively.


                                             (1)            (2)               (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)
                                                           Market
 Controls:                                Gravity          Depth           Returns       Governance           Trade            All

 Common language                         0.121***                                                                              0.018
                                           (0.029)                                                                           (0.025)
 Distance                                -0.038***                                                                         -0.039***
                                           (0.012)                                                                           (0.011)
 Contiguity                              0.206***                                                                          0.185***
                                           (0.042)                                                                           (0.029)
 GDP per capita                                          -0.076***                                                            -0.017
                                                           (0.019)                                                           (0.022)
 Number of firms                                          0.085***                                                           0.015**
                                                           (0.019)                                                           (0.006)
 Market Turnover                                           -0.003                                                             -0.005
                                                           (0.005)                                                           (0.004)
 Difference in returns                                                      0.249                                              0.807
                                                                           (1.064)                                           (0.643)
 Correlation in returns                                                   0.359***                                             0.054
                                                                           (0.102)                                           (0.037)
 Return volatility ratio                                                  0.276***                                             0.012
                                                                           (0.096)                                           (0.045)
 Rule of Law                                                                              -0.253***                         -0.072**
                                                                                            (0.072)                          (0.035)
 Govt Effectiveness                                                                         -0.076                         -0.129***
                                                                                            (0.058)                          (0.040)
 Regulatory Burden                                                                        0.398***                         0.230***
                                                                                            (0.095)                          (0.034)
 Trade                                                                                                      1.299**           0.399*
                                                                                                            (0.610)          (0.220)

 Observations                                789             789              789             789              789             789
 Year FE                                     Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
 Adjusted R-squared                         0.337           0.174            0.120           0.162           0.0515           0.376
                                                                 71

Table B3: Robustness: Using Raw Portfolio Allocations

This table shows results for country-level regressions using raw portfolio allocations as the dependent variable. The dependent
variable is the share of a given destination country in China's portfolio investment in a given year. All control variables are as
described in table 3. Column (7) is for the sub-sample excluding the U.S. The superscripts *, **, and *** indicate that a
coefficient is statistically significant at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent level, respectively.


                                 (1)            (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)                (7)
                                               Market
 Controls:                    Gravity          Depth           Returns        Governance          Trade             All                All

 Common language             0.093***                                                                             0.012            0.006
                              (0.030)                                                                            (0.027)          (0.024)
 Distance                     -0.012                                                                            0.050***          -0.003
                              (0.017)                                                                            (0.016)          (0.015)
 Contiguity                  0.164***                                                                           0.194***         0.196***
                              (0.052)                                                                            (0.032)          (0.027)
 GDP per capita                                 0.008                                                            -0.012           -0.031
                                               (0.034)                                                           (0.022)          (0.020)
 Number of firms                               0.057**                                                          0.020***         0.016***
                                               (0.023)                                                           (0.007)          (0.006)
 Market Turnover                              0.042***                                                          -0.008**          -0.005
                                               (0.013)                                                           (0.004)          (0.003)
 Difference in
 returns                                                        -1.553                                             0.864              0.448
                                                                (1.287)                                           (0.659)            (0.562)
 Correlation in
 returns                                                      0.426***                                             0.066             0.069**
                                                               (0.107)                                            (0.041)            (0.033)
 Return volatility
 ratio                                                           0.097                                            -0.067           -0.000
                                                                (0.098)                                          (0.048)           (0.040)
 Rule of Law                                                                     -0.038                         -0.088**         -0.088***
                                                                                (0.078)                          (0.036)           (0.032)
 Govt Effectiveness                                                              -0.076                          -0.081*          -0.082**
                                                                                (0.056)                          (0.043)           (0.035)
 Regulatory Burden                                                              0.189**                         0.180***         0.216***
                                                                                (0.084)                          (0.033)           (0.033)
 Trade                                                                                          3.534***        3.174***         1.675***
                                                                                                 (0.403)         (0.359)           (0.398)

 Observations                  1,416             814             1,187           1,347            1,373             807            731
 Year FE                        Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes
                                                                                                                                Excluding
 Sample                         All              All              All              All             All              All            US
 Adjusted R-squared            0.169            0.140            0.139           0.0735           0.351            0.457          0.504
                                                               72

Table B4: Robustness: Excess Investment based on EM investment benchmark

This table shows regression for country-level regressions in section 5.2. The dependent variable, excess investment, is computed
relative to a benchmark based on foreign investment of other emerging markets as defined in section 5.2. All control variables are
as described in table 3. Column (7) is for the sub-sample excluding the U.S. The superscripts *, **, and *** indicate that a
coefficient is statistically significant at the 10 percent, 5 percent, and 1 percent level, respectively.

                             (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)                 (5)            (6)
 Controls                    Gravity         Market           Returns          Governance          Trade          All
                                             Depth

 Common language             0.111***                                                                             0.051*
                             (0.026)                                                                              (0.028)
 Distance                    -0.035***                                                                            0.031**
                             (0.013)                                                                              (0.014)
 Contiguity                  0.164***                                                                             0.199***
                             (0.050)                                                                              (0.030)
 GDP per capita                              -0.053**                                                             -0.042*
                                             (0.026)                                                              (0.025)
 Number of firms                             0.076***                                                             0.017**
                                             (0.022)                                                              (0.007)
 Market Turnover                             0.058***                                                             0.024**
                                             (0.013)                                                              (0.012)
 Difference in                                                -1.512                                              0.807
 returns
                                                              (1.349)                                             (0.830)
 Correlation in                                               0.408***                                            0.057
 returns
                                                              (0.109)                                             (0.045)
 Return volatility                                            0.182*                                              -0.010
 ratio
                                                              (0.094)                                             (0.049)
 Rule of Law                                                                   -0.160**                           -0.171***
                                                                               (0.077)                            (0.040)
 Govt Effectiveness                                                            0.027                              0.006
                                                                               (0.054)                            (0.047)
 Regulatory Burden                                                             0.201**                            0.194***
                                                                               (0.088)                            (0.041)
 Trade                                                                                             3.142***       2.386***
                                                                                                   (0.553)        (0.326)

 Observations                1,410           814              1,187            1,341               1,369          807
 Year FE                     Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes                 Yes            Yes
 Adjusted R-squared          0.241           0.181            0.138            0.0661              0.263          0.445
                                                 73

Table B5: Robustness: Excess Investment at the Sector-level using EM benchmark

                          (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)
 Controls                 home       foreign     all         all         all         all         all


 RCD, China               2.373***   1.350*      2.549***
                          (0.858)    (0.769)     (0.800)
 RCD 2008, China                                             1.945***
                                                             (0.747)
 Top 5 RCD Sectors                                                       5.001**
                                                                         (2.092)
 Top Decile RCD Sectors                                                              5.390**
                                                                                     (2.181)
 !"#$% X RCD, China                                                                              1.872
                                                                                                 (1.485)
 !&#$% X RCD, China                                                                              3.022***
                                                                                                 (0.770)
 Size, home               2.775***               4.133***    3.831***    4.067***    4.002***    4.342***
                          (0.655)                (0.693)     (0.666)     (0.696)     (0.686)     (0.696)
 ROE, home                -0.083                 -0.079      -0.081      -0.095      -0.093      -0.094
                          (0.064)                (0.064)     (0.065)     (0.064)     (0.065)     (0.068)
 PB Ratio, home           -0.092                 -0.017      0.066       -0.041      -0.006      -0.019
                          (0.277)                (0.266)     (0.262)     (0.273)     (0.271)     (0.284)
 Leverage, home           -0.054                 -0.052      0.005       -0.006      0.008       -0.159*
                          (0.097)                (0.095)     (0.093)     (0.094)     (0.093)     (0.092)
 Returns, home            -0.039*                -0.050**    -0.051***   -0.044**    -0.046**    -0.048**
                          (0.021)                (0.020)     (0.020)     (0.020)     (0.020)     (0.020)
 Size, foreign                       -1.482***   -2.612***   -2.545***   -2.565***   -2.556***   -2.489***
                                     (0.459)     (0.493)     (0.493)     (0.494)     (0.492)     (0.481)
 ROE, foreign                        -0.071**    -0.027      -0.030      -0.033      -0.032      -0.029
                                     (0.032)     (0.026)     (0.027)     (0.027)     (0.026)     (0.026)
 PB Ratio, foreign                   0.098       0.097*      0.092       0.105*      0.103*      0.093
                                     (0.064)     (0.058)     (0.057)     (0.057)     (0.057)     (0.057)
 Leverage, foreign                   -0.085      -0.031      -0.024      -0.033      -0.030      -0.009
                                     (0.063)     (0.060)     (0.058)     (0.060)     (0.059)     (0.057)
 Returns, foreign                    -0.001***   -0.002***   -0.002***   -0.002***   -0.002***   -0.002***
                                     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
 Correlation in returns              -3.019      -5.494***   -5.486***   -5.184**    -5.255**    -6.686***
                                     (2.067)     (2.107)     (2.092)     (2.074)     (2.089)     (2.165)


 Observations             4,653      4,646       4,646       4,646       4,646       4,646       4,447
 Fund & Year FE           Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 Adjusted R-squared       0.0606     0.0606      0.0858      0.0837      0.0821      0.0825      0.0865
                                                  74

Table B6: Determinants of Excess Foreign Investment for Hong Kong Funds

                          (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)
                                      Market
Controls:
                          Gravity     Depth       Returns    Governance   Trade      All

Common language           -0.035***                                                  -0.052***
                          (0.013)                                                    (0.012)
Distance                  -0.054***                                                  -0.074***
                          (0.009)                                                    (0.010)
Contiguity                0.426***                                                   1.349***
                          (0.018)                                                    (0.140)
GDP per capita                        -0.053***                                      -0.005
                                      (0.020)                                        (0.016)
Number of firms                       -0.025*                                        0.016***
                                      (0.014)                                        (0.005)
Market Turnover                       0.021*                                         0.008***
                                      (0.011)                                        (0.002)
Difference in returns                             0.529                              0.055
                                                  (1.321)                            (0.480)
Correlation in returns                            0.034                              0.011
                                                  (0.058)                            (0.021)
Return volatility ratio                           0.259***                           0.021
                                                  (0.066)                            (0.013)
Rule of Law                                                  -0.225***               -0.003
                                                             (0.043)                 (0.019)
Govt Effectiveness                                           0.278***                -0.007
                                                             (0.060)                 (0.021)
Regulatory Burden                                            -0.106**                0.016
                                                             (0.048)                 (0.025)
Trade                                                                     0.976***   -2.013***
                                                                          (0.037)    (0.298)

Observations              2,058       1,629       1,782      1,941        1,975      1,561
Year FE                   Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
Adjusted R-squared        0.497       0.139       0.160      0.237        0.422      0.548
                                         75

Table B7: Robustness: With Both RCA and RCD

                                   (1)          (2)           (3)
          Dependent Variable                  Excess Investment

          RCA, China               -1.088**     -2.425***     -1.718***
                                   (0.538)      (0.487)       (0.533)
          RCD, China               4.411***     3.516***      4.547***
                                   (0.880)      (0.812)       (0.861)
          Size, home               1.480**                    2.847***
                                   (0.619)                    (0.670)
          ROE, home                -0.112                     -0.112*
                                   (0.071)                    (0.067)
          PB Ratio, home           -0.413                     -0.345
                                   (0.272)                    (0.267)
          Leverage, home           -0.170**                   -0.190**
                                   (0.080)                    (0.081)
          Returns, home            -0.002                     -0.008
                                   (0.018)                    (0.017)
          Size, foreign                         -1.969***     -2.774***
                                                (0.396)       (0.446)
          ROE, foreign                          -0.055**      -0.021
                                                (0.022)       (0.020)
          PB Ratio, foreign                     0.043         0.053
                                                (0.066)       (0.062)
          Leverage, foreign                     -0.122**      -0.045
                                                (0.062)       (0.058)
          Returns, foreign                      -0.001***     -0.002***
                                                (0.000)       (0.000)
          Correlation in returns                -6.508***     -7.590***
                                                (2.034)       (2.019)

          Observations             4,863        4,851         4,851
          Fund FE                  Yes          Yes           Yes
          Year FE                  Yes          Yes           Yes
          Adjusted R-squared       0.0723       0.0907        0.106
                                                          76

Figure B1: International Portfolio Allocations of Chinese Institutional Investors
The top and bottom panel of this figure show the international portfolio allocations of Chinese institutional investors
in 2008 and 2017 respectively, based on the Factset database.
                                                         77

Figure B2: Excess Investment of Chinese Institutional Investors by Destination Country

The top and bottom panel of this figure shows the average excess investment of Chinese institutional investors in top
10 underweighted and overweighted countries in 2008 and 2017 respectively. Excess investment in a given country
in a given year is computed as the share of investment accounted for by a given country in total international
portfolio allocation of an institutional investor relative to the share of that country in the world stock market
capitalization.
                                                  78

Figure B3: Revealed Comparative Advantage for China and the United States

This top and bottom panels of this figure show the top 10 RCA sectors in 2017 for China and the United
States respectively.
                                                  79

Figure B4: Revealed Comparative Disadvantage for China and the United States

This top and bottom panels of this figure show the top 10 RCD sectors in 2017 for China and the United
States respectively.
