                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE DEREGULATION OF THE PRIVATE EQUITY MARKETS AND THE DECLINE
                               IN IPOS

                                           Michael Ewens
                                          Joan Farre-Mensa

                                        Working Paper 26317
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26317


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2019


We thank Jay Fishman, Will Gornall, Matthew Gustafson, Peter Iliev, Andrew Karolyi, Stephen Karolyi,
Stephen Keen, Sungjoung Kwon, Josh Lerner, Bob Long, Michelle Lowry, Michael Mani, John Morley,
Ramana Nanda, Jay Ritter, Roberta Romano, Berk Sensoy, two anonymous referees, and audiences
at the AEA Conference, the WFA Conference, the Jackson Hole Finance Conference, UC Berkeley's
Finance and Innovation Conference, the Finance, Organizations and Markets (FOM) Research Conference,
the Institute for Private Capital Spring Research Symposium, the Washington University Corporate
Finance Conference, ESMT's 2nd Conference on Entrepreneurial Financial Management, the Securities
and Exchange Commission, and several universities. We also thank Correlation Ventures and VentureSource
for access to data, as well as Aleksandar Andonov, Yael Hochberg, and Joshua Rauh for their data
on the composition of state pension fund boards. Ewens is an advisor to and investor in Correlation
Ventures. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect The views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26317.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Michael Ewens and Joan Farre-Mensa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Deregulation of the Private Equity Markets and the Decline in IPOs
Michael Ewens and Joan Farre-Mensa
NBER Working Paper No. 26317
September 2019, Revised December 2019
JEL No. G24,G28,G32

                                             ABSTRACT

The deregulation of securities laws|in particular the National Securities Markets Improvement Act
(NSMIA) of 1996|has increased the supply of private capital to late-stage private startups, which are
now able to grow to a size that few private firms used to reach. NSMIA is one of a number of factors
that have changed the going-public versus staying-private trade-off, helping bring about a new equilibrium
where fewer startups go public, and those that do are older. This new equilibrium does not reflect an
IPO market failure. Rather, founders are using their increased bargaining power vis-a-vis investors
to stay private longer.


Michael Ewens
California Institute of Technology
MC 228-77
1200 East California Avenue
Pasadena, CA 91125
and NBER
mewens@caltech.edu

Joan Farre-Mensa
University of Illinois at Chicago
University Hall
601 S. Morgan Street
Chicago, IL 60607
jfarre@uic.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26317
The number of initial public offerings (IPOs) in the United States has experienced a sharp

decline since peaking in 1996 (Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2013, 2017; Gao, Ritter, and Zhu,

2013). While this decline has garnered considerable attention in academic and policy circles

and in the press,1 both its causes and its consequences remain unclear. Gao et al. (2013,

p. 1663) argue that the drop in IPOs follows from technological changes due to which "the

advantages of selling out to a larger organization . . . have increased relative to the benefits of

operating as an independent firm." By contrast, Doidge et al. (2017) note that the U.S.-centric

nature of the IPO decline suggests that global technological shocks cannot completely explain

it. At the same time, both Gao et al. (2013) and Doidge et al. (2013, 2017) agree that the

Sarbanes-Oxley Act and other early-2000s changes in public firms' regulatory environment did

not drive the fall in IPOs. Doidge et al. (2013, p. 571) go on to add that while their "findings

are consistent with the view that U.S. financial markets became less hospitable for young, small

firms, direct tests of this view, while needed, are beyond the scope of [their] paper."

      The going-public decision is likely to be a multi-faceted one that depends on the relative

costs of public and private capital. While several prior studies have analyzed changes in the

public equity markets during the IPO decline, this paper focuses on changes in the private

equity markets during the decline. Our analysis shows that, as hypothesized by de Fontenay

(2017), the deregulation of securities laws in the 1990s has facilitated the process of raising

capital privately and has been a key--but by no means the only--contributor to the changes

in the going-public versus staying-private trade-off.

      One such notable deregulation event has been the National Securities Markets Improvement

Act (NSMIA), passed in October 1996. NSMIA has made it easier for both private startups and

the private funds investing in them to raise capital. First, NSMIA exempts private firms selling

unregistered securities under Rule 506 of Regulation D from state securities regulations known

as blue sky laws (Rule 506 is one of the exemptions firms can use to issue private shares not

registered with the SEC). As a result, NSMIA has made it easier for startups to raise private

capital from out-of-state investors by exempting private firms from complying with the blue

sky laws of every new state where they issue securities (public firms have long been exempt


  1
      For recent examples, see Driebusch (2017), Buttonwood (2018), and Chernova (2019).




                                                     1
from blue sky laws). Second, NSMIA has made it easier for private funds such as venture

capital (VC) and private equity (PE) funds to raise large amounts of capital by increasing the

number of investors in a fund that force the fund to register under the Investment Company

Act (ICA).2 Registered funds have to regularly disclose their investment portfolio and face

leverage and other restrictions, and so VC and PE funds tend to avoid having to register.

       To investigate NSMIA's effect on startups' access to private capital, we perform several

difference-in-differences (diff-in-diff) analyses.3 Our first diff-in-diff test builds on the notion

that the higher capital requirements of late-stage startups imply that they should be more

intensely treated by a reduction in the cost of raising out-of-state capital than their early-

stage counterparts. Consistent with this prediction, we show that after the passage of NSMIA,

late-stage startups are more likely to raise capital from out-of-state investors than early-stage

startups. In addition, our second diff-in-diff test shows that after NSMIA, late-stage startups'

ability to raise large funding rounds increases more than that of their early-stage counterparts.

       NSMIA's passage coincided with the years of the Internet boom, during which VC fundrais-

ing and investment grew rapidly. A potential concern is that our diff-in-diff results might be

driven by factors other than NSMIA that could have both helped fuel the Internet boom and

led VC investors to increase the size of their investments by focusing on out-of-state and late-

stage startups even in the absence of NSMIA. The results of a number of identification tests

help alleviate this concern.

       Most notably, a triple-diff analysis that exploits pre-NSMIA variation in the extent to which

different states had voluntarily uniformized their blue sky laws shows that the impact of NSMIA

on late-stage startups' ability to raise both out-of-state and large funding rounds is strongest

in states with non-uniform blue sky laws. In addition, our diff-in-diff and triple-diff results are

unique to NSMIA's actual treatment period and (with only one exception) become insignificant

when estimated over adjacent placebo periods that also experienced similar growth in VC

fundraising. Furthermore, the findings on the effects of NSMIA are robust to the exclusion of


   2
     Strictly speaking, a VC fund is a particular type of private equity fund. Throughout this paper, we
distinguish between VC funds and other types of funds making private equity investments, which we refer to as
"PE funds."
   3
     All empirical analyses in the paper focus on VC-backed startups, which have traditionally been a major
player in both the IPO market (Ritter, 2018) and the production of innovation (e.g., Gornall and Strebulaev,
2015), and for which pre-IPO financing data are widely available.


                                                     2
information technology (IT) startups.

       Our third diff-in-diff test seeks to identify NSMIA's effect on VC and PE funds' ability

to raise large amounts of capital, an effect that should be strongest for funds investing in

capital-intensive late-stage startups. Consistent with this prediction, we find that the size of

late-stage funds increases more than that of their early-stage counterparts around the passage

of NSMIA--a finding that also passes our battery of identification tests.4

       Our findings thus indicate that by creating a uniform regulatory environment for private

security issues across the U.S. and by facilitating VC and PE funds' access to a larger number of

investors, NSMIA has increased the supply of private capital available to late-stage VC-backed

startups--precisely the kind of firms that have traditionally been IPO candidates.

       A series of descriptive results further support this conclusion. First, we show that the

decline in U.S. IPOs has been accompanied by an increase in the fraction of startups that stay

independent and privately-held long after they first raise capital. In particular, this indicates

that IPOs have not been replaced by an increase in the number of firms that rely on capital

provided by a publicly listed acquirer to fund their growth. Second, we find that those startups

that still go public now are older when they do so: The median numbers of years from first VC

financing to IPO has increased from around four years in the 1990s to seven in recent years.

       Third, we show that startups that stay private longer are increasingly able to raise large

amounts of capital and reach levels of employment and sales that in the early 1990s only

their public peers consistently reached. Fourth, and consistent with our diff-in-diff results, we

find that the average round size raised by late-stage private startups sharply increased after

NSMIA's passage in October 1996: The average late-stage round was between $5.9 million and

$7.3 million from 1992 to 1995, it increased to $10.3 million in 1997, and it has stayed above

$10 million since then. Fifth, consistent with our firm-level evidence, the aggregate amount of

private capital raised by late-stage startups has increased substantially, from $1.3 billion in 1995

to $7.7 billion in 2000--a 498% five-year cumulative increase--and then to $11.4 billion in 2005,


   4
     The pre-NSMIA registration requirements under the federal ICA affected all U.S. funds equally. Thus, our
fund size analysis does not lend itself to exploiting cross-state variation in the impact of NSMIA. Instead, we use
data on foreign VC and PE funds to show that the increase in the size of late-stage funds around the passage
of NSMIA is unique to U.S. funds. An analogous triple-diff analysis also shows that the increase in late-stage
startups' ability to raise large funding rounds is unique to U.S. startups.




                                                        3
$14.1 billion in 2010, and $33.0 billion in 2015. Finally, we show that non-traditional startup

investors--especially PE funds, which like VC funds benefited from the passage of NSMIA, but

also hedge funds and mutual funds (Chernenko, Lerner, and Zeng, 2017; Kwon, Lowry, and

Qian, 2019)--have been a key driver of the growth in the supply of late-stage private capital.

       Taken together, our findings suggest that late-stage VC-backed startups are now able to

raise large sums of capital while remaining private. A natural question then follows: Are these

late-stage startups raising capital privately because they cannot go public--or is an IPO still

an option for successful startups, but many choose to remain private instead?

       To shed light on this question, consider why a startup may choose to stay private. In their

survey of CFOs, Brau and Fawcett (2006) find that the main reason leading successful firms

to stay private is their managers' desire to preserve decision-making control and ownership--a

reason also emphasized by Boot, Gopalan, and Thakor (2006) and Helwege and Packer (2009),

among others. However, founders' desire to stay private (and independent) often conflicts

with VCs' desire to go public, as IPOs ensure a timely liquidation of their investment (as do

acquisitions) and carry considerable reputational benefits for VCs (Gompers, 1996).5

       Consistent with founders and their investors having conflicting exit preferences, we find that

those founders that are able to retain a larger degree of control of their startup are less likely

to eventually go public or be acquired.6 Of course, founder control is likely endogenous. Our

instrumental variable identification strategy is based on the assumption that founders who raise

their first financing round in state-years with higher VC supply benefit from a "money chasing

deals" environment (Gompers and Lerner, 2000) that allows them to extract better terms--and,

in particular, retain a higher equity stake. Our instrument interacts two sources of plausibly

exogenous variation in the supply of venture capital at the state-year level: (1) variation in the

assets of state and local pension funds (Gonzalez-Uribe, 2014; Bernstein, Lerner, Sorensen, and

Str¨
   omberg, 2016), and (2) variation in the funds' propensity to exhibit home-state bias in their

investment decisions as captured by the fraction of state officials in their boards of trustees


   5
     For a recent example of this conflict, see Dwoskin, Winkler, and Pulliam (2015) and Chernova (2019),
which describe the "deepening rift in Silicon Valley between private companies that want to stay that way and
investors who want to unlock at least some of the profits from their most successful investments."
   6
    We measure founder control using the founders' equity stake one year after the startup's first financing
round. We show that this measure is strongly and persistently correlated with the fraction of seats in a startup's
board of directors that the founders control.


                                                        4
(Hochberg and Rauh, 2013; Andonov, Hochberg, and Rauh, 2018).

    The exclusion restriction requires our instrument to impact the exit decision of startups only

through its effect on the founders' initial equity stake. Two facts help support this assumption.

First, the assets of a state's pension funds reflect the funds' past contributions and investment

performance as opposed to their investment opportunities at the time of the local startups'

exit decision. Second, the board seat allocation of most public pension fund boards is stable

and was initially set decades before pension funds were allowed to invest in VC and PE funds

(Andonov, Hochberg, and Rauh, 2018).

    Importantly, we show that the decline in IPOs has coincided with a gradual increase in

founder control over time. The reasons driving this increase are likely several, and a full

analysis of these reasons falls beyond the scope of our paper. That said, both the increase

in the supply of private capital that we document as well as technological changes decreasing

startups' capital requirements early in their lifecycle--when uncertainty is highest and capital

is most expensive (Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf, 2018)--have likely played a role.

    Our paper makes two contributions. First, the paper enhances our understanding of how the

going-public versus staying-private trade-off has changed since the early 1990s. We show that

the deregulation of the private equity markets--in particular, the National Securities Markets

Improvement Act of 1996--has increased the supply of private capital and reduced the relative

cost of being private. At the same time, this increased supply of private capital appears to

have helped strengthen founders' bargaining power vis-`
                                                      a-vis investors. The end result is that

more founders now have both the board votes and the private capital to realize their preference

for control by delaying--or avoiding altogether--an IPO.

    To be sure, our findings do not imply that NSMIA caused the IPO decline--although the

fact that its passage in 1996 coincided with the U.S. listing peak suggests that it may have been

a contributing factor.7 But our evidence does indicate that the IPO decline has not impeded

late-stage startups' ability to finance their growth. Ruling out the possibility that the fall in

IPOs has led to an overall reduction in the supply of capital available to startups would require


   7
     Doidge, Kahle, Karolyi, and Stulz (2018) discuss several other potential contributing factors, including
the increased importance of intangible assets coupled with public markets' disadvantage in supporting young,
R&D-intensive firms.




                                                     5
a comparison of startups' ability to fund their investment opportunities today to that of similar

startups before 1996--a comparison unlikely to be feasible. However, our finding that both VCs

and other less traditional startup investors provide an increasing amount of private capital to

late-stage startups, allowing them to grow to a size until recently reached by few private firms,

suggests that private markets now supply much (if not all) of the capital IPOs used to supply.

        Second, our paper contributes to the legal debate on the costs and benefits associated with

NSMIA's federal preemption of blue sky laws. Some legal scholars have expressed concerns that

"NSMIA's preemption of state regulation of private placements . . . created a regulatory black

hole," proposing to "return to the states supervision of private placements by or to nonregulated

persons or entities" (Johnson, 2010, p. 155). Our paper highlights the benefits of having a

uniform regulatory environment for private equity issues across the U.S. and the potential costs

of returning to a system where each state imposes its own regulations. Differences aside, our

findings can also be seen as pointing to the benefits of creating a similarly uniform regulatory

environment for private equity markets in Europe and other parts of the world.8



1        Data and Sample

Our main analysis sample consists of VC-backed startups. We begin by considering all startups

in the VC database VentureSource (a division of Dow Jones) that raised their first private round

of funding between 1992 and 2016.9 In order to be in our sample, a startup needs to (1) be

headquartered in the U.S. and (2) have raised at least one equity financing round from a

traditional VC investor (defined as a standard fixed-life fund that raises capital from limited

partners). For these startups, we collect data on all the capital (equity and debt) they raise

both from traditional VCs and from other non-VC investors, such as PE funds, corporations,

or mutual funds (Section 4.3 provides further details on non-VC investors).

        We supplement the VC and private investment data provided by VentureSource with in-

formation from Correlation Ventures, a quantitative VC fund. This supplemental information


    8
    Section IA.2 in the Internet Appendix discusses the European Union's recent attempts to integrate the
European private equity markets and the challenges these attempts have faced.
   9
     We choose 1992 as the starting point because the coverage of VC financings and investors is poor before
then. We observe investments through the end of 2016, and we adjust our sample period according to the data
demands of each analysis.


                                                     6
(described in detail in Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf (2018)) is particularly useful for those

analyses that require data on founder equity, exit valuations, and firm failures, as the coverage

of these data is poor in commercial databases. In addition, we obtain VC and PE fund-level in-

formation from VentureSource and PitchBook. Sections IA.3 and IA.4 in the Internet Appendix

provide additional details on the data and variables used in our analyses.

         Our focus on VC-backed startups, while admittedly restrictive, offers three key advantages.

First, we are able to observe firm- and financing-level outcomes that are typically unavailable

for non-VC-backed private firms. As a result, VC-backed startups offer a unique window on

the changes in the U.S. private markets that have accompanied the decline in IPOs. Second,

although VC-backed firms make up less than 1% of all privately held firms (Puri and Zarutskie,

2012), historically they have accounted for a sizable share of the U.S. IPO market,10 which

makes them particularly relevant to any analysis of the decline in IPOs. Third, VC-backed

firms play a prominent role in the production of innovation (Kortum and Lerner, 2000; Gornall

and Strebulaev, 2015). Understanding how they are adapting to the ongoing changes in the

entrepreneurial finance market is thus critical, as the success of their adaptation is likely to

have economy-wide consequences.



2         The Deregulation of the Private Equity Markets and the

          Supply of Capital to Late-Stage Startups

This section discusses how regulatory changes in the private equity markets can impact the

supply of private capital to late-stage startups, focusing on one major deregulation event,

NSMIA. We test the empirical predictions derived here in the following section.


2.1        Private capital markets and the IPO decision

Traditionally, a major benefit of going public has been the ability to tap a larger pool of capital

than is available in the private markets. In their survey of CFOs, Brau and Fawcett (2006, p.

410) find that the "need for capital to support growth" is one of the main drivers of the IPO


    10
         Ritter (2018) shows that, over 1990­2016, VC-backed firms accounted for 42% of all IPOs in the U.S.




                                                         7
decision. Public markets have also been shown to provide private firms and their investors more

liquidity (Pagano, Panetta, and Zingales, 1998; Bodnaruk, Kandel, Massa, and Simonov, 2007),

currency for acquisitions (Celikyurt, Sevilir, and Shivdasani, 2010), and improved flexibility for

employee compensation. Founders considering an IPO must weigh these benefits against the

loss of control (Brau and Fawcett, 2006) and other costs associated with going public--including

one-time listing costs as well as the ongoing costs of disclosure (Farre-Mensa, 2017; Aghamolla

and Thakor, 2019), takeover risk (Zingales, 1995), and short-termist pressures and other agency

problems (Asker, Farre-Mensa, and Ljungqvist, 2015; Bernstein, 2015).

       The early 2000s saw a number of major regulatory changes in the public-equity markets,

including Regulation Fair Disclosure in 2000, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, and the 2003

Global Settlement. Several public commentators have argued that these changes increased the

cost of being public, particularly for small- and medium-sized public firms, leading to a decline

in the number of IPOs (e.g., Zweig, 2010; Weild, 2011). Yet both Gao, Ritter, and Zhu (2013)

and Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2013) conclude that such regulatory changes cannot, on their

own, explain the reduction in IPOs and why the number of U.S. listed firms has been cut in half

since peaking in 1996 (Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2017). In particular, Doidge et al. (2013,

p. 549) write that small-firm IPOs "became abnormally low before these changes took place."

       Importantly, regulatory changes that increase the supply of private capital--which have

received far less attention in the finance literature--should also alter the going-public versus

staying-private trade-off. Indeed, an increased ability to raise private capital allows late-stage

startups and other traditional IPO candidates to delay--temporarily or indefinitely--their

IPO, while still being able to finance their growth opportunities and avoid many of the above-

mentioned listing costs. We next analyze one such regulatory shock: NSMIA.11


2.2      NSMIA: Deregulating and uniformizing the private capital markets

A few years before the adoption of the early-2000s regulatory changes affecting public firms,

one major regulatory change made it easier for both private startups and their investors to


  11
     Other notable regulatory changes include the SEC's adoption of Rule 144A in 1990 and the several sub-
sequent amendments to Rule 144, as a result of which "Rule 144 now effectively permits the unlimited and
unfettered resale of restricted securities [such as private shares] after a six-month or one-year period" (de Fonte-
nay, 2017, p. 468), as well as the JOBS Act of 2012.


                                                         8
raise capital: NSMIA, signed into law by President Clinton on October 11, 1996.

       While NSMIA has received little attention among finance scholars, several legal scholars and

practitioner-oriented publications have argued that it has played a first-order role in facilitating

private firms' access to capital (e.g., Denos, 1997; Campbell, 1998; Cox, 2013; Badway et al.,

2016). Writing of NSMIA and other regulatory changes affecting the private-equity markets,

de Fontenay (2017, p. 466) notes:

         The liberalization of the rules for selling and trading private securities is arguably
         the most significant development in securities regulation of the last thirty years,
         but the empirical literature on the decline of public equity has largely overlooked
         it. This is a critical and surprising omission, because the changes to the private
         side of securities regulation bear directly on a company's decision to go public.


       Two distinct provisions of NSMIA have helped increase the supply of private capital avail-

able to late-stage startups. First, NSMIA exempts qualified private security issuers from having

to comply with the blue sky laws of each state where they issue securities. Second, NSMIA

makes it possible for VC and PE funds to raise capital from a larger number of investors without

registering under the Investment Company Act of 1940.12 We describe them in turn.


2.2.1      NSMIA's preemption of state blue sky laws

Consider a hypothetical private startup seeking to raise outside capital to finance its growth.

Prior to NSMIA's passage, several regulations applied in this setting. First, the startup needed

to qualify for one of the federal exemptions that allow firms to issue securities privately without

registering them with the SEC (e.g., a Regulation D exemption).

       In addition to complying with federal regulations, the startup also needed to comply with

the laws governing the issuance of securities in each state where it sold its securities, commonly

known as blue sky laws. Though the specific provisions of the blue sky laws varied across

states--a feature we will exploit in Section 3.3.1--they generally required the registration with

the appropriate state regulatory agency of private offerings made by firms (or funds) to in-

dividuals or institutions in a state in order to protect the public from fraud. Registration


  12
    NSMIA's preemption of state blue sky laws went into effect at its signing, on October 11, 1996; NSMIA's
amendments to the ICA went into effect on January 1, 1997.




                                                    9
requirements ranged from filing a simple form and paying a filing fee to requiring state regula-

tors to pre-approve the offering after a so-called "merit review" (further discussed below). In

addition, most state blue sky laws provided private causes of action for private investors who

believed to have been injured by securities fraud, and some also required periodic disclosures.

    To illustrate, if a startup headquartered in Seattle issued shares to investors located in

Washington, California, New York, and Texas, the startup needed to comply with the blue sky

laws of these four states. Importantly, it was the issuer--i.e., in this example, the startup, not

its investors--that needed to comply with each state's blue sky law. In a pre-NSMIA legal

treatise for entrepreneurs and their lawyers, Sherman and Williams (1995, p. 5.3) noted:

      Failure to observe blue sky laws, even after full compliance with federal laws, can
      invalidate the [security issuance] transaction and subject the parties to civil and
      criminal liabilities and can also render it very difficult or even impossible at the
      time of an under-written public offering for issuer's counsel to give the necessary
      assurances to the underwriters that there are no contingent liabilities, particularly
      rescission rights, relating to the issuer's outstanding securities.

    Legal practitioners had long recognized the compliance burdens posed by this dual system

of federal and state regulations.13 Former SEC chairman Armstrong (1958, pp. 714-715) wrote:

      The "blue sky" laws had come to have a special meaning--a meaning full of com-
      plexities, surprises, unsuspected liabilities for transactions normal and usual--in
      short, a crazy-quilt of state regulations no longer significant or meaningful in pur-
      pose, and usually stultifying in effect, or just plain useless.

    Almost 40 years later, in 1996, then-SEC chairman Levitt (1996) testified in the U.S. Senate:

      The current system of dual Federal-State regulation is not the system that Congress--
      or the [SEC]--would create today if we were designing a new system. While se-
      curities markets today are global, issuers and securities firms still must register
      many securities offerings in 52 separate jurisdictions; satisfy a multitude of sepa-
      rate books and records requirements; and bear the substantial costs of compliance
      with the overlapping requirements.


  13
     The original state blue sky laws were passed between 1911 and 1931, at a time when federal securities
regulation in the U.S. was largely nonexistent (Macey and Miller, 1991; Mahoney, 2003). Agrawal (2013) shows
that during the pre-SEC years, the laws induced firms to increase dividends, issue equity, and grow in size, and
they facilitated improvements in operating performance and market valuations. The dual federal-state system
arose with the passage of the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which created the
SEC. Over the following years, most state blue sky laws were amended to largely exempt public firms--but they
remained fully in force for private firms.




                                                      10
   Perhaps the most onerous provision of the blue sky laws was the merit review that private

security issuers in many states had to undergo before being able to issue securities in a state.

Reporting on the findings of a subcommittee of the American Bar Association (ABA), Sargent

(1986, pp. 805-806) described the blue sky merit review process as follows:

     Many of the statutes that confer merit authority provide very broad grounds for
     the administrator's decision to deny, revoke, or suspend the effectiveness of a reg-
     istration statement. A typical provision would authorize the administrator to take
     such action if he or she finds that the offering is not "fair, just and equitable."
     There are numerous minor variations in the statutory statements of such general
     standards. Some statutes direct the administrator simply to determine the fairness
     of the offering, while others may require consideration of fairness of the "issuer's
     plan of business." . . .
     These broadly formulated standards apparently grant the administrator the author-
     ity to impose, in the name of fairness, a wide variety of restrictions and standards
     on all aspects of an offering and on the underlying transactions. The administra-
     tors have used this general authority to create a complex network of specific merit
     requirements.

   The report also discussed the potential costs associated with state merit review (p. 846):

     First, there are compliance costs associated with merit regulation. . . . Among
     those costs are the attorneys' fees incurred when the issuer or the underwriter has
     to negotiate with merit administrators to clear an offering in one or more states.
     These costs can increase when the offering is controversial and negotiations are
     prolonged. . . .
     The burden on the issuer of these direct compliance costs, however, is relatively
     insignificant, at least in most cases. More significant are the delays sometimes
     generated by difficulties with merit review. . . . These delays are perhaps most
     likely to occur when a new securities product is about to come to market. . . .
     Although compliance costs and the costs of delay can be important, they are perhaps
     not the most significant: there are larger and less quantifiable costs. For example,
     we do not know whether denying access to merit states' securities markets has
     seriously inhibited potentially successful enterprises from raising capital. Similarly,
     we do not know whether merit regulation inhibits venture capital investment.

   The costs and uncertainty associated with the pre-NSMIA merit review process highlighted

by the ABA report were particularly onerous for the innovative startups that tend to raise

venture capital, for two reasons. First, investments in innovative startups tend to involve con-

siderable risk and uncertainty (e.g., Hall and Woodward, 2010). Assessing whether a proposed

investment in, say, a four-year-old startup is "fair, just and equitable" from a regulatory per-

spective is a much more complex and subjective endeavor than when the investment involves

                                               11
a mature company with a tried-and-true business model and dozens of comparable companies

that can help price the offering. Second, startups tend to have limited financial slack and pursue

investment opportunities that require quick responses (e.g., Kerr and Nanda, 2011, 2015). As a

result, delaying an offering for several months--or years--while state regulators determine its

fairness can severely undermine a startup's competitive position and even threaten its survival.

       NSMIA was Congress's response to the "crazy-quilt of state regulations" described above.

Title I, Section 102 of NSMIA "preempts state securities law in certain areas long burdened by

duplicative regulation by both federal and state governments" (Denos, 1997, p. 101). Among

the "covered securities" that NSMIA exempts from complying with state blue sky laws are those

sold under Rule 506 of Regulation D, which allows private issuers to raise unlimited amounts

of capital as long as all investors are "accredited investors."14 As Section 3.1 shows, Rule 506

is the most popular exemption used by VC-backed startups to avoid SEC registration.15


2.2.2      NSMIA's changes to the Investment Company Act of 1940

Title II, Section 209 of NSMIA changed some key federal-level regulations affecting VC and

PE funds through amendments to the Investment Company Act of 1940 (ICA). The ICA

"regulates the organization of companies, including mutual funds, that engage primarily in

investing, reinvesting, and trading in securities, and whose own securities are offered to the

investing public" (SEC, 2019). The ICA requires investment companies to register with the

SEC and imposes extensive regulations on registered entities, including investment and leverage

restrictions, restrictions on related party transactions, and ongoing reporting requirements. In

particular, all investment companies registered under the ICA are required to disclose their

portfolio holdings, including the fair value of each security they hold, on a quarterly basis

(semi-annually before May 2004).

       Such disclosures are incompatible with the typical business model of VC funds, for at least


  14
     Accredited investors include institutions, individuals with annual income in excess of $200,000 ($300,000
for couples), or individuals and couples with net worth in excess of $1,000,000 excluding the primary residence.
For an example of how a state securities board describes NSMIA, see Texas State Securities Board (2019).
  15
     Rule 506 is also the most common SEC-registration exemption used by private funds (in particular, VC
and PE funds) when raising capital (Badway et al., 2016). Most blue sky laws also apply to private funds when
they raise capital in a state, not just to private operating companies. Thus, in addition to exempting private
firms from complying with blue sky laws, NSMIA also exempted VC and PE funds from the laws when the funds
themselves raise capital.


                                                      12
two reasons. First, disclosing the valuation of the funds' portfolio holdings on a quarterly (or

semi-annual) basis would harm the competitive position of their portfolio companies.16 Second,

if VC funds had to disclose the valuation of their portfolio holdings every quarter or semester,

this would affect the pricing of additional funding rounds as well as exit opportunities. In

fact, in a letter to the SEC in 2011, the National Venture Capital Association (NVCA, 2011,

p. 6) said that even disclosing the gross and net asset values of a fund--much less detailed

information than an ICA-registered fund would have to disclose--would be problematic:

         Information as to the gross and net asset values of a VCF [VC fund] . . . may allow
         "reverse engineering" regarding valuations associated with particular portfolio com-
         panies and should not be publicly available. If so, those private-company valuations
         could affect pricing of additional rounds of financing and/or exit opportunities in a
         manner adverse to the VCF, its portfolio companies and its investors.


       Thus, as we show below, most VC and PE funds rely on ICA registration exemptions to

avoid registering as investment companies.17 So much so that the SEC (2011, p. 9) adopted

"not [being] registered under the Investment Company Act" as one of the five criteria to define

a VC fund.

       Prior to NSMIA, private investment companies could rely on only one exemption to avoid

registration under the ICA: Section 3(c)(1) of the ICA, which exempts from registration funds

with up to 100 investors.18 NSMIA has made it possible for VC and PE funds to raise capital

from a larger number of investors while still avoiding ICA registration by adding a new regis-

tration exemption: Section 3(c)(7) of the ICA, which allows exempt private funds to surpass

the 100-investor limit as long as all the investors are "qualified purchasers" (natural persons


  16
     The case of Google illustrates why. When Google filed for its IPO in 2004, investors were surprised to learn
how profitable the company was (e.g., Delaney and Sidel, 2004). If Google's VC investors had had to disclose
the value of their investment in Google on a semi-annual basis between 1999 (when it raised its first VC round)
and 2004, Google's competitors would have learned about its profitability much earlier than they did, potentially
harming the company's competitive position. Google's founders recognized this in the company's S-1 filing: "As
a smaller private company, Google kept business information closely held, and we believe this helped us against
competitors" (p. iv).
  17
     In the case of PE funds, the leverage restrictions associated with being a registered investment company
can be even more onerous than the disclosure requirements discussed above.
  18
     A private investment company is one that does not make a public offering of securities. Any company
making a public offering of securities must register under the ICA. The SEC's "integration doctrine" is designed
to ensure that funds cannot get around the 100-investor limit by using parallel (or clone) funds with the same
investment purpose, each with up to 100 investors (see, e.g., SEC, 1996, p.35).




                                                       13
who own at least $5 million in investments or institutions that own at least $25 million).19 In

addition, NSMIA has also made it easier for funds relying on the 100-investor limit exemption

to avoid surpassing this limit by relaxing the Section 3(c)(1) "look-through" requirement.20

       Facilitating VC funds' access to capital was a key reason why NSMIA added the Section

3(c)(7) registration exemption to the ICA. Speaking in the U.S. Senate in support of NSMIA,

NY Senator D'Amato (1996) noted:

         This legislation will make it easier to raise capital in the securities market. The
         bill will create a new category of unregistered private investment companies [3(c)7
         funds] that will help venture capitalists tap the capital markets to fund business
         endeavors.

       An analysis of VC funds' Form ADV filings from the SEC website provides suggestive

evidence that NSMIA has been successful in helping accomplish these goals.21 As of August

2017, all active VC funds use either the 3(c)(1) or 3(c)(7) exemption to avoid having to register

and comply with the disclosure and other requirements of the ICA. Importantly, approximately

5% of all VC funds report having more than 100 investors--a number that, before NSMIA's

addition of Section 3(c)(7) to the ICA, would have triggered ICA registration. These 3(c)(7)

funds have an average size of $450 million, compared to $62 million for VC funds with up

to 100 investors. These findings suggest that by raising the cap on the number of investors

that trigger ICA registration, NSMIA made it possible for VC funds to raise larger amounts of

capital--a prediction we formally test in Section 3.5 below.


  19
     Until 2012, private funds still needed to stay below 500 investors, which was the universal beneficial own-
ership trigger for SEC registration. The JOBS Act raised this trigger to 2000 owners in 2012.
  20
     Prior to NSMIA, an investing entity that owned 10% or more of a fund counted as only one (legal) person
for purposes of the 100-investor limit only if the value of all of the entity's holdings of Section-3(c)(1)-exempt
investment companies did not exceed 10% of that entity's assets. Otherwise, the law required to look through the
entity to its beneficial owners and count each of them as an investor of the fund. NSMIA allows funds to count
all owners as one person for purposes of the 100-investor limit, except in the case of investors owning 10% or
more of a fund that are themselves investment companies (including Section 3(c)(1)- and Section 3(c)(7)-exempt
investment companies), for which the look-through requirement remains.
  21
       VC fund advisers (i.e., managers) need to file annual reports using (an abbreviated version of) Form ADV.




                                                       14
3         Identifying the Effects of NSMIA

3.1        NSMIA and Rule 506 private filings

Until 2016, private firms could use one of three SEC-registration exemptions under Regulation

D to raise private capital: Rules 504, 505, or 506 (the SEC repealed Rule 505 in 2016 and

integrated its provisions into Rule 504). NSMIA's preemption of state blue sky laws applies

only to private issuers raising capital under Rule 506. Thus, if firms value NSMIA's blue

sky preemption, they should favor Rule 506 over the other exemptions. Consistent with this

prediction, Ivanov and Bauguess (2013) show that Rule 506 offerings account for 99% of the

capital raised through Regulation D from 2009 to 2012. They note: "More than two-thirds

of non-fund issuers could have claimed a Rule 504 or 505 exemption based on offering size,

indicating that issuers value the Blue Sky law preemption allowed under Rule 506" (p. 3).

         To more directly test whether NSMIA's passage in October 1996 induced a change in private

issuers' behavior, we have obtained the full history of Form D filings from 1992 to 1998 via a

FOIA request to the SEC.22 Figure 1, Panel A shows that the number of Form D filings by

private firms claiming a Rule 506 exemption increased by 38% in the four quarters following

the passage of NSMIA relative to the four quarters preceding its passage. Importantly, Panel

B shows that the number of Rule 504 or 505 filings--to which NSMIA's preemption of blue sky

laws did not apply--did not experience a similar increase. This suggestive evidence supports

the notion that private issuers value NSMIA's blue sky preemption.


3.2        NSMIA and the supply of out-of-state capital to late-stage startups

Prior to NSMIA, private firms needed to comply with the blue sky laws of each state where

at least one of their investors was located. Startups typically raise their initial capital from

nearby investors located in their own state--often the founders themselves or their friends and

family (Sorenson and Stuart, 2001; Robb and Robinson, 2014). NSMIA has made it possible

for startups to raise capital from out-of-state investors without having to comply with those

other states' blue sky laws in addition to with their own state's law.


    22
    Private issuers must file what is known as a "Form D" with the SEC when relying on a Regulation D
exemption to issue securities; these filings are only available on the SEC's EDGAR website beginning in 2002.



                                                     15
    While all startups can in principle benefit from having easier access to a larger pool of

investors without additional regulatory burden, we expect late-stage startups to be more in-

tensely treated by NSMIA than their early-stage counterparts. The reason is that late-stage

startups have higher capital requirements (e.g., Gompers, 1995), and so they should benefit

more from being able to raise out-of-state capital than early-stage startups, whose smaller

capital needs can be more easily fulfilled by local investors.

    This prediction motivates our diff-in-diff analysis of NSMIA's effect on startups' propensity

to raise capital from out-of-state investors. Late-stage startups (those raising a Series C or

higher) comprise the treatment group and their early-stage counterparts the control group:23


    Yit = 0 + 1 P ostt × Late-stage roundit + 2 Late-stage roundit + t + s + j + it                         (1)


    Table 1 presents the results of estimating Equation (1) using a linear probability model,

where the unit of observation is an equity financing round, i identifies startups, and t identifies

year-quarters. The dependent variable (Y ) is an indicator set equal to one if the round includes

at least one out-of-state investor. The sample of financings ranges from 1994 to 1998, and the

P ost indicator identifies all financings that take place in or after the fourth quarter of 1996. All

regressions include financing year-quarter fixed effects ( , which subsume the non-interacted

P ost indicator) as well as startup state ( ) and industry () fixed effects.

    The results in column 1 support the hypothesis that NSMIA has facilitated late-stage

startups' access to out-of-state investors: The coefficient on the interaction term P ost ×

Late-stage round is positive and significant, indicating that the relative probability that a

late-stage financing includes at least one out-of-state investor increases by 4.1 percentage points

after NSMIA's passage (p = 0.001). Column 2 shows that our conclusions are robust to using

a continuous version of the late-stage indicator, the logarithm of the startup's financing round

number (p < 0.001); column 3 shows that they are also robust to using as the dependent vari-

able the fraction of investors in the round located outside of the startup's headquarter state

(p = 0.009).


  23
     Consistent with our definition of the treatment and control groups, late-stage rounds raised prior to NSMIA
were 26% more likely to include out-of-state investors than early-stage rounds.




                                                      16
3.3      Identification

For our control group to be a valid counterfactual, the evolution of the reliance on out-of-

state investors for treated (late-stage) and control (early-stage) startups need to share parallel

trends--that is, in the absence of NSMIA, the difference between late-stage and early-stage

startups should remain constant over time. While the parallel-trends assumption is ultimately

untestable, this section discusses a number of identification tests that support its validity.

       To begin with, our review of NSMIA's legislative history in Section IA.1 in the Internet

Appendix shows that it would have been all but impossible for startups or their investors

to predict NSMIA's passage more than a few weeks in advance and meaningfully alter their

behavior in anticipation of this passage. Also, NSMIA does not appear to have been passed

in response to a major lobbying effort by startups or their investors, thus alleviating reverse

causality concerns.24 In addition, when we allow the effect of the treatment variable to vary

over time by interacting Late-stage with semester-year indicators in Equation (1), Figure 2

shows that the pre-NSMIA coefficients exhibit no significant trend.

       NSMIA's passage coincided with the years of the Internet boom, during which VC fundrais-

ing and investment grew at a fast pace. A potential concern--both in Table 1 and the other

diff-in-diff analyses we present later in this section--is that our results might be driven by

factors other than NSMIA that helped fuel the Internet boom, such as an increase in techno-

logical innovation or behavioral considerations leading investors to chase returns. Regardless

of the identity of the non-NSMIA drivers of the VC fundraising increase during the 1990s, this

increase could lead VC investors to seek to increase the size of their investments by focusing on

out-of-state and late-stage startups even in the absence of NSMIA. Our goal in this section is to

show that while NSMIA was by no means the only driver of the changes in the entrepreneurial

finance market during the mid and late 1990s, it was a significant driver.

       To that end, column 4 in Table 1 shows that the post-NSMIA differential increase in late-

stage startups' reliance on out-of-state investors persists--and, if anything, becomes more

pronounced--when we exclude startups operating in IT industries (p = 0.001). This find-


  24
     Instead, the mutual fund industry, which prior to NSMIA also fell under the dual system of federal and
state regulation, appears to have been the key driver of the bill.




                                                    17
ing helps alleviate concerns that our diff-in-diff results are driven by changes in the IT sector

during the Internet boom. To further isolate the effects of NSMIA, we next exploit cross-state

variation in NSMIA's expected impact.


3.3.1      Cross-state differences in the impact of NSMIA

Prior to the passage of NSMIA, some states had tried to alleviate the costs and uncertainty

faced by private firms seeking to raise capital in multiple states by voluntarily coordinating

their blue sky laws. These coordination efforts were spearheaded by two sets of regulatory

frameworks adopted by a number of states in the 1980s and early 1990s: the Uniform Limited

Offering Exemption (ULOE) and the Small Corporate Offering Registration (SCOR). The

ULOE was proposed in 1983 by the North American Securities Administrators Association

(NASAA) to help create some uniformity between the SEC's Regulation D and state blue sky

laws (Maynard, 1987);25 in 1989, the NASAA proposed the SCOR to facilitate the simultaneous

registration of Regulation D offerings with the SEC and state regulators (Denos, 1997).26

       We predict that a late-stage startup from a state that had adopted neither the ULOE nor

the SCOR (identified by the indicator N on-uniform blue sky state) should experience a larger

increase in its ability to access out-of-state investors after the passage of NSMIA than a startup

from a ULOE or SCOR state, all else equal. The reason is that, before NSMIA's passage, late-

stage startups in states that had adopted the ULOE or the SCOR could raise capital from

investors located in other ULOE or SCOR states without triggering much additional blue sky

burden and uncertainty. By contrast, prior to NSMIA, late-stage startups in non-uniform blue

sky states could not raise capital from any out-of-state investors without complying with a new

set of blue sky regulations that were not uniformized with those of their own state.

       Importantly, this prediction is unique to NSMIA: If our diff-in-diff results were driven by

other confounding factors contemporaneous with the passage of NSMIA, we would not expect

the results to be stronger precisely in non-uniform blue sky states--particularly given that


  25
    The following states had adopted the ULOE (in some form) by the passage of NSMIA: Alabama, Georgia,
Idaho, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, North Carolina, Ohio,
South Carolina, Tennessee, Utah, Virginia, West Virginia, and Wisconsin.
  26
    The states that had adopted the SCOR but not the ULOE by NSMIA's passage include Alaska, Ari-
zona, California, Colorado, Indiana, Louisiana, Maine, Mississippi, North Dakota, New Hampshire, New Jersey,
Nevada, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Dakota, Texas, Vermont, Washington, and Wyoming.


                                                    18
Figure IA.1 in the Internet Appendix shows that uniform and non-uniform blue sky states

were on parallel macroeconomic trends prior to NSMIA's adoption.

      The results in Table 2 support the prediction that the effect of NSMIA on the propensity to

raise out-of-state capital should be stronger for late-stage startups located in non-uniform blue

sky states. In columns 1 and 2, we begin by estimating Equation (1) within the subsamples

of uniform and non-uniform blue sky states, respectively. The coefficient on the interaction

term P ost × Late-stage is 3.8 times greater for non-uniform blue sky states (0.114) than for

their uniform counterparts (0.030). These sub-sample differences are confirmed in the triple-diff

analysis reported in column 3, where the coefficient on the triple interaction P ost × Late-stage ×

N on-uniform blue sky state is positive and highly significant (p = 0.001).


3.3.2     Placebo tests

The dynamic diff-in-diff results in Figure 2 suggest that in the two years prior to NSMIA's

passage, when VC fundraising already benefited from the Internet boom, late-stage startups'

reliance on out-of-state investors was not already on an increasing trend. Table 3 reports

placebo tests that further support the notion that our empirical analyses do not conflate the

effects of NSMIA with those of other factors that may have also helped fuel VC fundraising

during the 1990s. Specifically, the placebo tests estimate our diff-in-diff and triple-diff analyses

during 1992­1996, the years immediately preceding the passage and implementation of NSMIA,

and 1997­2001, immediately following NSMIA. Unlike the actual analysis period 1994­1998,

there was no major regulatory change affecting the U.S. private capital markets in the middle

of the two placebo periods. Therefore, if our diff-in-diff and triple-diff regressions capture the

effects of NSMIA and not of other confounds, we should not find similar results when estimating

analogous regressions during the placebo periods.

      Importantly, the two placebo periods experienced similar growth in the inflow of capital

to the VC asset class as the actual analysis period. Specifically, whereas average annual real

growth in commitments to VC funds during 1994­1998 was 45.9%, it was 52.1% and 43.2%

during 1992­1996 and 1997­2001, respectively.27 This suggests that if our results in Tables 1


 27
      NVCA Yearbook (2013, 2016), Figure 2.02. Dollar figures deflated using the GDP deflator.




                                                     19
and 2 are driven by an increase in the inflow of capital to the VC asset class that is unrelated

to NSMIA, we should estimate similar results during the placebo periods.

       This is not what we find. Table 3 shows that when we estimate Equation (1) during the

1992­1996 or 1997­2001 placebo periods (columns 1 and 3), the interaction P ost×Late-stage round

is insignificant (p = 0.773 and p = 0.364, respectively).28 The same is true for the triple inter-

action P ost × Late-stage × N on-uniform blue sky state when we estimate placebo triple-diffs

during the 1992­1996 (column 2, p = 0.838) or 1997­2001 (column 4, p = 0.515) placebo

periods.

       Taken together, the fact that (1) the post-NSMIA increase in the propensity to raise out-

of-state capital is strongest in those states with non-uniform blue sky laws and (2) both our

diff-in-diff and triple-diff results are unique to NSMIA's actual treatment period supports a

causal interpretation of our estimates in Table 1.


3.4      NSMIA and the size of late-stage startup financing rounds

Having shown that NSMIA has facilitated startups' access to out-of-state investors, we now

analyze whether the law has also made it possible for these startups to raise larger financing

rounds. To do so, we begin by estimating a diff-in-diff regression analogous to Equation (1)

where the dependent variable is now the logarithm of the capital raised in a financing round.29

Column 1 in Table 4 shows that after NSMIA, late-stage financing rounds increase in size more

than early rounds: The coefficient of the interaction term P ost × Log round number implies a

30% (= log (3) × exp(0.171) - 1) post-NSMIA increase in round size for a startup raising its third

financing round relative to one raising its first round (p < 0.001). The relative post-NSMIA

increase when excluding IT startups in column 2 is similar (28%, p = 0.019).

       Columns 3 through 5 exploit the same cross-state differences in the expected impact of

NSMIA described in Section 3.3.1 above. Analogous to our findings in Table 2, a comparison

of columns 3 and 4 reveals that the impact of NSMIA on late-stage startups' ability to raise

large financing rounds is most pronounced in those states whose blue sky laws had not been


  28
    In the 1992­1996 and 1997­2001 placebo analyses, P ost equals one for quarters greater than or equal to
1994Q4 and 1999Q4, respectively.
  29
     We use the continuous version of the late-stage indicator (Log round number) to better account for the
fact that our measure of financing round size is also continuous.


                                                    20
uniformized with those of other states prior to NSMIA; the triple-diff results in column 4 show

that this difference is significant, although marginally so (p = 0.065).

       Table 5 presents placebo tests for our analysis of financing round size analogous to those

reported in Table 3 when analyzing startups' reliance on out-of-state investors. Column 1

shows that the diff-in-diff interaction P ost × Log round number is insignificant when estimated

during the 1992­1996 placebo period (p = 0.626). The same is true for the triple-diff interaction

P ost × Log round number × N on-uniform blue sky state in column 2 (p = 0.644).

       However, in column 3, the interaction P ost × Log round number is highly significant when

estimated during the 1997­2001 placebo period (p = 0.001). This suggests that our diff-in-diff

results in Table 4 may at least be partially driven by factors other than NSMIA that increased

the supply of capital to late-stage startups during the Internet boom in the late 1990s. Reassur-

ingly, though, the triple interaction P ost × Log round number × N on-uniform blue sky state

remains insignificant during this placebo period (column 4, p = 0.501). Taken together, these

placebo results support the hypothesis that NSMIA was a significant--but by no means the

only--driver of the increase in the supply of private capital during the mid and late 1990s.

       Columns 6 and 7 in Table 4 provide additional support for this hypothesis. Column 6

shows that the post-NSMIA increase in late-stage startups' ability to raise large financing

rounds is unique to the U.S.: There is no similar increase for startups located in Europe and

Canada, which did not deregulate the private equity markets in the middle of the 1994­1998

analysis period (p = 0.408).30 Column 7 shows that the difference between the diff-in-diff

results reported in column 1 for U.S. startups and those reported in column 6 for their foreign

counterparts, as captured by the triple interaction P ost × Log round number × U.S. startup,

is significant (p = 0.045).


3.5      NSMIA and the size of VC and PE funds

In addition to facilitating private startups' access to out-of-state investors, NSMIA has also

made it possible for VC and PE funds to raise capital from a larger number of investors without

facing the regulatory and disclosure requirements the ICA imposes on mutual funds and other


  30
    Section IA.2 in the Internet Appendix describes the evolution of the rules governing raising private equity
in Europe.


                                                      21
registered investment companies. To test whether NSMIA has helped VC and PE firms raise

larger funds, we follow a diff-in-diff strategy analogous to that in the previous sections. Here,

the control group consists of funds focused on investing in early-stage startups. The low capital

need of these funds' portfolio companies implies that they were unlikely to be constrained by

the pre-NSMIA 100-investor limit. By contrast, funds investing in startups seeking larger, late-

stage investments are more likely to have benefited from NSMIA making it easier for private

funds to raise large amounts of capital without registering under the ICA.31

       Column 1 in Table 6 shows that after NSMIA, late-stage-focused VC and PE firms are able

to raise larger funds: The coefficient of the interaction term P ost × % late-stage investments

implies a 47% post-NSMIA increase in fund size for a fund fully focused on late-stage invest-

ments relative to one fully focused on early-stage investments (p = 0.025).32 The relative

increase is even larger in column 2, where we exclude funds specialized in investing in IT

startups (p = 0.012).

       The fact that the pre-NSMIA registration requirements under the federal ICA affected all

U.S. funds equally means that our fund-level analysis in Table 6 does not lend itself to exploiting

cross-state variation as in the previous sections. However, mirroring columns 6 and 7 in Table

4, we can use data on foreign VC and PE funds to test the prediction that if NSMIA is the

driver of the increase in the size of late-stage funds, this increase should be unique to U.S.

funds. As expected, column 3 in Table 6 shows no increase in the size of foreign funds around

the passage of NSMIA (p = 0.279). Furthermore, the triple-diff results in column 4 indicate

that the difference between the diff-in-diff estimates for U.S. and foreign funds is significant

(p = 0.042 for the triple interaction P ost × % late-stage investments × U.S. fund).

       In order to further alleviate the concern that the post-NSMIA growth in the size of late-stage

funds might be a consequence of Internet boom-related factors independent of NSMIA, Table 7

presents placebo tests for our fund size analysis analogous to those in Tables 3 and 5. Columns

1 and 3 show that the diff-in-diff interaction P ost × % late-stage investments is insignificant


  31
     Coordination problems imply that it is easier for late-stage startups to raise large amounts of capital from
a few funds than small amounts from many funds (Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf, 2018).
  32
     Given that NSMIA's amendments to the ICA went into effect on January 1, 1997, we set the P ost indicator
equal to one for funds that closed in 1997 or later. As in Table 4, we use a continuous version of the late-stage
identifier (% late-stage investments) that combines fund type information (when available) with information
on the fund's initial investments to capture a fund's investment focus.


                                                       22
when estimated during the 1992­1996 and 1997­2001 placebo periods (p = 0.873 and p = 0.896,

respectively). The same is true for the triple-diff interaction P ost × % late-stage investments ×

U.S. fund in columns 2 and 4 (p = 0.409 and p = 0.992, respectively).

    The passage of NSMIA thus appears to have allowed VC and PE funds investing in late-

stage startups--traditional IPO candidates--to raise larger amounts of capital. This and our

other results in this section showing that NSMIA has facilitated late-stage startups' access to

out-of-state investors and has also allowed them to raise larger funding rounds point to NSMIA

as a positive shock to the supply of private capital. To be sure, these findings do not imply that

NSMIA has been the one and only driver of the changes in the U.S. entrepreneurial finance

market over the last three decades. We next conduct a broader examination of these changes.



4     The IPO Decline and the Financing of Late-Stage Startups

This section examines how the financing of VC-backed startups has evolved over the last three

decades. While the results in this section are descriptive in nature, they leave little doubt that

since 1996--the year that NSMIA was passed and public listings peaked in the U.S. (Doidge,

Karolyi, and Stulz, 2017)--private investors play an increasing role in financing even the largest

startups.


4.1   The evolution of startup exit rates

We begin by analyzing how the exit rate of VC-backed startups has evolved over time. Specif-

ically, for startups that raised their first VC financing round between 1992 and 2009, Figure 3

shows the stacked fractions of firms that (1) go public, (2) are acquired, (3) fail, or (4) remain

private during the seven years following that first financing round.

    Consistent with Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2013) and Gao, Ritter, and Zhu (2013), the

figure shows a sharp decline in IPO exits: The IPO rate declined from 26% for startups first

financed in 1994 to 2% for those first financed in 2000, and has hovered around 2% since then.

If those late-stage startups that used to go public were now being acquired by public firms,

they would still have access to public investors--albeit not as independent firms. This does

not appear to be the case: The acquisition exit rate has stood mostly flat at around 25%



                                               23
throughout our sample period.33 Instead, Figure 3 shows that the IPO decline has been made

up by an increase in the fraction of startups that remain private (and independent) for at least

seven years after their first financing round.

       Figure IA.2 in the Internet Appendix performs an analogous analysis measuring exits during

the 10 years following the first financing round. The figure shows that the fraction of startups

that remain private 10 years after their first financing round more than doubled from 11% for

startups that raised their first round in 1992 to 26% for those that did so in 2006. A comparison

of Figures 3 and IA.2 indicates that, as we expand the exit window, the fraction of firms that

remain private naturally shrinks and those of firms that go public, are acquired, or fail grow.

In particular, this suggests that part of the IPO decline is driven by startups taking longer

to go public--a trend confirmed by Figure 4, which shows that, for firms that go public, the

median numbers of years from first VC financing to IPO has increased by 75%, from around

four years in the 1990s to seven in recent years.34


4.2      Are private markets able to fund the growth of large startups?

Historically, only large and successful startups have gone public (e.g., Chemmanur, He, and

Nandy, 2009). We now study the extent to which private markets are able to finance the growth

of these traditional IPO candidates that are now staying private longer.


4.2.1      Raising large amounts of capital as a private firm

We begin by studying private startups' ability to raise large amounts of capital. For each

startup in our sample, we compute the total net capital (equity and debt) raised from both

public and private sources in the seven years following the startup's first financing round. For

firms that do not go public during these seven years, our measure of capital includes only

capital raised from private investors; for firms that go public, we include both pre-IPO private

capital as well as net capital raised at the IPO and any follow-on public offerings.


  33
     If we condition the sample on firms that do exit, then, consistent with Figure 2 in Gao, Ritter, and Zhu
(2013), we observe a sharp decline in the fraction of IPO exits and a symmetric increase in the fraction of exits
via acquisition. Our Figure 3 differs from Figure 2 in Gao et al. in that we do not condition on exits.
   34
      Mulcahy (2015) and Hesseldahl (2015) discuss the challenges faced by VC funds and their investors because
of the longer time VCs' portfolio companies take to exit and how VCs are adjusting their contractual terms--and,
in particular, relying on liquidation preferences--to protect their returns, respectively.


                                                       24
    The blue bars in Figure 5 show that, of those startups that received their first financing

round by 1996 (the year NSMIA was passed) and raised at least $150 million by age seven,

83% went public at some point during these seven years.35 The ability to raise large amounts

of public capital appears to have been a key driver of these firms' IPO decision: Untabulated

results reveal that 84% of the total net capital raised by the median such firm was from public

investors at or after the IPO. These findings are consistent with the notion that most startups

that raised large sums of capital in the pre-NSMIA years did so by going public.

    By contrast, the figure shows that of those startups whose first financing round was after

1996 and that also went on to raise over $150 million, only 42% raised at least some of this

capital after going public. Importantly, the red line in Figure 5 shows that the number of

startups raising over $150 million during the seven years following their first financing, scaled

by the average annual number of startups going public during these seven years, is similar

among those startups first financed in the mid-1990s and the mid-2000s--although lower than

at the peak of the Internet boom in 1999 and 2000. Figure 5 thus suggests that, in recent years,

private markets supply large sums of capital to startups that remain private.

    This conclusion is reinforced by Figure 6, which examines the evolution over time of the

relationship between the capital raised by a startup in the seven years following its first financing

round and the likelihood that the startup goes public during these seven years. To do so, we

plot the annual coefficient estimates t from the following regression:

                             Y7 it = t Log Capital7 it + t + s + j + it                                    (2)

where i indexes startups and t indexes the year of their first financing round. Y7 is an indicator

equal to one if the startup goes public during the seven years following its first financing

round; Capital7 is the net amount of capital (public and private) raised by the startup during

these seven years; and  ,  , and  denote first-financing year, state, and industry fixed effects,

respectively.

    Figure 6 shows that for startups first financed by 1996, there was a strong partial correlation


  35
     Throughout the paper, we measure age since a startup's first financing round. Fewer than 6.5% of our
sample firms raise $150 million by age seven, thus making $150 million a natural (if necessarily arbitrary)
threshold to identify large amounts of capital. Our conclusions are robust to using other thresholds, or to not
using a binary threshold at all (see Figure 6).



                                                      25
between the log capital a startup raised in the seven years following its first financing round

and the likelihood that it had gone public during these seven years. Since NSMIA's passage

in October 1996, this partial correlation has decreased by 75%. Thus, the growing ability of

private investors to supply large sums of capital has greatly weakened the correlation between

the capital raised by a startup and its listing status.


4.2.2    Achieving scale as a private firm: employment and sales

In addition to being able to raise large amounts of capital, are private startups able to reach

a large scale as measured by real outcomes such as employment or sales? Figures 7 and

8 present analogous versions of Figures 5 and 6 focusing on employment instead of capital

raised. Figure 7 shows that the post-1996 decline in IPOs has been accompanied by a marked

decline in the fraction of startups with over 200 employees by age seven that are public--but

not in the total number of startups that reach this size, which rebounded strongly after the

2001 recession. Similarly, Figure 8 shows that the partial correlation between a startup's log

number of employees and the likelihood that the startup is public was cut in four for startups

first financed in the 2000s relative to those first financed by 1996. Figures IA.3 and IA.4 in the

Internet Appendix present similar results for sales.

   In sum, while we cannot rule out the possibility that the decline in IPOs has made it harder

for some startups to fund their growth, the evidence in this section suggests that VC-backed

private startups can now reach a scale historically all but reserved to their public peers.


4.3     The evolution of the financing of late-stage startups

Consistent with our diff-in-diff results in Table 4, Panel A in Figure 9 shows that the average

round size raised by late-stage private startups (those at least four years old) sharply increased

after NSMIA's passage in 1996. The average late-stage round was between $5.9 million and

$7.3 million from 1992 to 1995. It increased to $7.6 million in 1996 and, most notably, to

$10.3 million in 1997 (the first full year after NSMIA's passage). The average round size then

oscillated between $10 million and $15 million between 1998 and 2013, with the only exception

of 2000 (the last year of the Internet boom), when it spiked to $20.3 million. The average

round reached again $20.3 million in 2015, before decreasing to $15.9 million in 2016.


                                                26
       Moving to the aggregate level, Panel B in Figure 9 shows a large increase in the log aggregate

capital raised by late-stage private startups beginning around the time of NSMIA's passage.

Specifically, late-stage private startups raised $1.282 billion of capital in 1995; in 2000, they

raised $7.664 billion, a 498% cumulative increase over five years. After declining in 2001 with

the end of the Internet boom, private capital going to late-stage startups continued to grow,

reaching $11.412 billion in 2005, $14.129 billion in 2010, and $33.020 billion in 2015. Panel A's

finding that the size of late-stage rounds remained largely flat from 2001 through 2013 suggests

that the aggregate increase in late-stage private capital during these years was largely driven

by an increase in the number of late-stage startups raising private capital. Figure IA.5 in the

Internet Appendix confirms that this was indeed the case, consistent with our finding in Figure

3 that the decline in IPOs since their 1996 peak has been accompanied by an increase in the

number of startups that remain private in their late-stage years.

       When applying a structural break test without imposing a known break date to the time

series of log aggregate capital raised by late-stage private startups from 1992 to 2016, the

estimated break closely follows NSMIA's passage in October 1996: The estimated break is

1997Q2 when using quarterly data (Wald statistic = 496.9, p < 0.001), and 1997 when using

annual data (Wald statistic = 141.0, p < 0.001).36 These findings support our conclusion in

Section 3 that NSMIA has been a positive shock to the supply of late-stage private capital--but

they of course do not imply that NSMIA has been the only driver of the private capital growth

shown in Figure 9.

       Traditionally, VC investors have been a key player in the entrepreneurial finance market,

particularly in funding the kind of high-growth startups that become IPO candidates (Puri

and Zarutskie, 2012). However, Panel B in Figure 9 shows that non-VC investors play an

increasingly important role in financing late-stage startups, consistently accounting for over

60% of late-stage private capital in recent years.

       Panel C breaks these non-VC investors into four categories: PE funds, corporations making

minority investments in startups, mutual funds, and a fourth category that combines hedge

funds and investment banks. PE funds, which Section 3.5 shows were also positively affected by


  36
    Specifically, we apply a supremum Wald test, which constructs a test statistic for a structural break without
imposing a known break date by choosing the maximum of the Wald tests computed at each possible break date.



                                                       27
NSMIA, are the largest non-VC investor in late-stage startups, with their aggregate investments

increasing from $235 million in 1995 to $8.367 billion in 2015. The post-1996 IPO decline thus

appears to have been accompanied by a gradual diversification of PE's traditional focus on

leveraged buyouts toward growth equity investments in late-stage startups. PE funds are

followed in order of importance by corporations, with mutual funds and the combined hedge

fund and investment bank category playing a more modest but increasing role.37

         Panels B and C in Figure 9 show that non-traditional startup investors such as PE, mutual,

and hedge funds have greatly increased their investments in late-stage startups. Are these

investors equally likely to invest in early-stage startups? Table IA.1 in the Internet Appendix

shows that this is not the case: When a non-VC investor first invests in a startup, the startup

tends to be older than when a traditional VC makes its initial investment (columns 1 and 2).

In addition, the table shows that non-VC investors are more likely to invest in out-of-state and

distant startups than their VC counterparts (columns 3 through 6).38 These conclusions are

all robust to considering only pre-NSMIA financings.

         The results in Table IA.1 thus indicate that the increasing role that non-VC investors play

in funding late-stage startups is not part of a broader phenomenon whereupon these investors

have now become major investors in startups of all ages. Rather, non-VC investors appear to

concentrate their investments in the kind of late-stage startups that have traditionally been IPO

candidates. In turn, non-VC investors' willingness to invest in out-of-state startups suggests

that they are uniquely positioned to take advantage of the fact that by preempting state blue

sky laws, NSMIA has made it easier for startups to raise out-of-state capital.



5         Why Do Startups Stay Private Longer?

The evidence presented so far points to the emergence of a new equilibrium in the U.S. en-

trepreneurial finance market, where late-stage startups are able to raise large sums of private

capital--both from traditional and new startup investors--to fund their growth while remain-


    37
    The rise of mutual funds as investors in private startups is the focus of recent studies by Chernenko, Lerner,
and Zeng (2017) and Kwon, Lowry, and Qian (2019).
  38
     This analysis includes round number fixed effects, and so it does not simply reflect the fact that non-VC
investors tend to invest in more mature startups that require less close monitoring.



                                                       28
ing private. This section seeks to shed light on the reasons that are driving many successful

startups to stay private longer than in the past.


5.1     The effect of founder control on exit decisions

A key reason why founders prefer to keep their firms private is that it allows them to retain

control of their firms (e.g., Boot, Gopalan, and Thakor, 2006; Brau and Fawcett, 2006; Helwege

and Packer, 2009). By contrast, investors' preferences are often quite different, particularly in

the case of VC investors. VC funds have a fixed lifecycle (typically, 10 years) at the end of

which the funds must be liquidated and the proceeds paid back to investors--ideally in cash or

liquid securities. In addition, VCs enjoy considerable reputational benefits from taking their

portfolio firms public, which helps them attract new investors--and fees--to their next fund

(Gompers, 1996). As a result, VC investors tend to favor taking their successful portfolio

companies public (or, to a lesser extent, selling them to a strategic or financial acquirer).

      If founders and VC investors differ in their exit preferences, this conflict should ultimately

be resolved in favor of the party with decision-making control at the time of the exit decision.

We test this prediction by examining how the founders' initial equity stake affects their startup's

future exit probability. To do so, we estimate the following equation:


  Y7 it = 0 + 1 F ounders' initial stakeit + 2 Log Capitalit + 3 Xst + t + s + j + it (3)


where i indexes startups and t indexes the year of their first financing round. Y7 is an indicator

equal to one if the startup has a successful exit (defined below) during the seven years following

its first financing; Capital is the total capital raised by the startup up to one year after its

first financing round;39 the vector X controls for the number of startups, number of public

pension funds (state and local), and population size in each state-year; and  ,  , and  denote

first-financing year, state, and industry fixed effects, respectively.

      Two reasons motivate our use of F ounders' initial (equity ) stake (measured one year after

the startup's first financing round) to capture the founders' decision-making control at the

time of the exit decision. First, Table IA.2 in the Internet Appendix shows a strong and


 39
      All our conclusions are robust to excluding this control.




                                                        29
persistent positive correlation between the founders' initial stake and the fraction of seats in

the startup's board of directors that the founders control; conversely, there is a strong and

persistent negative correlation between the founders' initial stake and the fraction of seats

controlled by the startup's investors.40 Second, measuring the founders' equity stake early

in the startup's life avoids capturing a mechanical correlation between the startup's financing

(and exit) decisions and the equity owned by the founders later in the startup's life.

       Of course, the founders' equity stake still remains endogenous even when measured years

before the exit decision. We address this endogeneity using an instrumental variable (IV)

approach. Our identification strategy builds on the assumption that VCs tend to invest in

nearby startups (Lerner, 1995). As a result, founders who raise their first financing round in

state-years with higher VC supply benefit from a "money chasing deals" environment (Gompers

and Lerner, 2000) that allows them to extract better terms--and, in particular, retain a higher

equity stake.

       Our IV exploits variation in the supply of venture capital stemming from the following

two facts: Public pension funds are an important source of capital for VCs, and they exhibit

substantial--and varying--home-state bias when investing in private equity (Hochberg and

Rauh, 2013). Specifically, the IV interacts two plausibly exogenous sources of variation in VC

supply at the state-year level, both measured the year before a startup's first financing round:

(1) variation in the assets of state and local pension funds (Gonzalez-Uribe, 2014; Bernstein,

Lerner, Sorensen, and Str¨
                         omberg, 2016), and (2) variation in the fraction of state officials (ap-

pointed and ex officio) in the funds' boards of trustees. This fraction "is strongly correlated

with a tendency of pension funds to bias the allocation toward in-state investments" (An-

donov, Hochberg, and Rauh, 2018, p. 2044).41 Consistent with the IV State pension assets ×

% state off icials in board satisfying the relevance requirement, column 1 in Table 8 shows

that it has a positive and strong partial correlation with F ounders' initial equity stake when


  40
     The analysis in Table IA.2 uses board size data from Form D filings, which we only have available for
VC-backed startups that raised capital in or after 2002. We find a similar negative correlation between the
founders' initial equity stake and the number (instead of the fraction) of board seats that investors control three
years later ( = -0.26, p < 0.01), which we observe for all startups in our sample.
  41
    The data source for the assets of state and local pension funds is the Census Bureau's Annual Survey of
Public Pensions (ASPP); data on the composition of each fund's board of trustees has been kindly provided
by Andonov, Hochberg, and Rauh (2018). In the case of state-years with multiple public pension funds, we
compute the asset-weighted average of the board fraction of state officials across the different funds.


                                                        30
estimating the first stage of Equation (3) (F = 27.9, p < 0.001).

       The exclusion restriction requires that the IV impacts a startup's exit decision up to seven

years later only through its effect on the founders' initial stake. The fact that the assets of a

state's public pension funds reflect the funds' past contributions and investment performance

as opposed to their investment opportunities at the time of the local startups' exit decision

supports the exclusion restriction. The exclusion restriction is further reinforced by the fact

that the board seat allocation of most public pension funds is stable and was initially set

decades before private equity became an established asset class and pension funds were allowed

to invest in it (Andonov, Hochberg, and Rauh, 2018). We thus expect the board fraction of

state officials in a state's public pension funds to be uncorrelated with changes in the exit

decisions of local startups.

       Two additional research design choices strengthen the exclusion restriction. First, our

inclusion of three state-year level controls in the vector X (number of startups, number of public

pension funds, and population size) helps control for changes in a state's economic conditions

that could be correlated with both the value of local pension funds and with the local startups'

future exit opportunities. Second, a potential identification concern is that in state-years with

higher pension assets and thus higher VC supply, the quality threshold required for a startup

to be able to raise venture capital may be lower than in state-years with lower pension assets.

The goal of our exit analysis is to capture the exit decisions of high-quality startups for which

a successful exit is a realistic option, and so over whose exit decision investors and founders

are likely to disagree. We thus exclude from the sample all startups that, within seven years

of their first financing round, either (1) fail or (2) are acquired at a low valuation that is less

than or equal to twice the total capital they raised in all pre-exit financings or $25 million.42

       Columns 2 through 7 in Table 8 estimate different versions of Equation (3) to investigate

the relationship between founder control and startup exit decisions. The dependent variable in

columns 2 through 4 is an indicator set equal to one if the startup goes public or is acquired

(at a non-low valuation) within seven years of its first financing round; in columns 5 through

7, it is an indicator set equal to one if the startup goes public within seven years.


  42
     Table IA.3 in the Internet Appendix shows that our findings are robust to also excluding from the sample
those startups that either fail or have a low-valuation acquisition more than seven years after their first financing.



                                                         31
       Columns 2 and 5 show that the OLS partial correlation between the initial equity stake of

a startup's founders and the startup's probability of exit is positive, though only significantly

so when focusing on IPO exits (p = 0.011). This finding is not surprising: The founders' initial

stake is likely positively correlated with unobserved startup quality, and higher-quality startups

are more likely to have a successful exit (and in particular an IPO), all else equal. We rely on

our IV identification strategy to address this endogeneity.

       Columns 3 and 6 show the reduced-form relationship between the instrument and the depen-

dent variables. The negative signs go in the hypothesized direction: More pension fund capital

available to startups increases founder bargaining power, which founders use to retain control

of their firms by delaying exits (p = 0.018 and p = 0.010 in columns 3 and 6, respectively).

       Columns 4 and 7 in Table 8 show the 2SLS results of estimating Equation (3). In contrast

to our OLS estimates, the instrumented founders' equity stake has a negative effect on the

likelihood of exiting via IPO or acquisition; the same is true when we focus only on IPO exits.

Specifically, the 2SLS estimate in column 4 indicates that a 1 percentage point increase in the

founders' initial equity stake leads to a 1.8 percentage point decrease in the probability that

the startup goes public or is acquired within seven years (p = 0.045); the decrease is somewhat

larger, 2.1 percentage points, when focusing only on IPO exits in column 7 (p = 0.032). These

effects are economically meaningful, given that the unconditional seven-year exit probability

in the sample is 30.6% when acquisition exits are included and 10.4% when they are not. Our

IV results thus support the notion that investors and successful founders often have conflicting

exit preferences that are resolved in favor of the party with decision-making control.


5.1.1      The role of California in the IV exit analysis

An important limitation of our IV exit analysis is that it is sensitive to the exclusion of California

startups, which account for 46% of the sample. Specifically, our IV's first stage has no power

when estimated within the Table 8 sample excluding California startups (henceforth, the non-

CA sample).43


  43
     When we estimate the same first-stage equation we report in Table 8 within the non-CA sample, the
estimated coefficient on the IV is positive (0.080) but insignificant (p = 0.772). The second-stage estimates
of the effect of founder equity on exits are negative but meaningless given the IV's lack of power. The large
number of California startups in our sample is common in VC papers; see, e.g., Gompers, Kovner, Lerner, and


                                                     32
       What explains the key role that California plays in our IV's first stage? California is by far

the state with the largest public pension fund assets, but California founders do not seem to

have larger equity stakes than their non-California counterparts.44 Rather, the lack of power

of our IV's first stage in the non-CA sample appears to be largely due to the fact that there

is insufficient within-state variation in the initial equity stakes of non-California founders for

Equation (3) to include state fixed effects. Consistent with this, Table IA.4 in the Internet

Appendix shows that replacing state fixed effects with Census division fixed effects increases

the power of our first stage within the non-CA sample, although the IV's F statistic remains

below 10 (F = 5.26, p = 0.026). The 2SLS estimates in Table IA.4 are in line with those in

Table 8, but noisier (p = 0.065 and p = 0.230 in columns 3 and 7, respectively).45

       In sum, while the effect of founder control on exit decisions does not appear to be fun-

damentally different for California and non-California startups, our IV does not allow us to

cleanly identify this effect when California startups are excluded from the sample.


5.2      Can an increase in founder control help explain the decline in IPOs?

The cross-sectional evidence in Section 5.1 raises the possibility that the decline in public

listings since 1996 may have been driven, at least in part, by a concurrent increase in founder

control: As founder control increases and so more founders are in a position to influence their

startup's exit decision, we should see fewer firms going public--particularly if private markets

are able to support the firms' growth.

       Figure 10 suggests that founder bargaining power has indeed increased since the early 1990s.

The figure reports the annual average fraction of equity held by startup founders one year after

their first financing round. Average founder equity increased from 50% to 55% during the

1990s, and then dropped significantly in the post-Internet boom years (likely due to a more


Scharfstein (2010) and Puri and Zarutskie (2012).
  44
     If anything, the opposite appears to be the case: The mean and median initial equity stakes owned by
California founders are 57.5% and 58.3%, respectively; for non-California founders, they are 59.0% and 60.3%.
  45
     The IV's F statistic increases above the critical value of 10 (Stock and Yogo, 2005) within the non-CA
sample if, in addition to replacing state with Census division fixed effects, Equation (3) does not control for the
number of startups in the state-year or the state-year population; in both cases, the 2SLS estimates of the effect
of founder equity are similar to those in Table IA.4, but less noisy. By contrast, the IV's F statistic decreases
somewhat if we do not control for the number of public pension funds.




                                                        33
challenging fundraising environment). However, by 2006, average founder equity had returned

to the year 2000 level, and it has continued to increase since then, approaching 70% for firms

first financed in 2015. Figure IA.6 in the Internet Appendix shows a similar pattern for founder

equity three years after the first financing event.

         Figure 11 further reinforces the notion that founders' control over exit decisions has in-

creased over time: It shows that the presence of redemption rights in first-round financings has

experienced a sharp decline since the early 2000s, standing at just 15% in 2016. Redemption

rights allow investors to force startups to repurchase their shares after a specified period of

time, often triggering an exit as startups do not have the necessary cash to buy investors out.46

         The reasons driving the increase in founder control are likely to be multiple, and a full

analysis of these reasons falls beyond the scope of our paper. For one, the increase in the

supply of private capital we have documented has likely strengthened founders' bargaining

power when negotiating with investors, even in early rounds. In addition, technological changes

decreasing startups' capital requirements early in their lifecycle--when uncertainty is highest

and thus capital is most expensive (Ewens, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf, 2018)--have likely

allowed founders to minimize the dilution they face in early rounds.

         Regardless of its ultimate driver, the increase in founder control shown in Figures 10 and

11, combined with the finding in Table 8 that founders with the most control are the most

likely to stay private, suggests that founders are using the increase in both their control and in

the supply of private capital to delay--temporarily or permanently--their startup's exit.



6         Conclusion

At the JOBS Act signing, President Obama (2012) said:

           For business owners who want to take their companies to the next level, this bill
           will make it easier for you to go public. And that's a big deal because going
           public is a major step towards expanding and hiring more workers. It's a big deal
           for investors as well, because public companies operate with greater oversight and
           greater transparency.


    46
    Figures IA.7 and IA.8 in the Internet Appendix show that both the fraction of equity owned by startup
founders and the presence of first-round redemption rights have followed similar evolutions for California and
non-California startups.



                                                     34
We show that the notion that going public is a major step toward expanding and hiring may

not be as big a deal as anticipated--at least not anymore. The deregulation of the private

equity markets--and in particular the National Securities Markets Improvement Act (NSMIA)

of 1996--has made it possible for both VC-backed startups and the funds investing in them

to raise large sums of private capital. This, together with the growing role of non-traditional

investors such as PE or mutual funds in the entrepreneurial finance market, allows private

startups to reach levels of employment and sales that few private firms used to reach.

   We emphasize that our results should not be interpreted as implying that NSMIA has been

the one and only driver of the increase in the supply of private capital and the decline in

IPOs in the U.S. The IPO decision is a multi-faceted one that is impacted by a number of

supply and demand forces in the public and private equity markets. Other factors--such as

the increased importance of intangible assets as well as technological changes that decrease

early-stage startups' capital requirements or make it easier for firms and investors to find each

other outside of centralized exchanges--are sure to have also helped fuel the fall in IPOs.

   But our results do suggest that by increasing the supply of private equity capital, NSMIA

has played a significant role in changing the going-public versus staying-private trade-off, help-

ing bring about a new equilibrium where fewer startups go public, and those that go public are

older. Importantly, this new equilibrium does not appear to be the result of successful startups

attempting to but being unable to go public. Rather, we show that the bargaining power of

startup founders vis-`
                     a-vis investors has increased and founders are using their increased control

over exit decisions to stay private longer. How this new equilibrium is affecting the incentives

and returns of startup investors remains an open question.

   The second "big deal" highlighted by President Obama--public companies operate with

greater oversight and greater transparency--undoubtedly remains a big deal. The new equi-

librium in the entrepreneurial finance market implies that an increasing number of the largest

and most successful firms in the U.S. economy are private and so avoid much of the scrutiny

and governance regulation imposed on their public peers (e.g., Gurley, 2015). It also implies

that ordinary stock-market investors--particularly those that invest via index funds--do not

hold in their portfolios an increasing number of the fastest growing firms (e.g., Partnoy, 2018).

We leave the investigation of these implications for future research.


                                               35
References

Aghamolla, Cyrus, and Richard T. Thakor, 2019, Do mandatory disclosure requirements for private
  firms increase the propensity of going public?, Working paper, University of Minnesota.

Agrawal, Ashwini K., 2013, The impact of investor protection law on corporate policy and performance:
  Evidence from the blue sky laws, Journal of Financial Economics 107, 417­435.

Andonov, Aleksandar, Yael V. Hochberg, and Joshua D. Rauh, 2018, Political representation and gov-
  ernance: Evidence from the investment decisions of public pension funds, Journal of Finance 73,
  2041­2086.

Armstrong, J. Sinclair, 1958, The blue sky laws, Virginia Law Review 44, 713­723.

Asker, John, Joan Farre-Mensa, and Alexander Ljungqvist, 2015, Corporate investment and stock mar-
  ket listing: A puzzle?, Review of Financial Studies 28, 342­390.

Badway, Ernest E., et al., 2016, Private equity and hedge funds: Regulatory analysis and struc-
  tural overview, White paper, Fox Rothschild LLP. Available at:            https://www.foxrothschild.com/

  content/uploads/2015/05/e-book-Badway-Horn-McCoy-Private-Equity-and-Hedge-Funds-Regulatory-Analysis-

  and-Structural-Overview-October-2016.pdf   .

Bernstein, Shai, 2015, Does going public affect innovation?, Journal of Finance 70, 1365­1403.

         , Josh Lerner, Morten Sorensen, and Per Str¨
                                                    omberg, 2016, Private equity and industry perfor-
  mance, Management Science 63, 1198­1213.

Bodnaruk, Andriy, Eugene Kandel, Massimo Massa, and Andrei Simonov, 2007, Shareholder diversifi-
  cation and the decision to go public, Review of Financial Studies 21, 2779­2824.

Boot, Arnoud W.A., Radhakrishnan Gopalan, and Anjan V. Thakor, 2006, The entrepreneur's choice
  between private and public ownership, Journal of Finance 61, 803­836.

Brau, James C., and Stanley E. Fawcett, 2006, Initial public offerings: An analysis of theory and
  practice, Journal of Finance 61, 399­436.

Buttonwood, 2018, American startups have less need to list on the stockmarket, The Economist,
  September 29, 2018. Available at:   https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2018/09/29/american-

  startups-have-less-need-to-list-on-the-stockmarket   .

Campbell, Rutheford B., 1998, The impact of NSMIA on small issuers, The Business Lawyer 53, 575­
  589.

                                                   36
Celikyurt, Ugur, Merih Sevilir, and Anil Shivdasani, 2010, Going public to acquire? The acquisition
  motive in IPOs, Journal of Financial Economics 96, 345­363.

Chemmanur, Thomas J., Shan He, and Debarshi K. Nandy, 2009, The going-public decision and the
  product market, Review of Financial Studies 23, 1855­1908.

Chernenko, Sergey, Josh Lerner, and Yao Zeng, 2017, Mutual funds as venture capitalists? Evidence
  from unicorns, Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chernova, Yuliya, 2019, Palantir co-founder says IPO for company likely years away, The Wall Street
  Journal, June 12, 2019. Available at:       https://www.wsj.com/articles/palantir-co-founder-says-ipo-for-

  company-likely-years-away-11560374990   .

Cox, James D., 2013, Who can't raise capital? The Scylla and Charybdis of capital formation, Kentucky
  Law Journal 102, 1­16.

D'Amato, Alfonse, 1996, Congressional Record ­ Senate (S12093), October 1, 1996. Available at:        https:

  //www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CREC-1996-10-01/pdf/CREC-1996-10-01-pt1-PgS12093-2.pdf   .

de Fontenay, Elisabeth, 2017, The deregulation of private capital and the decline of the public company,
  Hastings Law Journal 68, 445­502.

Delaney, Kevin J., and Robin Sidel, 2004, Google IPO aims to change the rules, The Wall Street Journal,
  April 30, 2004. Available at:   https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB108328345314098183    .

Denos, Kenneth I., 1997, Blue and gray skies: The National Securities Markets Improvement Act of
  1996 makes the case for uniformity in state securities law, Utah Law Review 101, 101­136.

Doidge, Craig, Kathleen M. Kahle, Andrew Karolyi, and Ren´
                                                         e M. Stulz, 2018, Eclipse of the public
  corporation or eclipse of the public markets?, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 30, 8­16.

Doidge, Craig, Andrew Karolyi, and Ren´
                                      e M. Stulz, 2013, The U.S. left behind? Financial globalization
  and the rise of IPOs outside the U.S., Journal of Financial Economics 110, 546­573.

       , 2017, The U.S. listing gap, Journal of Financial Economics 123, 464­487.

Driebusch, Corrie, 2017, IPO market isn't quite back as many startups are still holding out, The Wall
  Street Journal, July 5, 2017. Available at:    https://www.wsj.com/articles/ipo-market-isnt-quite-back-as-

  many-startups-are-still-holding-out-1499252401   .




                                                       37
Dwoskin, Elizabeth, Rolfe Winkler, and Susan Pulliam, 2015, Palantir and investors spar over how
  to cash in, The Wall Street Journal, December 29, 2015. Available at:      https://www.wsj.com/articles/

  palantir-and-investors-spar-over-how-to-cash-in-1451439352   .

Ewens, Michael, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2018, Cost of experimentation and the
  evolution of venture capital, Journal of Financial Economics 128, 422­442.

Farre-Mensa, Joan, 2017, The benefits of selective disclosure: Evidence from private firms, Working
  paper, University of Illinois at Chicago.

Gao, Xiaohui, Jay R. Ritter, and Zhongyan Zhu, 2013, Where have all the IPOs gone?, Journal of
  Financial and Quantitative Analysis 48, 1663­1692.

Gompers, Paul, 1995, Optimal investment, monitoring, and the staging of venture capital, Journal of
  Finance 50, 1461­1489.

         , 1996, Grandstanding in the venture capital industry, Journal of Financial Economics 42,
  133­156.

         , Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein, 2010, Performance persistence in en-
  trepreneurship, Journal of Financial Economics 96, 18­32.

Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner, 2000, Money chasing deals? The impact of fund inflows on private
  equity valuation, Journal of Financial Economics 55, 281­325.

Gonzalez-Uribe, Juanita, 2014, Venture capital and the diffusion of knowledge, Working paper, London
  School of Economics.

Gornall, Will, and Ilya A. Strebulaev, 2015, The economic impact of venture capital: Evidence from
  public companies, Working paper, Stanford University.

Gurley, Bill, 2015, Investors beware: Today's $100m+ late-stage private rounds are very different from
  an IPO, February 25, 2015. Available at:    http://abovethecrowd.com/2015/02/25/investors-beware   .

Hall, Robert E., and Susan E. Woodward, 2010, The burden of the nondiversifiable risk of entrepreneur-
  ship, American Economic Review 100, 1163­94.

Helwege, Jean, and Frank Packer, 2009, Private matters, Journal of Financial Intermediation 18, 362­
  383.




                                                   38
Hesseldahl, Arik, 2015, Here's one thing all the billion-dollar unicorns have in common, May 10, 2015.
  Available at:        https://www.vox.com/2015/5/10/11562462/heres-one-thing-all-the-billion-dollar-unicorns-

  have-in-common   .

Hochberg, Yael V., and Joshua D. Rauh, 2013, Local overweighting and underperformance: Evidence
  from limited partner private equity investments, Review of Financial Studies 26, 403­451.

Ivanov, Vladimir, and Scott Bauguess, 2013, Capital raising in the U.S.: An analysis of unregistered
  offerings using the Regulation D exemption, 2009­2012, Working Paper, Securities and Exchange
  Commission.

Johnson, Jennifer J., 2010, Private placements: A regulatory black hole, Delaware Journal of Corporate
  Law 35, 151­198.

Kerr, William R., and Ramana Nanda, 2011, Financing constraints and entrepreneurship, in David
  Audretsch, Oliver Falck, and Stephan Heblich, ed.: Handbook of Research on Innovation and En-
  trepreneurship (Edward Elgar Publishing: Cheltenham, U.K.).

         , 2015, Financing innovation, Annual Review of Financial Economics 7, 445­462.

Kortum, Samuel, and Josh Lerner, 2000, Assessing the contribution of venture capital to innovation,
  RAND Journal of Economics 31, 674­692.

Kwon, Sungjoung, Michelle Lowry, and Yiming Qian, 2019, Mutual fund investments in private firms,
  Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.

Lerner, Josh, 1995, Venture capitalists and the oversight of private firms, Journal of Finance 50, 301­
  318.

Levitt, Arthur, 1996, Testimony at the hearings on S. 1815 [the Senate version of the bill that ultimately
  became NSMIA] before the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, June 5, 1996.
  Available at:    https://www.sec.gov/news/testimony/testarchive/1996/spch107.txt   .

Macey, Jonathan R., and Geoffrey P. Miller, 1991, Origin of the Blue Sky Laws, Texas Law Review 70,
  347­398.

Mahoney, Paul G., 2003, The origins of the Blue-Sky Laws: A test of competing hypotheses, Journal of
  Law and Economics 46, 229­251.

Maynard, Therese H., 1987, Uniform limited offering exemption: How uniform is uniform ­ An evaluation
  and critique of the ULOE, Emory Law Journal 36, 357­532.

                                                       39
Mulcahy, Diane, 2015, The new reality of the 14-year venture capital fund, Institutional Investor,
  February 19, 2015. Available at:   https://www.institutionalinvestor.com/article/b14z9vv7hjbt6y/the-new-

  reality-of-the-14-year-venture-capital-fund    .

Nanda, Ramana, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2018, Coordination frictions in venture capital syndicates,
  Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

NVCA, 2011, Letter from the NVCA to the SEC Re: "Release No. IA-3110; File No S7-36-10, Rules
  Implementing Amendments to the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (the Proposed Implementing
  Rules)," January 24, 2011. Available at:      https://www.sec.gov/comments/s7-36-10/s73610-32.pdf   .

Obama, Barack H., 2012, Remarks by the Pesident at JOBS Act Bill signing, April 5, 2012. Avail-
  able at:    https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/2012/04/05/remarks-president-jobs-act-

  bill-signing   .

Pagano, Marco, Fabio Panetta, and Luigi Zingales, 1998, Why do companies go public? An empirical
  analysis, Journal of Finance 53, 27­64.

Partnoy, Frank, 2018, The death of the IPO, The Atlantic, November 2018. Available at:                    https:

  //www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2018/11/private-inequity/570808   .

Puri, Manju, and Rebecca Zarutskie, 2012, On the life cycle dynamics of venture-capital and non-
  venture-capital-financed firms, Journal of Finance 67, 2247­2293.

Ritter, Jay, 2018, Initial public offerings: Updated statistics, Working paper, University of Florida.

Robb, Alicia M., and David T. Robinson, 2014, The capital structure decisions of new firms, Review of
  Financial Studies 27, 153­179.

Sargent, Mark A., 1986, Report on State merit regulation of securities offerings, The Business Lawyer
  41, 785­852.

SEC, 1996, SEC analysis and recommendations on S. 1815. Available at:               https://www.sec.gov/news/

  testimony/testarchive/1996/spch107a.txt   .

       , 2011, Exemptions for advisers to venture capital funds, private fund advisers with less than $150
  million in assets under management, and foreign private advisers. Available at:        https://www.sec.gov/

  rules/final/2011/ia-3222.pdf   .

       , 2019, The laws that govern the securities industry. Available at:       https://www.sec.gov/answers/

  about-lawsshtml.html   .

                                                     40
Sherman, William D., and Schuyler L. Williams, 1995, State securities laws: Considerations of raising
  capital, in Richard D. Harroch, ed.: Start-Up Companies: Planning, Financing and Operating the
  Successful Business (Law Journal Press: New York, N.Y.).

Sorenson, Olav, and Toby E. Stuart, 2001, Syndication networks and the spatial distribution of venture
  capital investments, American Journal of Sociology 106, 1546­1588.

Stock, James H., and Motohiro Yogo, 2005, Testing for weak instruments in linear IV regression, in
  James H. Stock, and Donald W. K. Andrews, ed.: Identification and Inference for Econometric
  Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas J. Rothenberg (Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, U.K.).

Texas State Securities Board, 2019, Exemptions from registration. Available at:                     https://

  www.ssb.texas.gov/securities-professionals/regulation-securities/federal-covered-securities   .

Weild, David, 2011, How to revive small-cap IPOs, The Wall Street Journal, October 27, 2011. Available
  at:   https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052970203554104577001522344390902   .

Zingales, Luigi, 1995, Insider ownership and the decision to go public, Review of Economic Studies 62,
  425­448.

Zweig, Jason, 2010, The demise of the IPO--and ideas on how to revive it, The Wall Street Journal,
  June 25, 2010. Available at:    https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052748704569204575328784069347058   .




                                                    41
                               Figure 1: Form D filings around NSMIA.
The figure shows the number of Rule 506 (Panel A) and Rules 504 and 505 (Panel B) Form D filings by private
firms for each quarter from 1994 to 1998. The data come from a FOIA request to the SEC. Firms operating
in the natural resource industry are excluded. The vertical line represents the last quarter of 1996, the quarter
that NSMIA was passed.

                                  (A)   Form D filings using 506 exemption




                            (B)   Form D filings using 504 or 505 exemption




                                                       42
Figure 2: Propensity to raise capital from out-of-state investors around NSMIA ­ Dynamics.
The figure shows the results of estimating a dynamic version of our diff-in-diff analysis examining NSMIA's
effect on startups' propensity to raise capital from out-of-state investors. Specifically, we estimate a dynamic
version of Equation (1), where we interact the treatment variable Late-stage round with indicators identifying
the semester of each financing round. Observations belonging to the semester prior to NSMIA's passage (the
first semester of 1996) are excluded. The plot presents the point estimates and 95% confidence intervals of the
differences between the coefficients on the interaction terms Semester × Late-stage round and the pre-NSMIA
average of these coefficients, where robust standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                        43
                          Figure 3: Exit status by year of first VC financing.
For startups that raised their first financing round between 1992 and 2009, the figure shows the (stacked) fractions
of startups that (1) go public, (2) are acquired, (3) fail, or (4) remain private during the seven years following
that first financing round. For instance, for firms that raised their first financing round in 2000, we measure
exits as of 2007. We observe exits through 2016, so ending the sample of first financing rounds in 2009 allows us
to observe seven full years of exits for all firms. Section IA.3 in the Internet Appendix describes how we define
and identify exits, failures, and firms that are still private.




                                                          44
                                      Figure 4: Median age at IPO.
For each IPO year, the figure reports the median age of VC-backed startups at the time of their IPO, where age
is defined as the number of years since the startup's first financing round.




                                                       45
                    Figure 5: Raising large amounts of capital as a private firm.
For each first financing round year, the figure reports the number of VC-backed startups that raise at least
$150 million (in real 2009 U.S. dollars) during the seven years following their first financing round scaled by
the average annual number of VC-backed startups going public during these seven years (red line), as well as
the fraction of startups raising at least $150 million that go public during the same seven years (blue bars).
Capital includes both equity and debt. For firms that do not go public during the seven years following their
first financing round, our measure of capital includes only capital raised from private investors; for firms that go
public, we include both pre-IPO private capital as well as net capital raised at the IPO and any follow-on public
offerings within seven years of the first financing round. Both here and in Figure 6, data on capital raised by
private firms come from VentureSource; data on capital raised by public firms come from Compustat.




                                                        46
Figure 6: Evolution of the relationship between the capital raised by a startup and the likelihood
that the startup is public.
The figure shows the evolution over time of the relationship between the capital raised by a startup in the seven
years following its first financing round and the likelihood that the startup goes public during these seven years.
Specifically, the figure plots the annual coefficient estimates t (alongside their 95% confidence intervals) from
the following regression:
                                     Y7 it = t Log Capital7 it + t + s + j + it

where i indexes startups and t indexes the year of their first financing round. Y7 is an indicator equal to one if
the startup goes public during the seven years following its first financing round; Capital7 is the net amount of
capital (public and private) raised by the startup during these seven years (in real 2009 U.S. dollars); and  ,  ,
and  denote first-financing year, state, and industry fixed effects, respectively. Robust standard errors are used
to construct the 95% confidence intervals.




                                                        47
                    Figure 7: Reaching scale as a private firm ­ Employment.
For each first financing round year, the figure reports the number of VC-backed startups that have at least 200
employees at some point during the seven years following their first financing round (red line), as well as the
fraction of these startups that go public during these seven years (blue bars). Both here and in Figure 8, data
on the number of employees of private firms come from VentureSource and the National Establishment Time
Series (NETS) database; data on the number of employees of public firms come from Compustat.




                                                      48
Figure 8: Evolution of the relationship between a startup's employment and the likelihood that
the startup is public.
The figure shows the evolution over time of the relationship between a startup's maximum number of employees
during the seven years following its first financing round and the likelihood that the startup goes public during
these seven years. Specifically, the figure plots the annual coefficient estimates t (alongside their 95% confidence
intervals) from the following regression:

                               Y7 it = t Log Employment7 it + t + s + j + it

where i indexes startups and t indexes the year of their first financing round. Y7 is an indicator equal to one if
the startup goes public during the seven years following its first financing round; Employment7 is the startup's
maximum number of employees during these seven years; and  ,  , and  denote first-financing year, state, and
industry fixed effects, respectively. Robust standard errors are used to construct the 95% confidence intervals.




                                                        49
   Figure 9: Evolution of the capital raised by late-stage startups ­ Amount and sources.
For each financing year, Panel A shows the average size (in real 2009 U.S. dollars) of financing rounds raised by
VC-backed private startups at least four years old; round sizes are winsorized at the 1% level, and age is defined
as years since the first financing round. In Panel B, the red line shows the logarithm of the aggregate amount
of capital raised by VC-backed private startups at least four years old; the blue bars report the fraction of this
capital provided by investors that are not VCs. Panel C breaks down the capital provided by non-VC investors
into four categories: PE funds, corporations making minority investments in startups (either directly or via their
venture capital arms), mutual funds, and a fourth category that combines hedge funds and investment banks.
Panel C omits investors that VentureSource identifies as "Other," a catch-all category that includes individuals,
family offices, and sovereign wealth funds, among others. In the case of financing rounds with multiple investors
for which VentureSource does not break their individual investment amounts, we assume that the lead investor
provides half of the capital and the rest is split equally among the other syndicate members.

                                     (A)   Average late-stage round size




                    (B)   Aggregate capital raised from VC and non-VC investors




                                                       50
Figure 9: Evolution of the capital raised by late-stage startups ­ Amount and sources
(continued).


                            (C)   Breaking down non-VC investors




                                              51
                  Figure 10: Evolution of startup founders' initial equity stake.
The figure reports the annual average fraction of equity held by startup founders one year after their first
financing round (which is why the figure ends in 2015, one year before the end of our sample period). Section
IA.4 in the Internet Appendix describes how we compute the founders' initial equity stake.




                                                     52
      Figure 11: Evolution of the presence of redemption rights in first-round financings.
The figure reports the annual fraction of first-round VC financing contracts that have redemption rights. Re-
demption rights allow investors to force startups to repurchase their shares after a specified period of time, often
triggering an exit as startups do not have the necessary cash to buy investors out. The figure begins in 1995
because this is the first year for which we observe contract features such as redemption rights.




                                                        53
         Table 1: Propensity to raise capital from out-of-state investors around NSMIA.
The table presents diff-in-diff analyses examining NSMIA's effect on startups' propensity to raise capital from
out-of-state investors. Specifically, we report the results of estimating Equation (1) using a linear probability
model, where the unit of observation is an equity financing round and the sample of financings ranges from 1994
to 1998. The dependent variable in columns 1, 2 and 4 is an indicator set equal to one if at least one of the
investors in the financing round has offices outside the startup's state; in column 3, the dependent variable is the
fraction of investors in the financing round with offices outside the startup's state. Column 4 excludes startups
in the information technology (IT) industry. The treatment variable in columns 1, 3, and 4, Late-stage round,
is and indicator set equal to one if the financing event is a Series C or higher; in column 2, we use a continuous
version of the late-stage indicator, the logarithm of the startup's financing round number, capped at five. The
P ost indicator identifies all financings that take place in or after the fourth quarter of 1996. All regressions
include financing year-quarter fixed effects (which subsume the non-interacted P ost indicator) as well as startup
state and industry fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level are reported in parentheses.
                           
We use      ,      , and      to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.


                                          Has out-of-state            Fraction of out-         Has out-of-state
                     Dep. var.:             investors?               of-state investors          investors?

                                             All          All                 All                   Exclude IT
                                             (1)          (2)                 (3)                       (4)

  Post × Late-stage round                 0.041                            0.048                     0.070
                                          (0.012)                          (0.018)                   (0.020)
  Post × Log round no.                                 0.049
                                                       (0.011)
  Late-stage round                        0.173                            0.080                     0.138
                                          (0.028)                          (0.010)                   (0.022)
  Log round no.                                        0.176
                                                       (0.026)
  Constant                                0.377        0.332               0.415                       0.109
                                          (0.119)      (0.115)             (0.123)                    (0.113)

  Observations                              8244         8244                8244                      3038
  R2                                        0.109        0.136               0.201                     0.125




                                                                54
Table 2: Cross-state variation in the propensity to raise capital from out-of-state investors
around NSMIA.
The table investigates cross-state differences in the impact of NSMIA on startups' propensity to raise capital
from out-of-state investors. Columns 1 and 2 estimate the same model as column 1 in Table 1 within the
subsamples of uniform and non-uniform blue sky states, respectively; uniform blue sky states are those that
had voluntarily coordinated their blue sky laws before the passage of NSMIA by adopting the Uniform Lim-
ited Offering Exemption (ULOE) or the Small Corporate Offering Registration (SCOR). Column 3 investigates
whether the subsample differences in columns 1 and 2 are significant by estimating a triple-diff model. All re-
gressions include financing year-quarter fixed effects (which subsume the non-interacted P ost indicator), startup
state fixed effects (which in column 3 subsume the non-interacted N on-uniform blue sky state indicator), and
industry fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level are reported in parentheses. We use
                  
   ,      , and      to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.


                                               Dep. var.:              Has out-of-state investors?

                                                                     Uniform          Non-uniform      Triple-
                                                                  blue sky states    blue sky states    diff
                                                                        (1)                (2)          (3)

   Post × Late-stage round                                           0.030               0.114          0.027
                                                                     (0.011)             (0.028)        (0.012)
   Late-stage round                                                  0.186                0.082        0.190
                                                                     (0.027)             (0.042)        (0.026)
   Post × Late-stage × Non-uniform blue sky                                                            0.099
                                                                                                        (0.027)
   Post × Non-uniform blue sky state                                                                    -0.043
                                                                                                        (0.023)
   Late-stage × Non-uniform blue sky state                                                             -0.114
                                                                                                        (0.046)
   Constant                                                          0.363               0.713         0.376
                                                                     (0.153)             (0.077)        (0.120)

   Observations                                                       7121                 1123         8244
   R2                                                                 0.111                0.130        0.109




                                                             55
Table 3: Propensity to raise capital from out-of-state investors around NSMIA ­ Placebo tests.
The table presents placebo versions of our diff-in-diff and triple-diff analyses of NSMIA's impact on startups'
propensity to raise capital from out-of-state investors. Specifically, in columns 1 and 2, the placebo tests
estimate our diff-in-diff and triple-diff analyses during 1992­1996, the years immediately preceding the passage
and implementation of NSMIA; in columns 3 and 4, we estimate analogous placebo tests during 1997­2001,
the years immediately following NSMIA's passage. The diff-in-diff and triple-diff placebo analyses in columns 1
and 2 are analogous to their baseline counterparts in Table 1 (column 1) and Table 2 (column 3), respectively,
but with the P ost indicator set equal to one for quarters greater than or equal to 1994Q4; the same is true
in columns 3 and 4, but in this case the P ost indicator is set equal to one for quarters greater than or equal
to 1999Q4. When the placebo period is 1992­1996 in columns 1 and 2, the last quarter for which the placebo
indicator P ost is equal to 1 includes the true NSMIA regulatory change; this choice is conservative, as it biases
us against estimating no placebo treatment effect. All regressions include financing year-quarter fixed effects
(which subsume the non-interacted P ost indicator), startup state fixed effects (which in columns 2 and 4 subsume
the non-interacted N on-uniform blue sky state indicator), and industry fixed effects. Robust standard errors
                                                                                     
clustered at the state level are reported in parentheses. We use      ,      , and      to denote significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.


                                     Dep. var.:                    Has out-of-state investors?
                                                         Sample: 1992­1996                     Sample: 1997­2001
                                                       Diff-in-diff       Triple-diff        Diff-in-diff   Triple-diff
                                                           (1)               (2)                 (3)           (4)

  Post × Late-stage round                                 -0.007            -0.004              -0.017        -0.013
                                                         (0.025)           (0.029)             (0.018)       (0.022)
  Post × Late-stage × Non-unif. blue sky                                    -0.009                            -0.023
                                                                           (0.046)                           (0.035)
  Late-stage round                                      0.191              0.202              0.242          0.247
                                                        (0.037)            (0.037)            (0.033)        (0.036)
  Late-stage × Non-uniform blue sky state                                   -0.094                            -0.035
                                                                           (0.063)                           (0.045)
  Post × Non-uniform blue sky state                                          0.023                            -0.004
                                                                           (0.053)                           (0.037)
  Constant                                              0.660              0.656               0.255         0.254
                                                        (0.108)            (0.107)             (0.116)       (0.119)

  Observations                                            5516                5516              17871          17871
  R2                                                      0.126               0.127             0.082          0.082




                                                       56
                                                            Table 4: Size of startup financing rounds around NSMIA.
     The table reports the results of diff-in-diff and triple-diff analyses examining NSMIA's effect on the size of startup financing rounds raised from 1994 to 1998.
     The dependent variable in all columns is the logarithm of the dollar amount raised by the startup in the financing round (in real 2009 U.S. dollars). We use the
     continuous version of the late-stage indicator (Log round no.) to better account for the fact that our measure of financing round size is also continuous. Otherwise,
     the analyses in columns 1 through 5 are analogous to their counterparts in Tables 1 and 2. Column 6 estimates the same diff-in-diff model estimated in column 1
     using data for startups located in Europe and Canada, while column 7 estimates a triple-diff model combining the data for U.S. and foreign startups. All regressions
     include financing year-quarter fixed effects (which subsume the non-interacted P ost indicator) and industry fixed effects. In addition, columns 1 through 5 include
     state fixed effects (which in column 5 subsume the non-interacted N on-uniform blue sky state indicator), column 6 includes country fixed effects, and column 7
     includes state-country fixed effects (i.e., state fixed effects for U.S. startups and country fixed effects for foreign ones; these fixed effects subsume the non-interacted
     U.S. startup indicator). Robust standard errors clustered at the state (in columns 1 through 5), country (in column 6), and state-country (in column 7) level are
                                                         
     reported in parentheses. We use      ,      , and      to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                                                                 Dep. var.:                             Log capital raised in round
                                                                                                                                                         U.S. &
                                                                                                     U.S. startups                           Non-U.S.   Non-U.S.

                                                                                           Exclude   Uniform    Non-uniform     Triple-                  Triple-
57




                                                                                Baseline     IT      blue sky    blue sky        diff        Placebo      diff
                                                                                  (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)        (7)

                       Post × Log round no.                                     0.171      0.151     0.159           0.218      0.154         -0.207     -0.346
                                                                                (0.032)    (0.062)   (0.037)         (0.059)    (0.039)      (0.245)    (0.246)
                       Post × Log round no. × Non-uniform blue sky                                                               0.119
                                                                                                                                (0.063)
                       Post × Log round no. × U.S. startup                                                                                              0.509
                                                                                                                                                        (0.249)
                       Log round no.                                            0.427      0.433     0.444           0.317      0.450        1.174      1.325
                                                                                (0.079)    (0.070)   (0.085)         (0.058)    (0.083)      (0.234)    (0.209)
                       Post × Non-uniform blue sky state                                                                         -0.063
                                                                                                                                (0.078)
                       Log round no. × Non-uniform blue sky state                                                                -0.173
                                                                                                                                (0.121)
                       Post × U.S. startup                                                                                                                -0.067
                                                                                                                                                         (0.151)
                       Log round no. × U.S. startup                                                                                                     -0.898
                                                                                                                                                         (0.226)
                       Constant                                                 1.169       0.584    1.734        -0.761        1.160        -1.063      0.683
                                                                                (0.523)    (0.558)   (0.161)       (0.156)      (0.524)       (0.103)    (0.128)

                       Observations                                              7963       2943       6887           1076       7963          818       8783
                       R2                                                        0.132      0.139      0.132          0.186      0.133        0.253      0.169
              Table 5: Size of startup financing rounds around NSMIA ­ Placebo tests.
The table presents placebo versions of our diff-in-diff and triple-diff analyses of NSMIA's effect on the size of
startup financing rounds. Specifically, in columns 1 and 2, the placebo tests estimate our diff-in-diff and triple-
diff analyses during 1992­1996, the years immediately preceding the passage and implementation of NSMIA;
in columns 3 and 4, we estimate analogous placebo tests during 1997­2001, the years immediately following
NSMIA's passage. The diff-in-diff and triple-diff placebo analyses in columns 1 and 2 are analogous to their
baseline counterparts in Table 4, columns 1 and 5, respectively, but with the P ost indicator set equal to one for
quarters greater than or equal to 1994Q4; the same is true in columns 3 and 4, but in this case the P ost indicator
is set equal to one for quarters greater than or equal to 1999Q4. When the placebo period is 1992­1996 in columns
1 and 2, the last quarter for which the placebo indicator P ost is equal to 1 includes the true NSMIA regulatory
change; this choice is conservative, as it biases us against estimating no placebo treatment effect. All regressions
include financing year-quarter fixed effects (which subsume the non-interacted P ost indicator), startup state
fixed effects (which in columns 2 and 4 subsume the non-interacted N on-uniform blue sky state indicator), and
industry fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level are reported in parentheses. We use
                  
   ,      , and      to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.


                                               Dep. var.:                   Log capital raised in round
                                                                    Sample: 1992­1996            Sample: 1997­2001
                                                                  Diff-in-diff   Triple-diff   Diff-in-diff   Triple-diff
                                                                      (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)

  Post × Log round no.                                              0.026          0.013        0.198          0.208
                                                                   (0.053)        (0.050)       (0.058)        (0.069)
  Post × Log round no. × Non-unif. blue sky                                        0.102                        -0.082
                                                                                  (0.220)                      (0.121)
  Log round no.                                                    0.428          0.458         0.723          0.735
                                                                   (0.090)        (0.086)       (0.086)        (0.093)
  Log round no. × Non-uniform blue sky                                             -0.235                       -0.075
                                                                                  (0.249)                      (0.116)
  Post × Non-uniform blue sky state                                                -0.003                       -0.100
                                                                                  (0.109)                      (0.113)
  Constant                                                         1.599          1.588           0.556          0.562
                                                                   (0.343)        (0.343)        (0.646)       (0.645)

  Observations                                                      5423           5423           17086         17086
  R2                                                                0.118          0.119          0.237         0.237




                                                             58
                            Table 6: Size of VC and PE funds around NSMIA.
The table reports the results of diff-in-diff and triple-diff analyses examining NSMIA's effect on the size of VC
and PE funds that closed between 1994 and 1998. The dependent variable in all columns is the logarithm of
the dollar amount committed to the fund (in real 2009 U.S. dollars). As in Table 4, we use a continuous version
of the late-stage identifier (% late-stage investments) that combines fund type information (when available)
with information on the fund's initial investments to capture a fund's investment focus. Given that NSMIA's
amendments to the Investment Company Act went into effect on January 1, 1997, we set the P ost indicator equal
to one for funds that closed in 1997 or later. Column 2 excludes funds specialized in investing in information
technology (IT) startups. Column 3 estimates the same diff-in-diff model estimated in column 1 using data
for funds located in Europe and Canada, while column 4 estimates a triple-diff model combining the data for
U.S. and foreign funds. We exclude from the analysis boutique funds with less than $30 million in assets under
management. All regressions include fund closing year fixed effects (which subsume the non-interacted P ost
indicator) and industry fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the VC firm level are reported in
                                     
parentheses. We use     ,    , and      to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.



                                        Dep. var.:           Log capital committed to fund
                                                                                                 U.S. &
                                                              U.S. funds          Non-U.S.      Non-U.S.

                                                                      Exclude                     Triple
                                                         Baseline       IT         Placebo         diff
                                                           (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)

          Post × % late-stage investments                0.468        0.694          -0.491        -0.481
                                                         (0.208)      (0.273)       (0.452)       (0.413)
          Post × % late-stage × U.S. fund                                                         0.946
                                                                                                  (0.464)
          % late-stage investments                        -0.015       -0.150       0.894         0.831
                                                         (0.154)      (0.202)       (0.441)       (0.385)
          % late-stage × U.S. fund                                                               -0.835
                                                                                                  (0.415)
          U.S. fund                                                                              0.480
                                                                                                  (0.178)
          Post × U.S. fund                                                                         -0.265
                                                                                                  (0.228)
          Constant                                       4.510        4.513        4.434         4.219
                                                         (0.088)      (0.098)      (0.171)        (0.116)

          Observations                                      518         284           107           625
          R2                                               0.068       0.089         0.119         0.078




                                                           59
                Table 7: Size of VC and PE funds around NSMIA ­ Placebo tests.
The table presents placebo versions of our diff-in-diff and triple-diff analyses of NSMIA's effect on the size of VC
and PE funds. Specifically, in columns 1 and 2, the placebo tests estimate our diff-in-diff and triple-diff analyses
during 1992­1996, the years immediately preceding the passage and implementation of NSMIA; in columns 3
and 4, we estimate analogous placebo tests during 1997­2001, the years immediately following NSMIA's passage.
The diff-in-diff and triple-diff placebo analyses in columns 1 and 2 are analogous to their baseline counterparts
in Table 6, columns 1 and 4, respectively, but with the P ost indicator set equal to one for fund closing years
greater than or equal to 1995; the same is true in columns 3 and 4, but in this case the P ost indicator is set
equal to one for closing years greater than or equal to 2000. We exclude from the analysis boutique funds with
less than $30 million in assets under management. All regressions include fund closing year fixed effects (which
subsume the non-interacted P ost indicator) and industry fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the
                                                                       
VC firm level are reported in parentheses. We use       ,      , and      to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level (two-sided), respectively.


                                   Dep. var.:               Log capital committed to fund
                                                    Sample: 1992­1996                   Sample: 1997­2001
                                                      U.S.                 U.S. &         U.S.         U.S. &
                                                     funds                non-U.S.       funds        non-U.S.

                                                  Diff-in-diff         Triple-diff    Diff-in-diff   Triple-diff
                                                      (1)                 (2)             (3)           (4)

      Post × % late-stage investments                0.039                  0.592        -0.025        -0.003
                                                    (0.242)               (0.622)       (0.193)       (0.337)
      Post × % late-stage × U.S. fund                                      -0.551                       0.001
                                                                          (0.666)                     (0.390)
      % late-stage investments                       -0.010                0.474        0.493           0.256
                                                    (0.171)               (0.364)       (0.135)       (0.233)
      % late-stage × U.S. fund                                             -0.495                       0.235
                                                                          (0.399)                     (0.265)
      U.S. fund                                                           0.335                       0.327
                                                                          (0.126)                     (0.122)
      Post × U.S. fund                                                     0.171                       -0.019
                                                                          (0.245)                     (0.170)
      Constant                                     4.495                  4.067         4.729         4.497
                                                   (0.096)                (0.127)       (0.085)       (0.093)

      Observations                                    307                   346           939           1212
      R2                                             0.042                 0.075         0.065          0.085




                                                        60
                                                       Table 8: Instrumented effect of founder control on startup exits.
     The table examines how the initial equity stake owned by a startup's founders affects the startup's future exit probability by estimating Equation (3) using an
     instrumental variable (IV) model. The IV, State pension assets × % state off icials in board, interacts two plausibly exogenous sources of variation in VC supply
     at the state-year level, both measured the year before a startup's first financing round: (1) variation in the assets of state and local pension funds, and (2) variation
     in the fraction of state officials in the funds' boards of trustees (Andonov, Hochberg, and Rauh, 2018). Column 1 estimates the first stage of Equation (3), where
     the dependent variable is the founders' equity stake one year after the startup's first financing round. In columns 2 through 4, the dependent variable is an indicator
     set equal to one if the startup goes public or is acquired at a non-low valuation (defined below) within seven years of its first financing round; in columns 5 through
     7, it is an indicator set equal to one if the startup goes public within seven years. Columns 2 and 5 show the results of estimating Equation (3) by OLS; columns
     3 and 6 show the reduced-form relationship between the instrument and the dependent variables; and columns 4 and 7 show the results of estimating Equation
     (3) by 2SLS. We exclude from the sample all startups that, within seven years of their first financing round, either (1) fail or (2) are acquired at a low valuation
     that is less than or equal to twice the total capital they raised in all pre-exit financings or $25 million. All variables are defined in Sections IA.3 and IA.4 in the
     Internet Appendix. All regressions include first-financing year, state, and industry fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level are reported in
                                             
     parentheses. We use      ,      , and      to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively.

                                                                             Founders' initial          IPO or successful
                                                             Dep. var.:        equity stake           acquisition in 7 years               IPO in 7 years
61




                                                                                    First                      Reduced                           Reduced
                                                                                    stage             OLS       form         2SLS      OLS        form       2SLS
                                                                                     (1)              (2)        (3)          (4)      (5)         (6)        (7)

               Founders' initial equity stake                                                         0.035                -1.831     0.043                 -2.056
                                                                                                     (0.037)                (0.914)   (0.016)                (0.961)
               State pension assets × % state officials in board                  0.365                         -0.669                           -0.751
                                                                                   (0.069)                       (0.272)                          (0.282)
               Log capital raised                                                 -0.097            0.063       0.060        -0.118    0.059     0.055        -0.145
                                                                                   (0.005)          (0.011)      (0.009)    (0.089)    (0.006)    (0.005)    (0.094)
               Log no. startups in state-year                                     -0.109             -0.079       0.064      -0.136   -0.198       -0.037   -0.262
                                                                                   (0.032)          (0.067)      (0.119)    (0.127)    (0.057)    (0.105)    (0.124)
               Log no. pension funds in state-year                                 0.008             -0.013       -0.016     -0.002     0.018      0.015     0.030
                                                                                   (0.004)          (0.017)      (0.013)    (0.016)    (0.017)    (0.013)    (0.016)
               Log state-year population                                            0.125            0.094         0.067      0.296     -0.009     -0.040     0.217
                                                                                   (0.084)          (0.148)      (0.198)    (0.313)    (0.143)    (0.197)    (0.352)
               Constant                                                             -0.146           -0.949       -1.862     -1.148     1.978       0.950      1.131
                                                                                   (1.253)          (2.207)      (2.550)    (3.194)    (2.516)    (2.736)    (3.534)

               Observations                                                         7806              7806       7806        7806      7806       7806       7806
               R2                                                                   0.333             0.229      0.230         .       0.278      0.279        .
               First stage F statistic                                              27.86
