                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      JOB LOSS, CREDIT AND CRIME IN COLOMBIA

                                        Gaurav Khanna
                                        Carlos Medina
                                       Anant Nyshadham
                                        Christian Posso
                                       Jorge A. Tamayo

                                      Working Paper 26313
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26313


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019




The opinions expressed herein belong to the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
Banco de la República, its Board of Directors, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We
thank Salome Arango, Nicolas Torres, and Estefanía Saravia for excellent research assistance.
We thank seminar participants at ITAM, Universidad de los Andes, Banco de la República de
Colombia and NEUDC (Northwestern University) for feedback, and Andrea Otero and Julio
Romero for insightful comments.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Gaurav Khanna, Carlos Medina, Anant Nyshadham, Christian Posso, and Jorge A.
Tamayo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Job Loss, Credit and Crime in Colombia
Gaurav Khanna, Carlos Medina, Anant Nyshadham, Christian Posso, and Jorge A. Tamayo
NBER Working Paper No. 26313
September 2019
JEL No. J63,J65,K42

                                         ABSTRACT

We investigate the effects of job displacement, as a result of mass-layoffs, on criminal arrests
using a novel matched employer-employee-crime dataset in Medellín, Colombia. Job
displacement leads to immediate earnings losses, and an increased likelihood of being arrested for
both the displaced worker and for other youth in the family. We leverage variation in
opportunities for legitimate reemployment and access to consumption credit to investigate the
mechanisms underlying this job loss-crime relationship. Workers in booming sectors with more
opportunities for legitimate reemployment exhibit smaller increases in arrests after job losses.
Greater exposure to expansions in consumption credit also lowers the job loss-crime elasticity.


Gaurav Khanna                                   Christian Posso
University of California, San Diego             Medellín Branch
9500 Gilman Drive                               Banco de la República de Colombia
La Jolla, CA 92037                              Calle 50 # 50-21
gauravk@ucsd.edu                                Piso 2 Medellín
                                                Colombia
Carlos Medina                                   cpossosu@banrep.gov.co
Medellín Branch
Banco de la República                           Jorge A. Tamayo
Calle 50 # 50-21                                Harvard Business School
Piso 2 Medellín                                 Soldiers Field, Morgan Hall 292
Colombia                                        Boston, MA 02163
cmedindu@banrep.gov.co                          jtamayo@hbs.edu

Anant Nyshadham
Stephen M. Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
nyshadha@umich.edu
1     Introduction

Job losses have been shown to have substantial impacts on the lives of individuals, from reductions in
long-run earnings and employability (Couch and Placzek, 2010; Jacobson et al., 1993) to depression
and deterioration of health and well-being (Aghion et al., 2016; Black et al., 2015; Charles and
Stephens, 2004; Del Bono et al., 2012; Sullivan and Von Wachter, 2009). Each of these effects might
lead to increases in criminality, but with vastly different implications for how to combat or insulate
against these criminal responses to employment shocks. While canonical models of criminal activity
emphasize economic incentives (Becker, 1968; Ehrlich, 1973), empirical studies of criminal activity
document the importance of both economic incentives (Bignon et al., 2016; Blattman and Annan,
2015; Watson et al., 2019) and a myriad of other behavioral and psychological drivers (Anderson
et al., 2015; Blattman et al., 2017; Bondurant et al., 2018; Carpenter, 2005; Lindo et al., 2018).
This begs the question then whether any criminal responses to job losses are driven primarily by
the economic consequences of these employment shocks and, accordingly, if muting these economic
consequences significantly mutes the criminal response.
    Many low and middle income countries, particularly across Latin America, suffer from a combi-
nation of high employment volatility, poor unemployment safety-nets and rampant crime (Dell et al.,
2018; Dix-Carneiro et al., 2018). These settings, therefore, provide ideal conditions for investigating
the criminal responses to job losses when the economic consequences are unmitigated. We combine
rich granular data on the universe of arrests over a decade in Medellín, Colombia, with administrative
records on the universe of formally employed workers, the firms for which they work, and household
characteristics. We document a crime response to job-loss that is both large and far-reaching in that
criminal responses spill over to youth in the household as well. 1
    We study firm-specific shocks to account for worker heterogeneity in unobservable characteristics.
We focus on mass-layoff events where large groups of workers lose their jobs. As such, laid-off
workers are less likely to have characteristics systematically associated with the propensity to commit
crimes. We estimate the impact of displacement on the probability of being captured after the event.
In the spirit of an event-study analysis, we show that the displacement event is not associated with the
    1The only published study to our knowledge estimating the impacts of job loss on crime focuses on a high-income,
low-crime environment with strong unemployment safety-nets (Bennett and Ouazad, 2018). The impacts we estimate are
larger, especially as we additionally show spillover impacts on other members of the household.


                                                         2
likelihood of being arrested before such events, confirming that dynamic selectivity into displacement
is unlikely. We find that after job losses, workers suffer a significant earnings loss that lasts at least
five years. We show a corresponding spike in arrests in the year of job separation and the year after.
   We then leverage varying market conditions for job replacement and consumption credit to in-
vestigate the degree to which the economic consequences of job losses are driving the criminal
responses. We show that impacts on arrests are weaker for those with better opportunities for legit-
imate reemployment and that greater access to consumption credit in the year following the job loss
dampens the effects on arrests. That is, we first use additional data on industry-level opportunities
for legitimate reemployment to document patterns consistent with predictions of occupational sorting
models of crime in that workers in booming sectors, with more legitimate employment alternatives,
exhibit lower increases in arrests after job destructions. Second, using individual-level geographic
variation in exposure to a credit policy reform, we show that access to consumption credit weakens
the relationship between job loss and criminality, consistent with criminal responses being driven by
consumption necessity. By obtaining unique administrative data on the credit histories of individuals,
and leveraging a credit expansion program, we isolate the causal impact of access to an important
consumption smoothing mechanism on the elasticity between job loss and crime.
   Our findings contribute primarily to the literature on the impacts of job destructions. Previous work
has focused on earnings (Couch and Placzek, 2010; Jacobson et al., 1993) and health and well-being
(Aghion et al., 2016; Black et al., 2015; Charles and Stephens, 2004; Del Bono et al., 2012; Sullivan
and Von Wachter, 2009). We build on studies of criminality (Bennett and Ouazad, 2018; Rose, 2019)
by providing evidence of the specific roles that alternative employment opportunities and the ability
to meet consumption needs play in determining criminality responses.
   We also contribute to the study of the economic motives for criminal employment (Becker, 1968;
Ehrlich, 1973; Fu and Wolpin, 2017; Khanna et al., 2019) by exploiting individual level variation in
job displacement, opportunities for legitimate job replacement, and access to credit for meeting stop-
gap consumption needs to confirm economic incentives as primary mechanisms underlying criminal
responses to employment shocks. By using two distinct sources of identifying variation, we are able
to make causal inferences about the ability of consumption credit to dampen the criminal response to
employment shocks.



                                                    3
    Finally, we add to the literature on the intergenerational spillovers of crime (Hjalmarsson and
Lindquist, 2013; Meghir et al., 2012) and of job loss (Hilger, 2016; Oreopoulos et al., 2008; Rege
et al., 2011) by being among the first to document criminality responses among younger relatives. We
provide evidence that shocks to adult employment in the household, and resulting financial strain, can
have delayed ripple effects on young relatives' criminality. Ignoring such spillovers will lead to gross
underestimates on the long-term consequences of job loss on crime.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides some background. Section 3
discusses our data, section 4 our empirical strategy, and section 5 the results. Section 7 concludes.



2     Background

Located in the north-western region of Colombia, Medellín is the second largest city after the capital,
Bogota. It has strong industrial and financial sectors with approximately 2.3 million people or 5.5% of
the Colombian population. The urban zone consists of 249 neighborhoods, divided into 21 (comunas),
5 of which are semi-rural townships (corregimientos).
    Mass layoffs in Medellín differ across sectors and seasons. Figures 1a and 1b document patterns
in layoffs, where we divide the year into two halves, and sectors into 8 large groups. On the vertical
axes we plot the density of firms and on the horizontal axis, the fraction of workers separated. The
figures show that separations occur both over the course of the year and across sectors. There is less
job churning in the primary (agricultural) sector and a higher rate of job loss in construction.
    In keeping with the literature, we define a mass layoff event to be if between 30% and 90% of
workers were separated from the firm within a year. 2 On average, this represents about 20% of firms
each year. While there are differences between the first and second half of the year, such seasonality
is relatively minor in magnitude.




    2 Our results are robust to other cutoffs, such as 70% of workers being laid off. We cap it at 90%, as a 100% separation
rate may simply indicate a change in ownership without mass layoffs.


                                                             4
                                            Figure 1: Distribution of layoffs




                   (a) First half of year                                     (b) Second half of year

Notes: Figure 1a shows the distribution of layoffs across industries for the first half of the year. Figure 1b shows the
distribution of layoffs across industries for the second half of the year. We use the employer-employee matched PILA data
and define a seperationg to be if the worker no longer shows as being employed at the firm in any future date. We then
plot the density of firms that have different fractions of seperations by time and sector.


2.1     Crime in Medellín

Although Colombian violence has traditionally been high, the emergence of drug cartels in the late
1970s and early 1980s, fueled the emergence of organized crime to support illegal businesses, and
guerrilla or paramilitary groups often involved in the drug trade. From the mid 1980s to early 1990s,
homicide rates rose rapidly driven by the boom of cartels, paramilitaries, and local gangs. Medellín
used to be one of the most violent cities in the world (CCSPJP, 2009), placing our analysis among a
handful that study such motivations to join crime in high-crime environments. The high homicide rates
are a result of fights among urban militias, local gangs, drug cartels, criminal bands, and paramilitaries
based in surrounding areas. 3 Demobilized militias continue to be involved in crimes like extortion
and trafficking, given their experience (Rozema, 2018).
    The arrest rate is predominantly male. Over the entire sample period (2005-13), 12% of all males
(across all age groups) were at some point arrested, while the arrest rate for females was only 1%. 4
Youths, between 14 and 26 years, are far more likely to be involved as victims or assailants than
other age groups. Youth are more likely to be engaged in drug trafficking and consumption, whereas
   3 Operacion Orion in 2002, followed by the demobilization of paramilitary forces between 2003 and 2005, led to a
sharp decline in homicides from more than 180 homicides per 100000 inhabitants in 2002, to less than 35 in 2007, as the
military clamped down on urban militias (Medina and Tamayo, 2011).
   4 According to the Judicial Research Unit of the Metropolitan Police of Medellín (SIJIN).


                                                           5
slightly older individuals are involved in violent crimes (homicides, extortions, and kidnapping), and
the oldest still are involved in property crime.
    In ongoing research, Blattman et al. (2018) document Medellín's criminal world as hundreds of
well-defined street gangs (combos) which control local territories and are organized into hierarchical
structures, with protection by the razones at the top of the hierarchy. Anthropological studies and
in-person interviews show that economic incentives (such as the focus of our study) drive young men
in Medellín to join crime (Baird, 2011). As many respondents highlight, the reason to join crime is
mostly "economic" or for a profitable career. 5 Knowing this, paramilitaries and gangs actively recruit
men who are "idle" and without a good job. 6
    Often, however, remunerations for gang-members are higher than jobs for those with similar levels
of education (Doyle, 2016). New recruits are employed to run guns (carritos), before transitioning to
extortion and trafficking. Blattman et al. (2018) estimate that foot soldiers of the combos receive well
above national minimum wage whereas combo leaders earnings "put them in the top 10% of income
earners in the city."
    For young men, 21.5% were arrested over the period of study ­ 11.1% for drug crimes, 5.6% for
property crime, and 4.8% for violent crimes. These numbers are high relative to most contexts. Yet,
the US has an incarceration rate more than six times the typical OECD nation, where one in ten youths
from a low-income family may join a gang, 60% of crimes are committed by offenders under the age
of 30, and 72% by males (Kearney et al., 2014). Accordingly, in some regards, arrests in our context
are similar to not only high-crime regions in many parts of the developing world and Latin America,
but also the US.



3     Data

We combine four different sources of administrative data based on individual identification numbers
and date of birth. The first source is the Integrated Information System for Social Protection (SISPRO),
   5 See Baird (2011) interview with Gato, p264 and interview with Armando, p197.
   6 An interview with El Mono (p191) documents the recruitment process: "those guys would hang out around here and
be nice to me and say `come over here, have a bit of money'." Having a reasonable job means that one is not "hanging
around the neighborhood" when the gangs come recruiting. A desirable outside option would be a job with benefits and
social security (see interview with El Peludo, p184). Indeed, the options are often presented as an occupational choice:
"are you gonna work [for the gang] or do a normal job?" (see interview with Notes, p193, (Baird, 2011).



                                                           6
which contains the information of the Integrated Registry of Contributions to the social security system
of all formal workers in Colombia (PILA). The PILA includes the monthly salaries of all formal workers
(i.e., those who pay contributions to health and pension), and the days the individuals have worked
per month since July 2008. Using the PILA, we build an employer-employee panel that allows us to
follow both individuals and firms over time. The PILA has detailed information on payroll, earnings,
days worked, firm and worker identifiers, and some demographic information of the employees.
   The second administrative data, from the Judicial Research Unit of the Metropolitan Police of
Medellin (SIJIN), is the census of all individuals arrested in Medellin between 2006 and 2015. The
data contains type of crime committed, the date and place of arrest, and demographic information of
the arrested individual such as age and marital status. These data allow us to build crime outcomes
such as whether individuals were arrested for having committed any crime over a specific time period
and to identify the type of crime (e.g., homicide, robbery, burglary or drug trafficking).
   We restrict our analysis to data on first arrests. Repeat arrests are excluded as time spent under
incarceration and the length of sentencing may be endogenous to other characteristics. 7 We contend
that first arrests most closely map to the first decision node between legal and illegal activities. Once
captured a criminal career begins, with subsequent decisions to repeat, escalate, or exit the criminal
sector based on many factors we do not observe (including prison sentences).
   The third source of information is the second wave of the System for the Identification of Potential
Beneficiaries of Social Programs (SISBEN II). SISBEN II was introduced in 2005 and classified
households into six different socio-economic levels according to the SISBEN score, with level one
representing the most economically disadvantaged households and level six the least disadvantaged
ones (Bottia et al., 2012). In particular, this data allow us to split the sample by household socio-
economic status.
   Finally, we use data from "Individual Debtor Report and Active Credit Operations" or "Form 341"
from the Superintendencia Financiera de Colombia (Superfinanciera), the Colombian government
agency responsible for overseeing financial regulation. Form 341 provides quarterly data that contains
the census of all credits with the formal financial sector for more than 250 million credit transactions,
including credit cards, car loans, consumer credits, mortgage credit, and other credit. This information
   7 Our results are robust to including repeat arrests.




                                                           7
is available quarterly since year 2004, allowing us to track all credit in the formal financial sector for
all individuals in our sample.
    PILA allows us to longitudinally follow individuals and firms. We focus on 2010 to measure the
unexpected firm-level mass-layoff events that year and follow individuals' earnings and arrests until
2015, the most recent date for which we have crime data available. We restrict our estimation sample
to firms with at least 11 workers, and to full time employees aged 20 to 60, with at least 1 year of
tenure in the same firm just before 2010. Finally, we follow the literature and define a mass layoff as
an event in which a firm lays off between 30% to 90% of its employees during at least six months in
2010. The final sample consists of 457,096 individuals and 11,739 firms, where 28.7% of the firms
suffered a mass layoff event affecting 27.9% of the individuals in the estimation sample.
    Table A1 provides descriptive information for our sample. 58 percent of the workers are males
and the average age in 2009 was 35.5 years old. We compute annual formal sector earnings by adding
inflation-adjusted monthly formal sector earnings during the period covered by our formal employment
data, using 2008 as a base year. The average monthly earnings is COL$ 910,000 which was about
US$ 462 in 2009. On average, individuals in the sample work 29 days per month and work in firms
with approximately 1763 employees. The unconditional probability of arrest is 0.19 percent.



4    Empirical Strategy

We would like to compare the arrest rates among those who lose a job and those who do not. Yet,
individual probability of job loss may be correlated with an individual's proclivity to commit crimes.
That is, for example, delinquent behavior inside and outside the workplace may go together. To get
around this endogeneity issue, we leverage variation from mass layoff events at the firm, as has been
done by well-regarded work over the last few decades (Aghion et al., 2016; Black et al., 2015; Charles
and Stephens, 2004; Couch and Placzek, 2010; Del Bono et al., 2012; Jacobson et al., 1993; Sullivan
and Von Wachter, 2009). Mass layoffs capture time-specific characteristics of the firm rather than the
worker, allowing us to navigate around individual-specific unobservable differences across workers.
    Our baseline specification estimates the impact of job displacements on the probability of being
arrested after the event. We use an event study model which allows us to check for differential pre-
trends (between workers who were exposed to mass layoffs and workers who were not), and to estimate

                                                    8
the dynamic consequences in the post-layoff period. We use the following event study model:


                         Arrestedit = i + t + Xit  +                                k
                                                                           Displacedit k + it ,                       (1)
                                                                -4  k  5


where Arrestedit is an indicator variable recording whether individual i was arrested at time t ,
         k is indicator for whether the individual worked in a firm that displaced at least 30 percent
Displacedit
of its workers within six consecutive months in year t , and k indexes the set of time indicator variables
beginning 4 years prior to the displacement up to five years after the event. The parameters k measure
the impact of displacement before, during, and after the event. Our specifications control for time fixed
effects t , and individual fixed effects i that account for an individual's time-invariant characteristics.
    In additional analysis we document the cumulative effect on arrests, by redefining the outcome
Arrestedit = 1 if the individual was ever arrested between the time of the mass-layoff event and year
t . Following Cameron et al. (2011), and since we use matched employer-employee data, we cluster
standard errors at the firm and employee level for inference. 8
    Our parameters of interest are k for k = 0, 1, ..., 5. Our empirical specification includes a constant
and sets the coefficient -1 equal to zero. Consequently, all estimated k parameters are relative to the
probability of being captured the year prior to the event. We interpret the statistical significance of these
coefficients as evidence of the causal relationship between job displacement and crime. Additionally,
the coefficients k for years prior to the event, i.e. k = -2, -3, -4, test whether the displacement
event is correlated with the probability of being arrested before the event. Economic significance of
such coefficients is evidence of dynamic selectivity into displacement. Whereas a lack of meaningful
effects in the pre-period suggest that individual-level dynamic selection into a mass layoff is unlikely.
    Identification relies on two features of the mass-layoff. First, the mass-layoff was unanticipated
by workers at the time of the event, and uncorrelated with worker-specific characteristics. This
assumption is supported by the lack of pre-trends in our analysis. Second, a substantial group of
workers lose their jobs leading to earnings losses, providing relevance to the underlying source of
variation. We hypothesize that such unexpected losses explain why individuals end up sorting into
criminal activities.
   8 Cameron et al. (2011) suggest that in matched employer-employee studies, practitioners should allow for clustering at
both employer and employee levels, in particular when there are repeated observations at the employee level.



                                                            9
5     Displacement effects

We first present the results of the estimation of equation 1 for earnings and crime outcomes, and
some heterogeneous effects by gender and baseline poverty status. We also explore the effect across
sectors with positive and negative employment dynamics leading into the event (i.e., booming sectors
vs. slumping sectors), to emphasize the role of alternative legitimate employment opportunities in
determining the elasticity between job loss and crime.
    We test whether workers with tighter economic constraints show stronger responses. We explore
two types of constraints: income (poverty) constraints and financial constraints. Similarly, we explore
whether workers in booming sectors with more legitimate employment alternatives exhibit weaker
criminality responses to job destructions. Finally, we explore the effects on young relatives of workers
that suffer significant earning losses. These within-family spillovers allow us to document the aggregate
consequences on the family.


5.1     The Effect of Job-Loss on Earnings and Arrests

Prior work for developed countries show substantial and long-lasting negative impacts of job displace-
ments on earnings (Couch and Placzek, 2010; Jacobson et al., 1993). Here we document such losses
in the context of a low- and middle-income setting. In line with previous work, we define earnings
losses as the difference between their actual and expected earnings had the events that led to their job
losses not occurred. Figure 2a shows the effects associated with the job displacement event. Since
formal earnings are only available after 2007, we show that the displacement event is not correlated
with earnings just before the mass-layoff events. We observe a persistent loss in earnings that lasts
up to five years after the event. 9 The magnitudes are meaningful enough to suggest there might be
permanent negative effects on labor earnings. Although we observe effects the year of the event, the
largest impact occurs 3 years after the layoff, where earnings are lower by about 7.3% with respect to
average earnings in 2009 of COL$ 910,000. The response in earnings is slightly stronger for females.
    Layoffs generate an immediate response in criminal behavior. Figures 2b and 2c, and table A2 show
the results for the probability of arrest, for the entire sample and across genders. 10 The probability of
   9 Figure A1 shows the effect of firms mass layoff event, five years after the event, on the probability of being formally
employed for at least six months.
  10We show the cumulative effect on arrests in Figure A2.


                                                            10
                     Figure 2: Effects of firm-level mass layoffs on earnings and arrests




     (a) Event study estimates on earnings by gender                    (b) Event study estimates on arrests




      (c) Event study estimates on arrests by gender                (d) Event study estimates by poverty status

Notes: Figure 2a shows the effect of firms mass layoff event, from two years before event year to five years after the
event on average annual earnings, for men and women (excluding 1% above and below the earnings distribution). We
compute annual formal sector earnings by adding inflation-adjusted monthly formal sector earnings during the period
covered by our formal employment data using as a base year 2008. Number of observations for men: 10 years x 266521
individuals. Number of observations for women: 10 years x 190575 individuals. Figure 2b shows the effect of firms mass
layoff event from four years before event year to five years after the event on arrests. Number of observations: 10 years x
457096 individuals. Figures 2c and 2d show heterogeneous effects of mass layoff event on arrest by gender and poverty,
respectively. Poor is 1 when employee information is matched with poverty census. Number of observations for women:
10 years x 190575 individuals. Number of observations for poor: 10 years x 244954 individuals. Number of observations
for non-poor: 10 years x 212142 individuals. The regressions include individual and year fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the employee-firm level. 95% confidence intervals are presented in the figure. Layoff event is defined as those
firms where 30-90% of their employees were separated during at least six months in 2010. Arrest is 1 if the employee was
arrested at least once in a year.


arrest is 0.16 percent in 2009, the year before the event, and increases 45 percent in the year of the
event and 35 percent the year after. The effect steadily reduces to zero after that.
    We find that among all workers exposed to mass layoffs, the increase in arrests only took place
among males, and the effects are concentrated on property crimes (robbery, thefts, etc.). The larger


                                                            11
effect on men may reflect the opportunity to join criminal enterprises and gangs. Additionally, the
coefficients k for years prior to the event ( k = -2, -3, -4) allow us to test for differential pre-
trends, i.e., whether the onset of the displacement event is correlated with the probability of being
arrested before the event. In general, we do not find individual or joint statistical significance in such
coefficients. We interpret this evidence as absence of dynamic selectivity into job displacement on
the basis of arrests.
    In figure 2d we explore the role played by poverty constraints in determining the relationship
between job loss and arrests. Using administrative records from the SISBEN census of the poor,
we split the data between poor and non-poor workers. The Colombian government uses the data on
assets and wealth from the SISBEN census to create an asset poverty score for each household, based
on a formula not available to the public. Poor workers are defined as those whose poverty status
places them in the 2005 SISBEN II. We do not find heterogeneous effects in this case; the impacts
on arrest rates are similar in both sub-samples. This suggests that baseline levels of poverty are not
strongly associated with the increase in arrests, perhaps as the Colombian government targets safety
net programs to those identified as poor by the SISBEN II.


5.2    Heterogeneous Effects Across Alternative Opportunities

A worker's outside options may play an important role in determining their decision to join a criminal
enterprise. For instance, if the construction sector is booming, then a construction worker who is laid
off may find work easily elsewhere. Yet, if the sector were slumping, then it may be difficult to find
alternative employment options, inducing more individuals to get involved in illegitimate activities
after the layoff. We follow workers according to their baseline sector of employment, and compare
those working in booming sectors to those in slumping sectors.
    Figure 3b presents this split of the results by booming and slumping sectors. Booming sectors
are defined as those with employment growth over the average employment growth in Medellin.
Consistent with predictions of occupational sorting models, in booming sectors, with more legitimate
employment alternatives, we cannot rule out the possibility of no effect on arrest; while in slumping
sectors the probability of arrests increase by 70 percent in the year of the event and 51 percent the
year after. These patterns suggest strongly that alternative employment options play a crucial role in


                                                   12
Figure 3: Event study estimates by alternative work opportunities: booming and non-booming sectors

     (a) Growth rate by broad sector (2008 to 2010)                (b) Heterogeneous effects by booming sector




Notes: Figure 3a shows employment growth by broad sector categorization over the period 2008-10. Booming sectors
are defined as those economic sectors with employment growth over the average of the employment growth in Medellin.
The figure 3b shows the effect of firms mass layoff event (defined as those firms where 30-90% of their employees were
separated during at least six months in 2010) from four years before the event year to five years after the event on arrests
(arrest is 1 if the employee was arrested at least once in a year). The regression include individual and year fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered at the employee-firm level. 95% confidence intervals are presented in the figure. Number of
observations for booming sectors: 10 years x 183068 individuals. Number of observations for non-booming sectors: 10
years x 274016 individuals.


determining the elasticity between job loss and crime.




                                                            13
5.3     Spillovers to Family Members

                   Figure 4: Event study estimates of arrests on other youth in the family




              (a) Employees relatives (youth)                      (b) Effects on youth family members by gender




    (c) By whether employee was head of household                     (d) By employee gender (household heads)

Notes: Figures show the effect of firms mass layoff event (defined as those firms where 30-90% of their employees were
separated during at least six months in 2010) from four years before event year to five years after the event on arrests (arrest
is 1 if the employee was arrested at least once in a year). The regression include individual and year fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the employee-firm level. 95% confidence intervals are presented in the figure. Here we only use the
subsample of relatives of workers that show up in SISBEN II. Number of observations in Figure 4a: 10 years x 169881
individuals. Number of observations in Figure 4b for men: 10 years x 84430 individuals. Number of observations in
Figure 4b for women: 10 years x 85451 individuals. Number of observations in Figure 4c for workers heads of household
or spouses: 10 years x 90891. Number of observations in Figure 4c for workers non heads of household or spouses: 10
years x 78990. Number of observations in Figure 4d for man workers heads of household or spouses: 10 years x 63496.
Number of observations in Figure 4d for woman workers heads of household or spouses: 10 years x 27395.


    A standard model of consumption and labor supply predicts that after a decrease in a household's
income, consumption should reduce while individuals' time allocated to the labor market increases.
The job displacement shock may decrease a household's income pushing other members of the family
to find additional sources of income. In settings like Medellin where individuals not formally employed

                                                              14
have several opportunities to get involved in criminal activities, in particular for young adults, it may
occur that young relatives of laid-off workers are drawn into crime.
    Like in other high-crime settings (Sampson and Laub, 2005), Medellin shows a strong crime-age
pattern where the arrest rate peaks in the late teens and declines rapidly thereafter. The peak ages of
arrest lie between 14 and 24 years old. While we focus on the spillovers effects on young relatives
between 14 to 24 years old, our results are similar for others in adjacent age ranges. Since we only
observe relatives in the SISBEN surveys, the estimations are conducted for this sub-sample.
    Figures 4a-4d show event-study estimates for young relatives. Contrary to the direct effects on
workers, for younger relatives we find a large significant increase in the probability of arrests only a
year after, and not the year of the displacement event. Once we focus on layoffs for the relatives of the
head of households, we observe an effect on both the year of the event and one year after the event
(figure 4c). This suggests that the spillovers to youths are more immediate when the shock affects
the main economic provider. Finally, the gender of the earner laid off matters, with male displaced
workers having a larger effect on the probability of arrests for youths in their household (figure 4d).



6     Job-Loss and Credit

Finally we turn to the role played by access to credit. To the best of our knowledge, we are not aware
of any work that studies the relationship between access to credit and crime. We focus on a specific
kind of credit that helps displaced workers smooth their consumption over time, when necessary. We
obtain unique data documenting the credit histories of individuals with their identification numbers,
allowing us to match these data with our administrative database. We first show heterogeneous effects
by baseline access to credit. Next, we leverage variation in exposure to a credit expansion policy in
an instrumental variables approach to document the causal impact of access to credit on the elasticity
between job loss and arrests.
    Our attempt is to document one of the first causal relationships between the access to credit and
the likelihood of being arrested. 11 Credit here works as a mitigating mechanism of the initial shock of
job loss. We obtain administrative records from Superfinanciera, the Colombian government agency
  11 There is work studying the effects of credit shocks on the financial market, for instance,Angelini and Cetorelli (2003);
Gissler et al. (2019); Spiller and Favaro (1984); Tewari (2014); Yildirim and Philippatos (2007).



                                                            15
responsible for overseeing financial regulation, allowing us to identify workers that before and after the
event did have access to consumer credit. The baseline information allows us to study heterogeneous
effects between those who did and did not have access the year before the event.
    In figure 5a we explore the arrests response to job loss across baseline access to consumption
credit. Consistent with desperation-driven criminality and the liquidity constraints derived from not
being formally employed, we find that among all workers exposed to mass layoff events, the increases
in arrest rates only took place among those who did not have consumption credit before the event.
Within the sub-sample of individuals who did not have access to consumer credit before the event,
the probability of arrests increases by 63 percent in the year of the event and 51 percent the year after.
This suggests that consumer credit acts as a safety net and allows individuals to not resort to crime.


6.1    Instrumental Variables for Access to Credit

Our primary objective is to measure the causal effect of having access to consumption credit on the
elasticity between job loss and arrests. Given the potential endogeneity between socioeconomic status
of the individual and their likelihood of being arrested, a simple comparison of workers with and
without access to credit may provide biased estimates of the causal effect. We leverage a supply shock
associated with the 2009 financial reform in Colombia (Act 1328 of 2009). Act 1328 (2009) regulated
the entrance and formalization of branch offices of foreign credit institutions and national financing
companies. In addition, the reform gave the power to both foreign and national institutions to operate
as a credit institution (i.e., banks). In practice, the reform created a supply shock to the number of
bank branches in Colombia. In total, five financing companies became banks between May 2010 and
May 2011. In Medellin, five new banks entered with 19 new branches in 2011. 12
    We first document that the probability of access to credit strongly depends on the distance be-
tween an individual's residence and the new branches. We geocode each individual's address in our
administrative data, and the geo-location of all bank branches to estimate the effect of distance to new
branches on changes in access to credit. Doing so allows us to exploit a supply-shock to credit, not
associated with an individual's characteristics, alleviating concerns of endogeneity.
   12 Falabella Bank introduced 5 branches in September 2011, Pichincha Bank introduced 5 branches in July 2011, W
Bank introduced 3 in October 2011, Bancoomeva introduced 5 branches in January 2011 and Finandina Bank introduced
1 branch in January 2011. At the end of 2011, we identify 19 new bank branches in Medellin.



                                                       16
   Using Google MY MAPS and information from the business and social registry of the chambers
of commerce of Medellin (RUES), we locate the coordinates for new branches. In addition, Sisben
data allow us to locate the block where the individual was located before the reform. 13 The Sisben
census of the poor represents 54 percent of all individuals in the job-displacement sample, where 94
percent of the sample have a valid address in Medellin. Then, we compute the Euclidian distance
from each new branch in the city to each individual in our Sisben sample. Our main instrument is the
distance to the nearest new branch in Medellin for each individual. We find that the nearest distance is
a strong predictor of the amount of credit associated with new consumption credit. We predict access
to new consumption credit using our instrument, the nearest distance, and controlling for comuna fixed
effects and a set of covariates. 14 The first-stage estimates for this regression are presented in table A3,
and shows a strong relationship between distance to the new bank branches and the amount of credit.
   Using the prediction on the amount of credit associated with new consumption credit, we re-
estimate our event study model. In this new model, we fully interact the predicted amount of credit
with the job displacement variable as follows:

                                                       k
             Capturesit =  +         k -5    k Credit it × Displacedi +        k -5      k × Displaced k
                                                                                                                    (2)
                                 1 Displacedi + 1Credit i + X +  c +               it   ,

                k
where Credit it is the predicted credit from the first stage on distance to new bank branches. In this
specification, we also control for the dynamic effect of job displacement on captures, along with
comuna and year fixed effects, and covariates. For standard errors, to account for the presence of a
generated regressor, we follow the two-step bootstrapping algorithm procedure applied in Ashraf and
Galor (2013). Figure 5b shows the estimates for the  k coefficients of the equation 2. We find that
among all workers exposed to mass layoffs, those who benefit from the credit supply shock exhibit
a reduction in the job loss-crime elasticity in 2011 and 2012, although the 2011 effect (when new
branches were first opened) is only statistically significant at 10% level. Like before, the interaction
between the displacement event and the credit variable is not correlated with the probability of being
arrested before the job displacement event.
  13As Alcaldia de Medellin (2011) point out intra-urban migration in Medellin is very low.
  14The set of covariates includes Sisben score (poverty index), education, socioeconomic strata, gender and age.




                                                           17
                              Figure 5: Heterogeneous effects by access to credit




  (a) OLS: Event study estimates by consumption credit (b) IV: Total consumption credit at new branches




        (c) IV: Total amount of any type of credit                   (d) IV: Total amount of credit at any bank

Notes: First stage instrumental variables estimation where we instrument the access to consumption credit with distance
to expanded bank branches is shows in Table A3, with an F-statistic of 11. Figure 5a show the effect of firms mass layoff
event from four years before event year to five years after the event on arrests. The regression include individual and
year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the employee-firm level. 95% confidence intervals are presented in the
figure. Number of observations for credit : 10 years x 228368 individuals. Number of observations for non-credit: 10
years x 228728 individuals. Figures 5b to 5d show the heterogeneous effect of mass layoff event by access to credit on
arrest from five years before and four years after the entry of banks. The regression includes comuna and year fixed effects.
Confidence Intervals at 95% are calculated with bootstrap 1000 repetitions following Ashraf and Galor (2013) procedure.
Here we only use the subsample of workers that in SISBEN II. Number of observations: 10 years x 148386.


    While our main result is to do with consumption credit, we also present a specification where
our independent variable of interest is the access to any amount of credit from any bank. Figures 5c
and 5d show the  k of equation 2, which captures the causal ameliorative effect of credit on the job
loss-arrests relationship.




                                                            18
7    Conclusion

Studying the relationship between employment shocks and criminal activity comes with certain
challenges. The first is related to identification. We need to isolate the effects of an individual's
employment opportunities unrelated to their unobservable characteristics, such as motivation and
ability. As such, we use mass layoffs which helps us cut past individual-specific unobservables that
may contaminate our estimates. Additionally, the lack of pre-trends suggest that it is unlikely that
workers are differentially selecting into firms that will have mass layoffs in the future.
    We document that mass-layoffs produce a permanent loss on earnings, and a temporary increase
in the likelihood of being arrested for both the worker who directly suffers the unexpected shock
and their younger relatives. While prior work has focused on high-income countries with strong
judicial and police institutions (Bennett and Ouazad, 2018), we evaluate these effects in the context
of low- and middle-income settings with weak institutions and high-crime. In particular, we build
an employer-employee-crime matched database that follows individuals and firms over a decade in
Medellin, Colombia. We combine these data with unique administrative information on crimes
of family members, credit histories, and geolocations to identify channels underlying the elasticity
between job loss and crime.
    We observe a loss in individuals' earnings that lasts up to five years after their firm massively
lays workers off, the longest horizon our data allow us to assess, suggesting there might be permanent
negative effects on formal labor earnings. Additionally, individuals experience an increase in the
probability of being arrested the year of the event, and the year after. Although the effects on earnings
are observed in both male and female samples, the increases in arrest rates only took place among
males, and the effects are concentrated in property crimes (robbery, thefts, etc.). In figure A2 we
document the cumulative effects of such layoff events on arrest rates, showing stark patterns across
both gender and access to credit.
    Our evidence indicates that financial constraints and economic sectors with less employment
alternatives have played a key role on changes in arrest rates, enabling us to shed light on mechanisms
which may or may not have been at play. For instance, our causal estimates suggest that effects are
likely to be stronger among workers that did not have access to consumer credit before the shock. In
fact, we find muted effects on individuals that already had formal credit. In the particular context of


                                                   19
Colombia, access to credit markets usually depends on whether the individual has a formal job. After
an unexpected job displacement, individuals who lost their job and did not previously have access
to formal credit, may have a hard time looking for access to consumer credit in order to smooth the
financial burden, leading to a viscous cycle between the lack of formal financial safety nets and arrest
rates. In addition, consistent with predictions of occupational sorting models, workers in booming
sectors with more employment alternatives exhibit weaker arrest responses to mass layoffs.
   Finally, our evidence suggests that the job displacement may have spillovers on the criminal
behavior of young relatives. The income shock may decrease the household's income pushing other
members of the family to find additional sources of income. In settings like Medellin where individuals
not formally employed have several opportunities (in particular for adolescents and young adults) to
get involved in criminal activities, a fraction of young relatives, might potentially have been drawn
into crime. As such, ignoring spillovers on youth in the family underestimates the overall impacts of
job losses on crime, for this generation and the next.




                                                  20
References
Aghion, P., U. Akcigit, A. Deaton, and A. Roulet (2016). Creative destruction and subjective well-
  being. American Economic Review 106(12), 3869­97.

Alcaldia de Medellin (2011). Bio 2030 plan directo medellin, valle de aburra. Technical report,
  Alcaldia de Medellin.

Anderson, D. M., R. Cesur, and E. Tekin (2015). Youth depression and future criminal behavior.
  Economic Inquiry 53(1), 294­317.

Angelini, P. and N. Cetorelli (2003). The effects of regulatory reform on competition in the banking
  industry. The RAND Journal of Economics 35(5), 663­684.

Ashraf, Q. and O. Galor (2013). The 'out of africa' hypothesis, human genetic diversity, and compar-
  ative economic development. American Economic Review 103(1), 1­46.

Baird, A. (2011). Negotiating Pathways to Manhood: Violence Reproduction in Medellin's Periphery.
  Thesis, University of Bradford.

Becker, G. S. (1968). Crime and punishment: An economic approach. In The economic dimensions
  of crime, pp. 13­68. Springer.

Bennett, P. and A. Ouazad (2018). Job displacement, unemployment, and crime: Evidence from
  danish microdata and reforms. Unemployment, and Crime: Evidence from Danish Microdata and
  Reforms (December 21, 2018).

Bignon, V., E. Caroli, and R. Galbiati (2016). Stealing to survive? crime and income shocks in
  nineteenth century france. The Economic Journal 127 (599), 19­49.

Black, S. E., P. J. Devereux, and K. G. Salvanes (2015). Losing heart? the effect of job displacement
  on health. ILR Review 68(4), 833­861.

Blattman, C. and J. Annan (2015). Can Employment Reduce Lawlessness and Rebellion? A Field
  Experiment with High-Risk Men in a Fragile State. American Political Science Review 10(1), 1­17.

Blattman, C., G. Duncan, L. Benjamin, and S. Toben (2018). Gangs of Medellín: How Organized
  Crime is Organized. Technical report, mimeo.

Blattman, C., J. C. Jamison, and M. Sheridan (2017). Reducing crime and violence: Experimental
  evidence from cognitive behavioral therapy in liberia. American Economic Review 107 (4), 1165­
  1206.

Bondurant, S. R., J. M. Lindo, and I. D. Swensen (2018). Substance abuse treatment centers and local
  crime. Journal of Urban Economics 104, 124­133.

Bottia, M., L. C. Sosa, and C. Medina (2012). El sisben como mecanismo de focalización individual
  del régimen subsidiado en salud en colombia: ventajas y limitaciones. Revista de Economía del
  Rosario 15(2), 137­177.

Cameron, A. C., J. B. Gelbach, and D. L. Miller (2011). Robust inference with multiway clustering.
  Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 29(2), 238­249.



                                                 21
Carpenter, C. S. (2005). Heavy alcohol use and the commission of nuisance crime: Evidence from
  underage drunk driving laws. American Economic Review 95(2), 267­272.
CCSPJP (2009). Consejo Ciudadano para la Seguridad Publica y la Justicia Penal.
Charles, K. K. and M. Stephens, Jr (2004). Job displacement, disability, and divorce. Journal of Labor
  Economics 22(2), 489­522.
Couch, K. A. and D. W. Placzek (2010). Earnings losses of displaced workers revisited. American
  Economic Review 100(1), 572­89.
Del Bono, E., A. Weber, and R. Winter-Ebmer (2012). Clash of career and family: Fertility decisions
  after job displacement. Journal of the European Economic Association 10(4), 659­683.
Dell, M., B. Feigenberg, and K. Teshima (2018). The Violent Consequences of Trade-Induced Worker
  Displacement in Mexico. American Economic Review: Insights forthcoming.
Dix-Carneiro, R., R. Soares, and G. Ulyssea (2018). Economic Shocks and Crime: Evidence from
  the Brazilian Trade Liberalization. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics forthcoming.
Doyle, C. (2016). Explaining Patterns of Urban Violence in Medellin, Colombia. Laws 5(3).
Ehrlich, I. (1973). Participation in illegitimate activities: A theoretical and empirical investigation.
  Journal of political Economy 81(3), 521­565.
Fu, C. and K. I. Wolpin (2017). Structural estimation of a becker-ehrlich equilibrium model of crime:
  Allocating police across cities to reduce crime. The Review of Economic Studies 85(4), 2097­2138.
Gissler, S., R. Ramcharan, and E. Yu (2019). The effects of competition in consumer credit market.
  NBER Working Paper.
Hilger, N. G. (2016). Parental job loss and children's long-term outcomes: evidence from 7 million
  fathers' layoffs. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8(3), 247­83.
Hjalmarsson, R. and M. J. Lindquist (2013). The origins of intergenerational associations in crime:
  lessons from swedish adoption data. Labour Economics 20, 68­81.
Jacobson, L. S., R. J. LaLonde, and D. G. Sullivan (1993). Earnings losses of displaced workers. The
  American economic review, 685­709.
Kearney, M. S., B. Harris, E. Jacome, and L. Parker (2014). Ten Economic Facts about Crime and
  Incarceration in the United States. The Hamilton Project Policy Memo. Brookings Institute.
Khanna, G., C. Medina, A. Nyshadham, J. Tamayo, et al. (2019). Formal Employment and Organized
  Crime: Regression Discontinuity Evidence from Colombia. Harvard Business School.
Lindo, J. M., P. Siminski, and I. D. Swensen (2018). College party culture and sexual assault. American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10(1), 236­65.
Medina, C. and J. Tamayo (2011). An Assessment of How Urban Crime and Victimization Affects
 Life Satisfaction. in Dave, Webb and Eduardo, Wills-Herrera (Eds.), Subjective Well-Being and
 Security. Springer, Social Indicators Research Series.
Meghir, C., M. Palme, and M. Schnabel (2012). The effect of education policy on crime: an
 intergenerational perspective. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                                  22
Oreopoulos, P., M. Page, and A. H. Stevens (2008). The intergenerational effects of worker displace-
  ment. Journal of Labor Economics 26(3), 455­483.

Rege, M., K. Telle, and M. Votruba (2011). Parental job loss and children's school performance. The
  Review of Economic Studies 78(4), 1462­1489.

Rose, E. (2019). The Effects of Job Loss on Crime: Evidence from Administrative Data. Available at
  SSRN 2991317 .

Rozema, R. (2018). Urban DDR-processes: Paramilitaries and Criminal Networks in Medellin,
  Colombia. Journal of Latin American Studies 40, 423­452.

Sampson, R. J. and J. H. Laub (2005). A life-course view of the development of crime. The Annals
  of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 602(1), 12­45.

Spiller, P. T. and E. Favaro (1984). The effects of entry regulation on oligopolistic interaction: The
  uruguayan banking sector. The RAND Journal of Economics 15(42), 244­254.

Sullivan, D. and T. Von Wachter (2009). Job displacement and mortality: An analysis using adminis-
  trative data. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(3), 1265­1306.

Tewari, I. (2014). The distributive impacts of financial development: Evidence from mortgage markets
  during us bank branch deregulation. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6(4), 175­
  196.

Watson, B., M. Guettabi, and M. Reimer (2019). Universal cash and crime. The Review of Economics
 and Statistics Forthcoming.

Yildirim, H. S. and G. C. Philippatos (2007). Restructuring, consolidation and competition in latin
  american banking markets. Journal of Banking and Finance 31, 629­639.




                                                 23
Online Appendix


                                        Table A1: Summary statistics

                                                                       Mean         Std       Number of workers
      Male                                                            0.5831      0.4931             457096
      Age in 2009                                                       36.5        10               457096
      Average earnings in 2009                                          0.91       0.94              457096
      Average monthly days of work in 2009                             29.28       1.69              457096
      Firm size                                                        1763        3794              457096
      Probability of arrest 2006-2015                                 0.0019      0.0433             457096
      Access to Consumer Credit 2009                                  0.4996        0.5              457096
      Probability in Sisben II (high poverty)                         0.5359      0.4987             457096
      Probability in Booming Sector                                   0.4025      0.4904             457096

      Probability of arrest 2006-2015 by:
        Age:                       20-30                              0.0030      0.0547             138,166
                                   30-40                              0.0019      0.0438             144,148
                                   40-50                              0.0010      0.0323             117,698
                                   50-60                              0.0008      0.0277              55,156
        Sex:                       Male                               0.0030      0.0168             266,521
                                   Female                             0.0003      0.0548             190,575
        Booming-Sector:            Booming                            0.0019      0.0440             184,000
                                   Non-Booming                        0.0018      0.0427             273,096
        Poverty Status:            Poor                               0.0020      0.0452             244,954
                                   Non-Poor                           0.0017      0.0410             212,142
        Consumer Credit 2009: Have Credit                             0.0012      0.0351             228,368
                                   Non have Credit                    0.0025      0.0501             228,728

      Amount of New Credit 2006-2015 (million $COL)
       Total Credit                                                   7.8164     19.4014             236,853
       Consumer Credit                                                6.1740     12.1569             224,432
       Credit at Banks                                                8.4523     21.3845             160,779
      Notes: Sample of workers with at least one formal sector job spell. Employees in sample are people that work in
     a private firm with at least 11 employees, with a tenure of 12 months in the same firm (in 2009) and are full-time
     workers (in 2009) and full-time workers (20 or more days worked in the month), with only one job in 2009. Credit
     in millions of nominal $COL.




                                                             i
                                  Table A2: Event study estimates on arrests



                                                                            Arrests
                                                   (1)                       (2)                        (3)
                                                   All                       Men                       Women
 t = -4                                        -0.000201                  -0.000239                   -0.000063
                                              (0.000208)                 (0.000329)                  (0.000122)

 t = -3                                        0.000018                   0.000041                    -0.000026
                                              (0.000224)                 (0.000352)                  (0.000139)

 t = -2                                        0.000083                   0.000105                    0.000030
                                              (0.000225)                 (0.000354)                  (0.000137)

 t=0                                           0.000708                    0.00107                    0.000051
                                              (0.000234)                 (0.000369)                  (0.000139)

 t=1                                           0.000549                   0.000725                    0.000177
                                              (0.000235)                  (0.00037)                   (0.00014)

 t=2                                           0.000358                   0.000542                    -0.000013
                                              (0.000233)                 (0.000369)                  (0.000136)

 t=3                                           0.000412                   0.000671                    -0.000082
                                              (0.000234)                  (0.00037)                  (0.000141)

 t=4                                           0.000097                   0.000210                    -0.000125
                                              (0.000227)                 (0.000359)                  (0.000134)

 t=5                                           0.000125                   0.000172                    -0.000117
                                              (0.000238)                 (0.000377)                  (0.000139)

 Observations                                  4570960                    2665210                     1905750
 Dep. Var. Mean                                0.001880                   0.003010                    0.000280
 Joint significance (2006-2008)         F (3, 457094) = 0.68        F (3, 266519) = 0.41       F (3, 190574) = 0.17
 p-value                                        0.5613                      0.7428                     0.9141
 Joint significance (2010-2015)         F (6, 457095) = 2.30        F (6, 266520) = 1.95       F (6, 190574) = 1.04
 p-value                                        0.0317                      0.0696                     0.3986

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the individual and firm-level. The sample includes drug, property, violence, and
other crimes. Table A2 lists k from equation (1). Event time is measured in years. Arrested outcome is binary indicator:
1 if the event occurred at any point in the year, 0 otherwise.




                                                           ii
                 Table A3: First stage for credit access and minimum distance to branch

                                                                 Amount of Credit
                                    Minimum Distance                 -0.025
                                                                     (0.007)
                                    Observations                     148,386
                                    R-squared                          0.012
                                    First stage F-stat                10.922

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the neighborhood level. The regression includes comuna fixed effects and controls
for the Sisben score (poverty index), education, socioeconomic strata, gender and age. The average minimum distance to
a new banks is 3 kilometers. The dependent variable is the amount of credit in millions $COL.




                                                           iii
                          Figure A1: Event study estimates on Formal Employment




Notes: Figure A1 shows the effect of firms mass layoff event, five years after the event, on the probability of being formally
employed for at least six months. We standardized the effect of the event to the share of individuals that experienced a
layoff the year of the event, and to 0 the year before the event. Number of observations: 5 years x 457096 individuals.
The regressions include individual and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the employee-firm level. 95%
confidence intervals are presented in the figure. Layoff event is defined as those firms where 30-90% of their employees
were separated during at least six months in 2010.




                                                             iv
                     Figure A2: Effects of firm-level mass layoffs on cumulative arrest




                                                              (b) Event study estimates on cumulative arrest by gen-
      (a) Event study estimates on cumulative arrest
                                                              der




  (c) Event study estimates on cumulative arrest by (d) Event study estimates on cumulative arrest by con-
  poverty status                                    sumption credit

Notes: Figures show the effect of firms mass layoff events on cumulative arrests after the layoff event. We re-define the
post-period of arrests in the post-layoff period to be an indicator= 1 if the individual was ever arrested between the time
of the layoff and the year. Figure A2a shows the effect of firms mass layoff event, from four years before event year to five
years after the event on cumulative probability of being arrest. Number of observations: 10 years x 457096 individuals.
Figures A2b to A2d show heterogeneous effects of mass layoff event on arrest by gender, poverty status and consumption
credit. Poor is 1 when employee information is matched with poverty census. Number of observations for women: 10
years x 190575 individuals. Number of observations for poor: 10 years x 244954 individuals. Number of observations
for non-poor: 10 years x 212142 individuals. Number of observations for credit : 10 years x 228368 individuals. Number
of observations for non-credit: 10 years x 228728 individuals. The regressions include individual and year fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered at the employee-firm level. 95% confidence intervals are presented in the figure. Layoff event
is defined as those firms where 30-90% of their employees were separated during at least six months in 2010. Arrest is 1
if the employee was arrested at least once in a year.




                                                             v
