                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 LEGACY AND ATHLETE PREFERENCES AT HARVARD

                                       Peter Arcidiacono
                                         Josh Kinsler
                                        Tyler Ransom

                                      Working Paper 26316
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26316


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019




Peter Arcidiacono served as an expert witness for Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. (SFFA) in
the SFFA v. Harvard case. SFFA is not funding his work on this paper. Josh Kinsler worked as
a consultant for SFFA in the SFFA v. Harvard case. SFFA is not funding his work on this
paper. The views expressed and conclusions reached in this paper are those of the authors; they
do not purport to reflect the views of SFFA. To the extent this paper relies on records from the
SFFA v. Harvard case, it relies solely on the public records from the case. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Peter Arcidiacono, Josh Kinsler, and Tyler Ransom. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Legacy and Athlete Preferences at Harvard
Peter Arcidiacono, Josh Kinsler, and Tyler Ransom
NBER Working Paper No. 26316
September 2019
JEL No. I23,I24,J15

                                           ABSTRACT

The lawsuit Students For Fair Admissions v. Harvard University provided an unprecedented look
at how an elite school makes admissions decisions. Using publicly released reports, we examine
the preferences Harvard gives for recruited athletes, legacies, those on the dean's interest list, and
children of faculty and staff (ALDCs). Among white admits, over 43% are ALDC. Among admits
who are African American, Asian American, and Hispanic, the share is less than 16% each. Our
model of admissions shows that roughly three quarters of white ALDC admits would have been
rejected if they had been treated as white non-ALDCs. Removing preferences for athletes and
legacies would significantly alter the racial distribution of admitted students, with the share of
white admits falling and all other groups rising or remaining unchanged.


Peter Arcidiacono                                 Tyler Ransom
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
201A Social Sciences Building                     University of Oklahoma
Duke University                                   158 CCD1
Durham, NC 27708                                  308 Cate Center Drive
and NBER                                          Norman, OK 73072
psarcidi@econ.duke.edu                            ransom@ou.edu

Josh Kinsler
University of Georgia
jkinsler@uga.edu
1         Introduction
The Students for Fair Admissions (SFFA) lawsuit against Harvard University provided un-
precedented access to how Harvard makes admissions decisions and to the data underly-
ing those decisions. While the focus of the lawsuit was on Asian American discrimination
(relative to whites) and the size of racial preferences, the data provided in the lawsuit also
revealed how preferences operate for other distinct applicant groups, including recruited ath-
letes, legacies, those on the dean's interest list, and children of faculty and staff (ALDCs).1
The aim of this paper is to provide a detailed analysis of Harvard ALDC applicants and
their admissions outcomes relative to their non-ALDC peers.
        Following on the heels of the recent college admissions scandal (Chappell and Kennedy,
2019), the treatment of ALDC students in college admissions is receiving renewed scrutiny.
Wealth inequality in the US has been expanding for decades and college admissions prefer-
ences for applicant groups that may already be advantaged are generally condemned. Addi-
tionally, there are widespread concerns about the "fairness" of college admissions decisions.
Applicants with greater academic preparation and accomplishments expect to be admitted
at higher rates relative to less qualified applicants. Preferences for ALDC applicants have
the potential to subvert this meritocratic ideal. The ongoing debate about the use of af-
firmative action in college admissions has also drawn attention to the impact that other
admissions preferences have on the racial composition of college students. For example, it
is widely accepted that legacy preferences will tend to benefit white applicants relative to
other racial groups. Finally, underlying the rising concerns about privilege and fairness in
college admissions is the growing competitiveness of the higher education market. Over the
past twenty years, application levels have risen dramatically at elite colleges and universities
    1
     The term ALDC was first used in the defendant's expert witness rebuttal report (Document 419-143, p.
30). As indicated in the Day 3 Trial Transcript, the dean's interest list contains a set of applicants that is of
special importance to the dean of admissions. In particular, this list will include applicants whose parents
have donated to Harvard, and applicants whose relatives have donated to Harvard. Trial Exhibit P104 and
Trial Exhibit P106 illustrate how the dean's interest list operates. P104 is an email from the dean of the
Kennedy School of Government at Harvard praising the admissions dean for admitting applicants whose
families committed funding for buildings and fellowships prior to any admissions decision. P106 indicates a
case where an applicant's score on the dean's interest list is below the maximum because the development
office doesn't "see a significant opportunity for further major gifts."




                                                       2
in the US, with essentially no change in the number of seats available.2
       Harvard epitomizes the competitive nature of elite college admissions--the admit rate for
the Class of 2023 was 4.5%--and is thus an ideal setting to explore the attributes of ALDC
applicants and their admissions outcomes relative to their non-ALDC peers.3 Harvard is
the oldest university in the US and is considered to be one of the most, if not the most,
preeminent educational institution for societal leaders.4 While of interest in its own right,
Harvard is also similar to other Ivy League and highly selective institutions in terms of
academics and the socioeconomic background of its students.5
       While detailed data on admissions are typically tightly guarded by universities, rich data
on Harvard's decisions were made available as a result of the court case. The Harvard ad-
missions data contain a plethora of applicant characteristics, including detailed information
on demographics, academics, and extracurricular activities. Of particular importance, the
data contain information on Harvard's internal ratings of its applicants on a host of dimen-
sions, including academic, extracurricular, athletic, and personal ratings. The availability
of Harvard's internal ratings allows us to better describe the differences between ALDC and
non-ALDC applicants, as well as to account for factors that would typically be unavailable
when estimating admissions models.
       We use the detailed Harvard admissions data to examine three questions:

   1. How do the characteristics of recruited athletes, legacies, and other special groups
         of applicants and admits compare to the corresponding characteristics of the broader
         applicant and admit pools?

   2. How large of an admissions advantage is given to those in special recruiting categories?

   3. How would the removal of these admissions preferences impact legacy and athlete
   2
     See Bound, Hershbein, and Long (2009) and DeSilver (2019).
   3
     Throughout, class refers to the year Harvard would expect the applicant to graduate college, i.e. four
years after high school graduation.
   4
     Five US presidents and ten Supreme Court justices attended Harvard as undergrads, the most of any
institution in the US.
   5
     All eight Ivy League universities are ranked in the top twenty national universities in the 2019 US
News and World Report (https://www.usnews.com/best-colleges/rankings/national-universities).
Chetty et al. (2017b) show that Harvard has a similar share of students from the top 1% and top 20% of the
US income distribution as compared to the other seven Ivy League institutions plus MIT, Stanford, Chicago,
and Duke.


                                                    3
         admissions and the racial composition of admitted students?

These questions are motivated by the ongoing public debate related to privilege, fairness,
and racial equity in higher education.
       In response to the first question, we find that for each special applicant group under
the ALDC umbrella, applicants and admits are disproportionately white and come from
higher income households. As an example, 40% of non-ALDC applicants are white, while
nearly 70% of legacy applicants are white. When we explore other characteristics, such as
academic preparation, extracurricular strength, and personal qualities, the results are more
nuanced. On average, LDC applicants (that is, excluding athletes) are stronger than non-
ALDC applicants. However, the average LDC admit is weaker than the average non-ALDC
admit, suggesting an admissions advantage for LDC applicants. The admissions advantage
for recruited athletes appears to be even stronger. Admitted athletes have significantly worse
credentials than non-ALDC admits, and in some cases, non-ALDC applicants.6
       We show that LDC applicants are especially highly rated on Harvard's non-academic
ratings. Ratings related to extracurricular activities, athletics, and personal qualities are
included in the admissions process to allow for a more comprehensive view of an appli-
cant. It is widely believed that this "holistic" approach--pursued by many competitive
universities--opens doors for less advantaged applicants. Harvard's non-academic ratings
appear to achieve that goal only if race is the central characteristic defining disadvantage:
the gap between white and under-represented minority applicants is much smaller for non-
academic ratings than for the academic rating. However, within racial groups, these holistic
admissions criteria favor advantaged applicants. As a result, LDC applicants within racial
groups are doubly advantaged in the admissions process. They benefit from the particular
criteria Harvard uses to evaluate applicants, and they receive an additional tip in admis-
sions decisions conditional on those criteria. These findings are consistent with Lee and
Ries (2019), who find that use of non-academic admissions criteria favors white and wealthy
applicants at the University of British Columbia.
   6
    One might suppose that recruited athletes are a small share of admitted students to Harvard. They
are not, representing 10% of admits. In fact, Harvard offers 42 Division I intercollegiate sports teams--
the most in the nation. See https://college.harvard.edu/student-residential-life/athletics. For
more information about Harvard athletics, see Appendix E. In contrast, Ohio State University, one of the
largest public universities in the country, fields only 37 Division I teams. See ohiostatebuckeyes.com.

                                                   4
       To address our second question, we estimate a model of Harvard's admissions that ac-
counts for hundreds of applicant characteristics, including Harvard's academic, extracurric-
ular, and athletic ratings, among others. Admissions preferences for ALDC applicants are
substantial. We find that a white non-ALDC applicant with a 10% chance of admission
would see a five-fold increase in admissions likelihood if they were a legacy; more than a
seven-fold increase if they were on the dean's interest list; and that they would be admitted
with near certainty if they were a recruited athlete.7
       Finally, we explore how the admitted class at Harvard would change if ALDC preferences
were eliminated. First, we estimate that only one quarter of white ALDC admits would
have been admitted had they been treated as white non-ALDC applicants. Given the highly
advantaged status of this group, eliminating ALDC preferences would tend to reduce the
household income level among Harvard admits. Second, we explore how the number of
admits in each racial/ethnic group would change if legacy and athlete preferences were
removed, holding fixed the total number of admits. We find that removing either of these
preferences would result in significantly fewer white admits with increases or no change in
the number of African American, Hispanic, and Asian American admits.8
       A natural question is why Harvard would give such large preferences to these groups.
In a recent report issued by Harvard on race-neutral admissions (Trial Exhibit P316), a
committee of Harvard deans provides various rationales for promoting ALDC preferences.
While we forego the details of these arguments, the main takeaway is that these preferences
are thought to build a sense of community. Harvard's argument is that students who are
currently on campus benefit from being exposed to recruited athlete and legacy students,
while the university benefits from increased engagement and donations from alumni.9 There
are other incentives for Harvard to employ these preferences as well. For example, donations
   7
     We focus on whites because they make up the vast majority of ALDC applicants and admits.
   8
     Removing preferences for recruited athletes leaves the number of African Americans essentially un-
changed, with increases for Hispanic and Asian American admits. Removing legacy preferences increases the
number of admits for each of the non-white groups.
   9
     A major component of alumni engagement is Harvard's 10,000+ alumni that volunteer to interview and
recruit applicants (Trial Exhibit P316, pp. 9, 16­17). A higher admissions probability for the children of
these alumni implicitly compensates them for their contribution to the admissions process. When considering
ramifications of removing legacy preferences, Harvard said it is "concerned that [doing so] would diminish
this vital sense of engagement and support" (ibid., p. 17). These arguments are also mentioned in Document
421-9, pp. 191­192.


                                                    5
by alumni--as opposed to parents of current students--are part of the formula used in U.S.
News & World Report Best Colleges rankings,10 providing an additional incentive to admit
legacies whose parents will be more likely to donate if their child is admitted.
       While there is little research on the peer effects of athletes and legacies, researchers have
analyzed the impact that athletics and legacy admissions have on giving. Meer and Rosen
(2009b) and Anderson (2017) show that a university's athletic success can lead to increased
donations and prestige. Meer and Rosen (2009a), Meer and Rosen (2010), and Clotfelter
(2003) find an increased propensity to donate to a university among alumni parents and
students who graduate as legacies. So while the general public may find ALDC preferences
unseemly, institutions see them as a way of maintaining and enhancing their prestige (Jacob,
McCall, and Stange, 2018).11
       Due to the paucity of admissions data, the number of papers analyzing legacy and athlete
admission preferences is limited. Espenshade, Chung, and Walling (2004) use admissions
data from three elite research universities to estimate the admissions tip that legacies and
athletes receive conditional on SAT scores, race, and gender. They find that legacy and
athlete status increases the odds of admission by three and four, respectively. In our preferred
model, the similar increases in odds are substantially higher at over eight (legacies) and five
thousand (athletes) times. This reflects at least two factors: our model provides substantially
more explanatory power than their models due to the wealth of data provided;12 and there
is evidence that legacy and athlete preferences have been increasing over time.13 Hurwitz
  10
      The rankings methodology of U.S. News & World Report is described at https://www.usnews.com/
education/best-colleges/articles/how-us-news-calculated-the-rankings.
   11
      Preferences for ALDC applicants can also be rationalized if the economic returns to attending an elite
institution are smaller for students from less advantaged backgrounds. There is conflicting evidence regarding
this question. Zimmerman (2019) and Riehl (2018) find that the return to attending a high quality college is
larger for students from wealthy backgrounds. On the other hand, Dale and Krueger (2014) and Zimmerman
(2014) find that the returns to college quality are large for low-income and historically disadvantaged groups.
   12
      The Pseudo R2 of their models are around 0.2 while our preferred model has a Pseudo R2 of 0.56. The
more explanatory power of the model, the higher the log-odds all else equal, due to the coefficient estimates
of logit models being estimated relative to the variance of the unobservables. The more explanatory power of
the model, the lower the variance of the unobservables. See Norton and Dowd (2018) for a discussion of this
issue. While the odds ratio of 5,000 may seem ridiculous, this is simply the exponentiated logit coefficient,
where exp(8.532) = 5, 075, illustrating the massive advantages recruited athletes have in the admissions
process.
   13
      Arcidiacono, Kinsler, and Ransom (2019) demonstrate that the admissions advantages athlete and legacy
applicants receive at Harvard have increased substantially over the past twenty years. In particular, the admit
rate for athlete and legacy domestic applicants relative to the admit rate for non-athlete and non-legacy



                                                      6
(2011) uses data from thirty private colleges and universities and finds that legacy applicants
are again three times more likely to be admitted. To help account for unobserved differences
between legacy and non-legacy applicants, he exploits multiple applications per applicant
in a fixed-effects-type model. An assumption of this model is that different schools value
applicant attributes equivalently. Our approach instead uses more detailed applicant data
and a single school's own set of internal ratings of applicants to help control for differences
between ALDC and non-ALDC applicants. Despite the differences in approaches, our results
are similar to his findings for legacies at the most selective schools in his data.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we provide background on
Harvard's admissions process and the data we use. Section 3 compares the characteristics
of ALDC applicants to their non-ALDC counterparts. Section 4 describes the admissions
model and shows what the estimated preferences imply about how these advantages affect
the admissions probabilities for particular applicants. Section 5 shows how removing legacy
and athlete preferences would affect the racial distribution of the class, taking into account
that removing these preferences makes it slightly easier for other applicants to be admitted.
Section 6 concludes.



2     Harvard Admissions and Data
In this section, we describe the admissions process at Harvard and the key documents and
methodology used to study ALDC preferences. All documents are publicly available either at
the URL in the bibliography, or on the Public Access to Court Electronic Records (PACER)
website at https://www.pacer.gov/.


2.1     Harvard Admissions Process

To provide a framework for understanding the role of ALDC preferences in Harvard admis-
sions, we first describe the Harvard admission process.14 As sources, we use the unsealed
(but heavily redacted) depositions of Admissions Dean William R. Fitzsimmons (Document
domestic applicants has increased from a ratio of 4:1 to 9:1 between the Classes of 2000 and 2017.
  14
     Harvard's process is similar to that employed by other Ivy League schools (Jackson, 2017; Sabky, 2017),
and likely other elite institutions that employ holistic admissions criteria.

                                                     7
421-9) and Admissions Director Marlyn McGrath (Document 419-1), as well as two versions
of the admissions office's reading procedures that were admitted to the court as Trial Ex-
hibits P001 and P723. We also use trial testimony of Harvard admissions office personnel
and exhibits filed as part of various legal motions.


2.1.1      Overview

Domestic applicants are first divided into "dockets" which correspond to geographical areas
of the United States.15 Each application is read by at least one admissions officer who assigns
scores on a series of internal Harvard ratings, which we detail below.16 In addition to the
internal ratings produced by the admissions officer, most applicants are also interviewed
and rated by a Harvard alum, and a very small number (less than 3%) may be interviewed
by an admissions staff member.17 The alumni and staff evaluate applicants on a subset of
the application ratings, using the same scale that admissions officers employ.18 Competitive
applications may also be read by an additional admissions office member (typically the head
of the docket sub-committee).19 The initial reader of the application is known as the "first
reader," whereas the docket head is known as the "third reader."20
       Application scores, supporting material, and other characteristics of the applicant (such
as demographics) are summarized in a single document known as the "summary sheet,"
which is used to convey application information to admissions officers.21 Throughout the
application cycle, admissions officers assigned within dockets meet together to discuss can-
didates and make tentative admissions decisions.22 Towards the end of the cycle, the full
committee (i.e. all admissions officers) meets to consider docket sub-committee recommen-
  15
      See pp. 176­177 of Document 419-1
  16
      See Trial Exhibit P001, p. 5. Those who wish to know more about the reading process can find full
details in the casebook (Trial Exhibit DX 002) and its discussion guide (Trial Exhibit DX 024).
   17
      See Trial Exhibit P001, p. 12; Document 419-1, p. 55; and Document 421-9, p. 191. Staff interviews
are scheduled on a first-come, first-serve basis (Document 419-1, p. 96). Trial Exhibit P619 describes the
frequency of staff interviews.
   18
      See Document 421-9, p. 239.
   19
      See Document 419-1, p. 173.
   20
      ibid., pp. 172­178. A "second reader" generally applies to situations where the first reader is in training.
   21
      See Document 419-1, pp. 96­97. Document 421-9 mentions that applicant demographics (such as race)
are discussed in committee meetings (see p. 288), as well as disadvantaged and legacy status (see pp. 201,
259).
   22
      See Document 419-1, pp. 184­185



                                                        8
dations and make final decisions.23


2.1.2      Scoring of Applications

A key advantage of using Harvard's data to study ALDC preferences is the availability of
internal ratings for each applicant. In this section, we describe precisely how applications
are scored.
       Readers assign each application a set of numerical codes indicating its strength.24 Read-
ers give an overall rating as well as a rating profile, which is composed of ratings in the
following areas: academic, extracurricular, athletic, and personal.25 Additionally, competi-
tive applications are rated on the "full profile," which includes the strength of support from
the applicant's teachers and school counselor (school support ratings) and ratings assigned
by alumni or staff interviewers.26 Each of the ratings is on a five-point scale, with lower
numbers indicating better ratings, and "+" and "-" suffixes respectively indicating better
and worse ratings within a number.27 Each of the component ratings, as well as the overall
rating, are included on the summary sheet.28 The overall ratings assigned by the first and
third readers both appear on the summary sheet, but the other component rating scores are
overwritten in the event of an additional read.29
       We now highlight some key aspects of Harvard's reading procedures, which explain how to
code numerical values for each of the ratings.30 Our highlights below focus on the procedures
used for the Class of 2018, because they correspond to the time period of our data. The
reading procedures were recently updated for the Class of 2023. Harvard made a number of
major changes, foremost being changes in the guidelines of how to score the personal rating.
  23
     ibid., pp. 186­187; Document 421-9, pp. 287­290.
  24
     See Trial Exhibit P001, p. 5.
  25
     ibid.
  26
     ibid.
  27
     See Document 419-1, pp. 158­161, and Trial Exhibit P001, p. 5. For example, a rating of 1- is better
than a 2+.
  28
     See Trial Exhibit P001, p. 5.
  29
     ibid.
  30
     In addition to these reading procedures, Harvard provides new admissions officers and new alumni
interviewers specific training on how to convert an application's data into a numerical score (Day 6 Trial
Transcript, pp. 151­154). The backbone of this training is the case book (Trial Exhibit DX 002) and its
discussion guide (Trial Exhibit DX 024).




                                                    9
Overall rating A 1 in this rating category is reserved for "exceptional" applications with
"90+% [chance of] admission." On the other hand, a 4 is "neutral," while a 5 is "negative"
and characterizes those candidates whose "credentials are generally below those of other
candidates" (Trial Exhibit P001, p. 5). The overall rating is based on each of the component
ratings (Document 419-1, p. 159) as well as any other factors that admissions officers deem
valuable to Harvard, such as race or legacy or disadvantaged status.31


Academic rating The academic rating ranges from 1s who have "summa potential ...
near-perfect [test] scores and grades" to 5s who have "marginal potential ... modest grades
and 500 scores (25 and below ACT)" (ibid., pp. 5­6).


Extracurricular rating This rating also includes "community employment [and] family
commitments." A 1 indicates "possible national-level achievement or professional experience
... truly unusual achievement." A 4 indicates "little or no participation" (ibid. p. 6).


Athletic rating A score of 1 on the athletic rating indicates a recruited athlete.32 A 2
indicates "strong secondary school contribution in one or more areas; possible leadership
role(s)." A 4 indicates "little or no interest" (Trial Exhibit P001, p.6) but is "not necessarily
negative" (Document 419-1, p. 159).


Personal rating The personal rating criteria, compared to the other ratings, are surpris-
ingly vague. The criteria are as follows: "(1) Outstanding; (2) Very strong; (3) Generally
positive; (4) Bland or somewhat negative or immature; (5) Questionable personal qualities;
(6) Worrisome personal qualities" (Trial Exhibit P001, pp. 6­7).33


School support rating Readers examine the letters of recommendation provided by the
applicant's high school and code them on a range from "`The best ever,' `one of the best in
x years,' truly over the top" (1) to "Negative or worrisome report" (5).
  31
     See Document 421-9, pp. 288, 259, 422.
  32
     See Trial Exhibit P001, p. 6, and Document 419-1, pp. 160, 163.
  33
     These criteria were substantially updated in Trial Exhibit P723. It has half of a page of contextual
description leading into the description of the scoring criteria, and the criteria for scores of 1 or 2 each
contain five or six sentences.


                                                    10
2.1.3      The Treatment of ALDCs in the Admissions Process

The testimony and documents made available at trial also provide an in-depth look at how
ALDC applications are handled by the admissions staff. While ALDC applicants go through
the full committee process with all other applicants, we find that ALDC applicants are
given special treatment in the reading process. ALDC applications are closely monitored
throughout the cycle by the admissions dean, admissions director, athletic coaches, and
others.34 Often, ALDC applications are annotated in specific ways to aid in the monitoring
process.35 As a group, ALDCs are also about 20 times more likely to interview with a
member of the admissions office.36
       The specialized treatment ALDC applicants receive likely contributes to their admissions
advantages. Much of Harvard's specialized treatment of these applicants stems from its desire
to find "distinguishing excellences," or individuals who are exceptional in at least one of a
variety of dimensions (Trial Exhibit DX 005, pp. 9­10). Admissions "tips" are given to those
applicants who have distinguishing excellence, and listed among these are athletic ability and
legacy status (Trial Exhibit DX 005, pp. 9­11).37 The rest of this section illustrates how
each of the ALDC categories intersects with the admissions process.


Athletes While Harvard does not offer athletic scholarships,38 each of its 42 sports teams
has a liaison that moderates contact throughout the admissions process between the admis-
sions office and that team's coach.39 Additionally, the admissions office sets aside a certain
number of staff interview slots for only athletes, which can occur outside of the time frame
for which staff interviews are made available to the general public.40
  34
     See below for specific references.
  35
     See below for specific instances.
  36
     See Trial Exhibit P619 for a summary of staff interview rates by ALDC status.
  37
     Other specific examples of distinguishing excellence include the following: intellectual ability, personal
qualities, capacity for leadership, creative ability, and socioeconomic background (including race/ethnicity).
See pp. 9­11 of Trial Exhibit DX 005 for further details.
  38
     Document 419-1, p. 160
  39
     See Document 419-1, p. 41. See also footnote 89 of Document 419-143, which relates an email corre-
spondence between women's hockey coach Katey Stone and the admissions office in which Stone advocates
for her recruits. Stone admits that "their testing may not be that of others, yet what they will bring to the
Harvard classroom, athletic area and community is immeasurable."
  40
     See Day 5 Trial Transcript, p. 184.




                                                      11
Legacies Legacies are coded in the "Lineage" field of the application, meaning that lega-
cies are strictly children of alumni, and not other relatives (Trial Exhibit P001, p. 3).41 The
reading procedures instruct that these files "should be read by [Admissions Dean Fitzsim-
mons] following the normal reading process if the decision might require special handling or
if another reading might be helpful" (Trial Exhibit P001, p. 3).


Dean's Interest List There is no mention of the Admissions Dean's or Admissions Direc-
tor's interest lists in the reading procedures. However, Document 421-9 provides a number
of details about the handling of such applications. First, members of this list receive an
additional rating which is separate from the profile ratings (ibid., pp. 269­273). This addi-
tional rating is tied to the applicant's (or the family of the applicant's) donation history and
future donation prospects (ibid., p. 278).42 When subcommittees discuss applicants on this
list, the admissions dean may pre-emptively join the meeting to discuss members of this list,
or may have individually discussed the applicant with the subcommittee chair beforehand
(ibid., p. 279). A similar process applies for the Admissions Director's interest list (ibid., p.
278). Finally, being a member of the Dean's or Director's interest lists is a field included in
the individual-level applicant data that were produced by Harvard for the SFFA case.


Children of Faculty or Staff The reading procedures instruct readers that these appli-
cations "should be sent to [Admissions Dean Fitzsimmons] after the normal reading process
has been completed."43


2.2     Admissions Data

Our analysis of ALDC applicants and admissions is based upon anonymized data on domestic
applicants produced by Harvard. The applicants come from the set of students who would be
  41
     Klein and Keto (2015) show that 16.8% of the Class of 2019 are legacies by this strict definition, but that
nearly 28% of the class is a legacy by a looser definition (i.e. parent, sibling, grandparent, aunt/uncle, or
other relative graduated from Harvard). While these other definitions do not appear to be formally tracked
by the admissions office, they may be correlated with other ALDC categories.
  42
     See also Trial Exhibit P106 which alludes to this rating.
  43
     Harvard labels some faculty as "staff." Only Faculty of Arts and Sciences are called "faculty," whereas
faculty of other colleges are called "staff," in addition to non-faculty employees (Trial Exhibit P001, p. 3).
This distinction motivates our decision to put faculty and staff children in the same category.



                                                      12
graduating from Harvard in 2014­2019. This range includes students who would typically
have been applying to Harvard in the fall of 2009­2014 and graduating from high school
in the spring of 2010­2015. In all, the sample consists of 166,727 domestic, non-transfer,
complete applications.44
       For each applicant, the data contain detailed demographic information, academic perfor-
mance in a variety of categories, scores on each internal rating, and final admission decisions.
Critically, the data also include indicator variables for each of the LDC categories. Recruited
athletes are identified as those applicants who receive a 1 on the athletic rating.
       It is important to point out that we no longer have access to Harvard's individual-level
applicant data. As a result, the findings presented in the current paper are based solely on
information in the publicly released versions of the expert witness reports or information
publicly released in other documents. A full list of the documents we rely on is presented
in Appendix A. Fortunately, the publicly available documents provide enough detailed in-
formation for us to infer the characteristics of ALDC applicants relative to their non-ALDC
peers, and the preferences afforded to ALDC applicants in the admissions process. Appendix
B provides both a general and detailed account of how each number we present is generated
based on information in the public record.



3        Characteristics of ALDC Applicants and Admits
We begin by describing differences in admit rates and racial composition across ALDC status.
We follow this with separate analyses of the ratings and attributes of LDC applicants and
athlete applicants, since we are able to provide more information in greater detail for LDC
applicants.45
  44
     For further details about the data and sample selection, see sections 2.2 and 2.3 of Document 415-8 and
section 3 of Document 419-141.
  45
     Our analysis of athletes is limited because it is more difficult to isolate the attributes of recruited athletes
in publicly available documents. Further details are provided in Appendix B.2.




                                                         13
3.1       ALDC admit rates

ALDC applicants are admitted at substantially higher rates than non-ALDC applicants.
Table 1 illustrates this phenomenon.46 It shows domestic admit rates for each of the ALDC
groups across the six admissions cycles spanning 2014­2019. With an admit rate of 86%,
recruited athletes are over 14 times as likely to be admitted as those that are not recruited
athletes. This is by far the largest admit rate. Although recruited athletes are less than 1%
of the applicant pool, they make up over 10% of the admitted class.47
       The admit rate for legacy applicants over this period was 33.6%, which is 5.7 times higher
than the admit rate for non-legacy applicants. Legacies are the largest of the ALDCs, both
in terms of number of applicants as well as number of admits, and make up 14% of the
admitted class. Interestingly, this legacy admit rate is similar to the legacy admit rate when
the Office for Civil Rights (OCR) was investigating Harvard, despite Harvard receiving many
more applications in recent years. In the last two admissions cycles that OCR analyzed (1991
and 1992), the admit rates for legacies ranged from 33.4% to 35.2%.48
       Children of faculty and staff and those on the dean's interest list also have high admit
rates at 46.7% and 42.7%, respectively, making up 1.3% and 9.5% of admitted students.
Note that the total share of admits that belong to one of the ALDC groups is 29%, which
is the less than the sum of the shares listed here.49 The difference arises because of double
counting. For example, some recruited athletes may also be legacies.
       To get an initial sense of the admissions advantage these groups receive, Table 2 reports
admit rates by academic rating for three sets of applicants: non-ALDC, LDC, and recruited
  46
      The sample used to create Table 1 includes applicants that were subsequently dropped in the main
analysis sample of Document 415-9 as the result of missing ratings, SAT scores, or academic index. Thus,
the numbers in Table 1 will not necessarily match the numbers in other documents that use the trimmed
sample. Note that the total number of applicants in Table 1 is 166,727, which matches the number of
applicants from Table A.5 in Document 415-8 after the first three sample cuts. As a result, we know that
the total number of admits in this sample is 11,132, which we can derive using Tables A.5R and B.3.2R in
Document 415-9.
   47
      The 10% number is calculated by multiplying the admit rate times the number of applicants and dividing
by 11,132, the total number of admits. Similar calculations are used to generate admit shares for legacies,
dean's list, and children of faculty/staff.
   48
      See Trial Exhibit P555. OCR investigated whether Harvard discriminated against Asian Americans in
its undergraduate admissions process, concluding that Harvard did not discriminate against Asian American
applicants.
   49
      The 29% figure is based on information from Table B.3.2 in Document 415-8 and Tables B.3.1R and
B.3.2R in Document 415-9. This figure is also directly reported in Trial Exhibit DX 706.


                                                    14
athletes. The first column shows the results for non-ALDCs. Consistent with Harvard
valuing academics, higher academic ratings are associated with higher admission rates. All
non-ALDC applicants who received a 5 were rejected and those who received a 4 were almost
certain rejects, with an admit rate of 0.02%. The bulk of non-ALDC Harvard applicants
receive a 3 or a 2 on the academic rating and see average admit rates of 2.4% and 10%,
respectively. Receiving a 1 is rare (less than 0.5% of applicants), but is rewarded with an
admit rate of over 66%.
   At ratings of 4 or better, LDC applicants have substantially higher admit rates than their
non-ALDC counterparts (no one outside of athletes is admitted with an academic rating of
5). While a 4 virtually guarantees rejection for non-ALDC applicants, LDC applicants are
admitted at a rate of 3.5%, which is a full percentage point higher than the admit rate for
non-ALDC applicants who received a 3 (one rating better). LDC applicants who receive a
3 have admit rates of 18%, which is 7.5 times the admit rate of non-ALDC applicants who
receive a 3 and 1.8 times higher than the admit rate for non-ALDC applicants who received
a 2.
   While the differences in admit rates between non-ALDC and LDC applicants conditional
on the academic rating are striking, they pale in comparison to the differences between
recruited athletes and everyone else. An academic rating of 5 guarantees rejection for all other
applicants, but half of the recruited athletes with the worst academic rating are admitted.
For all other academic ratings, the admit rate for recruited athletes was 79% or higher.
Recruited athletes who receive a 4 on the academic rating had admit rates that were higher
than non-ALDC applicants who received a 1.


3.2    The racial composition of ALDCs

The overall admit rates, as well as the admit rates conditional on the academic rating,
suggest the possibility of large preferences for ALDC applicants. Panel A of Table 3 shows
large admissions advantages for ALDC applicants within each racial group. However, this
does not imply that all racial groups benefit evenly from ALDC preferences, since the share
of each racial group that is ALDC varies considerably.
   Panels B and C of Table 3 show the racial distribution of applicants and admits for non-

                                              15
ALDCs as well as for each of the ALDC categories. The share of applicants and admits who
are white in each of the ALDC categories are both substantially higher than the correspond-
ing shares of applicants and admits who are white and not ALDC. For example, recruited
athletes, legacies, and dean's interest list applicants are all over 68% white, yet the share
of non-ALDC applicants who are white is less than 41%. All other racial groups see higher
representation among non-ALDC applicants and admits than in any of the corresponding
ALDC applicant and admit categories.50
       The final panel of Table 3 documents the share of admits who are non-ALDC and the
share of admits in each of the ALDC categories by race. For non-whites, the share of ALDC
admits are less than 16% for each racial/ethnic group.51 The corresponding share for whites
is much higher at over 43%. Indeed, the share of white admits who are recruited athletes
alone is higher than the share of ALDC admits as a whole for any of the other racial/ethnic
groups.


3.3       Comparing LDC and non-ALDC Applicants and Admits

The previous section shows that ALDC applicants are admitted at much higher rates and are
substantially more likely to be white than non-ALDC applicants. In this section, we exam-
ine further how LDC applicants differ from non-ALDC applicants. We focus on three types
of measures: background characteristics, Harvard internal ratings, and academic prepara-
tion. Since we are unable to fully replicate this analysis for recruited athletes, we return to
recruited athlete attributes in the next subsection.


3.3.1      Demographics

Table 4 displays the background characteristics of LDC and non-ALDC applicants by race
and admission status. Panel A lists these statistics for all applicants and Panel B for all
admits. The results in Panel A indicate that, among applicants of each race, LDCs are
significantly less likely to be coded as disadvantaged or to receive financial aid. They are
  50
     There is one exception: Asian Americans represent a slightly greater share of children of faculty and staff
admits than non-ALDC admits. However, this category is much smaller than the other ALDC components.
  51
     Because of overlap in ALDC group membership, we compute this as 100 minus the non-ALDC share.



                                                      16
also much more likely to have their application reviewed by a second admissions officer.52 The
increased propensity to obtain a second review is consistent with Harvard's reader guidelines
and handling of special applications as detailed in Section 2.1.
       Panel B of Table 4 shows that admitted LDCs also come from more privileged back-
grounds than non-ALDC admits. We investigate the relative advantage of legacy admits
further by using publicly available survey data on Harvard enrollees. The Harvard Crimson,
the nation's oldest continuously published daily college newspaper, surveys each incoming
class about their family background. These surveys confirm the advantaged status of lega-
cies. For the Class of 2019, 40.7% of legacy respondents have parents who earn more than
$500K, which is the Top 1% of US income.53 The corresponding share for all respondents,
including legacies, is only 15.4%.54
       Finally, comparing across Panels A and B also highlights that disadvantaged status affects
admissions probabilities differently for non-ALDC and LDC applicants. Among non-ALDCs,
disadvantaged applicants tend to be over-represented among admits relative to all applicants.
The reverse is true for LDCs, suggesting that applicant characteristics are valued differently
according to LDC status.


3.3.2      Harvard Ratings

In addition to differences in basic applicant characteristics, we are also able to explore
whether Harvard rates LDC applicants differently than non-ALDC applicants. We mea-
sure applicant strength as the rate of receiving a score of 2 or better on Harvard's internal
  52
     Recall from Section 2.1 that Harvard refers to an additional reader as the "third" reader.
  53
     See Klein and Keto (2015). The share of legacies whose parents earn above $500K is not reported
directly. However, the survey reports the probability of being a legacy, the distribution of family income for
all respondents, and legacy by family income. We use these numbers to calculate the share of legacies whose
parents earn above $500K according to:

                                              P (legacy | income > $500K ) × P (income > $500K )
              P (income > $500K | legacy) =                                                      .
                                                                   P (legacy)

See Sommeiller and Price (2018) for data on the U.S. income distribution.
   54
      Remarkably, Chetty et al. (2017b) also estimate that 15.4% of students at Harvard come from families in
the Top 1% of the income distribution, which is about the same number as from the bottom three quintiles
combined (see p. 14). Their data come from Harvard students who graduated in the early 2000s. Chetty
et al. (2017a) show that the share of Harvard students from the Top 1% has stayed steady at about 15%
since 2000.



                                                       17
ratings.55 Table 5 shows ratings distributions for Harvard's overall rating, as well as the
profile ratings, by race and admission status, separately for non-ALDCs and LDCs. Distri-
butions for Harvard's other ratings, such as school support measures and alumni interview
scores, are given in Appendix Table D1.
       The results in the top panel of Table 5 are broadly consistent with the patterns observed
in the demographic characteristics. In each of the five dimensions and for each racial group,
LDCs are stronger on average than the average applicant. The relative strength of LDC
applicants, however, depends on the rating. The gaps are especially large for the overall,
athletic, and personal ratings. On the overall rating, Hispanic LDC applicants have the low-
est share of 2's at 18.5% when compared to LDC applicants of other racial groups. But this
share is 3.5 times larger than the highest share for non-ALDC applicants (African Americans
at 5.3%). In contrast, on the academic rating, non-ALDC Asian American applicants have
a higher share of 2's than the LDC applicants of the other three races/ethnicities.
       Perhaps the most striking results are for the athletic rating, which correlates strongly
with LDC status and advantaged status more generally. Among LDC applicants, Asian
Americans have the lowest share of 2's at 14.9%. Yet this is higher than the highest share
among non-ALDC applicants (whites at 12.8%). White legacies score the highest on the
athletic rating with 21.9% receiving a 2, and white non-ALDC applicants score the highest
among non-ALDC applicants.
       The relative strength of LDC applicants on Harvard's internal ratings is not a surprise
given their family resources. What is surprising is that it is the non-academic ratings where
LDC applicants particularly dominate. There are two factors working together that likely
drive this pattern. First, LDC applicants are simply stronger than non-ALDC applicants
in the non-academic dimensions that Harvard values. Second, when rating applicants on
non-academic qualities, Harvard provides tips to LDC applicants.
       While the first channel seems less controversial than the second, it is important to consider
what the relative strength of LDC applicants on non-academic dimensions implies for the
concept of holistic admissions. Ratings related to extracurricular activities, athletics, and
  55
    For ease of exposition, we use 2 or better to refer to applicants who received any form of a 2 or 1,
regardless of whether the 2 or 1 was accompanied by a plus or minus.



                                                  18
personal qualities are included in the admissions process to allow for a more comprehensive
view of an applicant. It is widely believed that this approach--pursued by many elite US
universities--opens doors for less advantaged applicants. Harvard's non-academic ratings
appear to achieve that goal only if race is the central characteristic defining disadvantage.
The gap between white and under-represented minority applicants is much smaller for non-
academic ratings as compared to the academic rating. However, within racial groups, these
holistic admissions criteria favor advantaged applicants. In fact, within a racial group it is
generally true that the LDC and non-ALDC academic ratings are more similar than the
non-academic ratings.
       In addition to the possibility that LDC applicants have better personal qualities and
overall profiles (as defined by Harvard) than non-ALDC applicants, preferences for these
special applicants may also influence these non-academic ratings. According to Harvard's
reader guidelines, the overall rating is essentially the reviewer's assessment of the applicant's
probability of being admitted as a function of both objective and subjective factors, which
according to depositions of admissions officers includes race and ALDC status (among oth-
ers).56 The reader guidelines for the personal rating provide very little guidance other than
that "Outstanding" personal qualities deserve the highest rating. In fact, when OCR in-
vestigated Harvard in 1990, they found less consistency in how Harvard's readers assigned
personal ratings as compared to the academic and extracurricular ratings.57 The subjectiv-
ity inherent in the personal rating leaves greater scope for other preferences to play a role.
Harvard has attempted to address this subjectivity in newly updated reader guidelines that
are much more explicit about what constitutes excellence in academics, extracurriculars, and
personal qualities.58
       Somewhat surprisingly, OCR also found Harvard's athletic ratings to be quite inconsis-
tent.59 For example, they found that some applicants with only recreational participation
  56
     See Document 419-1, pp. 172­173 and Document 421-9, pp. 253­254, 259.
  57
     See Trial Exhibit P555, pp. 20­21.
  58
     As mentioned in Section 2.1, Harvard altered their reader guidelines in Summer 2018 to address some
of these shortcomings (see Trial Exhibit P723). In particular, readers are now instructed explicitly to ignore
race when assigning the personal rating. Additionally, the description of attributes leading to the highest
personal rating has increased from one word ("Outstanding") to five lines of text.
  59
     See Trial Exhibit P555, pp. 20­21. Trial testimony also supports the ambiguous nature of the athletic
rating. When the director of admissions was asked whether a nationally ranked figure skater would receive



                                                     19
during high school received a better athletic rating than applicants who participated on var-
sity teams in high school. This coincides with testimony from Harvard's admissions director
which indicated that the athletic rating has a "team component" to it in the sense that an
applicant would be rated more highly if they participated in a sport that Harvard competes
in at the varsity level.60 Applicants who play a leadership role in their sport are also likely
to receive a higher athletic rating.61 Both of these ratings advantages are likely to benefit
LDC applicants since they are more likely to attend private secondary schools.62 Relative
to public secondary schools, private schools may be more likely to offer an array of varsity
teams similar to Harvard's, and to provide more leadership opportunities since they tend to
be smaller on average.
    The comparative advantage of LDC applicants over non-ALDC applicants generally re-
verses when we look only at those applicants who were admitted. The bottom panel of Table
5 shows that LDC admits are weaker than non-ALDC admits in most dimensions.63 This is
not true for the athletic rating, which especially favors LDC applicants.64
    Within racial groups, LDC applicants are on average stronger than the average applicant,
but the average LDC admit is weaker than the average non-ALDC admit. This pattern
suggests a significant preference for LDC applicants in the admissions process. In other
words, LDC applicants within racial categories are doubly advantaged. They benefit from
the particular criteria Harvard uses to evaluate applicants (see also Lee and Ries, 2019), and
they receive an additional tip in admissions decisions conditional on those criteria.
a high athletic rating, she responded: "They might not get an athletic rating since we don't have a figure
skating team. There are members of my staff who would think that it's not fair to indicate ­ for example, your
daughter, were she a candidate and so on and she were still a figure skating champion, we would probably
want to record that in some way in that box. Others of us would make her a 1 or a 2+ or something in the
extracurricular box." See Day 6 Trial Transcript, pp. 181­183, for additional details.
  60
     See Day 6 Trial Transcript, pp. 181­183.
  61
     See Trial Exhibit P001. Similar to the personal rating, the reader guidelines for assigning the athletic
rating have also recently been updated (see Trial Exhibit P723). The new guidelines explicitly state that a
student with an opportunity to walk on to a varsity team should receive a higher rating.
  62
     Klein and Keto (2015) indicate that 60% of legacy students attended a private secondary school while
only 35.4% of all students attended a private secondary school.
  63
     Appendix Table D2 shows the distributions of Harvard's other ratings for admitted students.
  64
     There are a handful of other ratings and race combinations for which LDC admits are stronger than
non-ALDC admits, but this only occurs for African Americans and Hispanics. Here it is important to note
that the tip African Americans and Hispanics receive for LDC status is lower than that of non-ALDCs. We
discuss this further in Section 4.1.




                                                     20
3.3.3       Academic Preparation

We investigate these disparities further by comparing in greater detail the academic quali-
fications of LDC and non-ALDC applicants. To do this, we construct deciles of Harvard's
academic index, which is a weighted average of the applicant's scores on the SAT, SAT II,
and high school grade point average (or class rank).65 The deciles are defined over academic
indexes for all LDC and non-ALDC applicants with non-missing values.66 We then show
in Table 6 how LDC and non-ALDC applicants are distributed across the academic index
deciles by race, and report the admit rates for each racial/ethnic group and LDC status by
decile.67
       Panel A of Table 6 shows the distribution of the academic index for LDCs and non-ALDCs
by race. For all racial/ethnic groups, LDC applicants are less likely to be in the bottom two
deciles than their non-ALDC counterparts.68 Moreover, for most racial/ethnic groups LDC
applicants are more likely to be in the top two deciles. The exception is Asian Americans.
While LDC Asian Americans have higher academic indexes than LDC applicants of other
races, non-ALDC Asian American applicants have significantly higher representation in the
top two deciles (34%) than their LDC counterparts (27%).
       The key results are in Panel B where we show the admit rates associated with different
deciles of the academic index. Consider the bottom decile. No non-ALDC white, Hispanic,
or Asian Americans are admitted, and the admit rate for African Americans is 0.03%. Yet,
white LDC applicants in the bottom decile are admitted at a rate of 6.32%, a rate 1.4
percentage points higher than the average admit rate for all white non-ALDC applicants.
Indeed, white LDC applicants in the third decile from the bottom are admitted at a rate
  65
     See Document 415-8 footnote 29 for a more detailed discussion of the academic index.
  66
     We exclude those who received the lowest score for converted grade point average (35). This is because
converted GPAs range from 35 to 80, and there is a spike in the data at 35. It is apparent from the data
that a 35 is often a result of grades being incorrectly converted. See Document 415-8 footnote 51 for details.
  67
     A typical applicant in the top decile might have an SAT score of 1580 (combined math and verbal), an
average SAT2 score of 790 (out of 800), and perfect grades. This combination yields a academic index value
of 238. On the other hand, a typical applicant in the bottom decile might have an SAT score of 1150, an
average SAT2 score of 575, and average grades (among applicants). This combination of test scores and GPA
yields an academic index value of 190. See Trial Exhibit P626 for the correspondence between academic
index values and deciles. Trial Exhibit DX 730 reports the average converted GPA among applicants.
  68
     A surprising result is the lack of academic strength among African American LDC applicants. Nearly a
quarter of this group is in the lowest academic index decile.




                                                     21
higher than white non-ALDC applicants in the top academic index decile.
       Harvard acknowledges admissions preferences for underrepresented minorities.69 Using
this as a reference point, we see that, for the top five deciles, African American non-ALDCs
have admit rates similar to white LDCs. However, in the bottom five deciles the admit rates
for white LDCs are much higher. Note that the characteristics of the applicants are likely to
be different across these groups even within academic index deciles. What the table shows
is what the combination of preferences and observed differences in characteristics have to be
in order to account for the observed differences in admit rates.
       The results in Table 6 illustrate that, while LDC applicants are stronger academically
than non-ALDC applicants, admit rates for less academically prepared LDC applicants are
much higher. Since these patterns move in opposite directions, it is unclear how LDC admits
compare to non-ALDC admits in terms of academic preparation. Table 7 fills this gap by
showing how admits are distributed across the academic deciles and the share of admits
within each decile that are LDC. A clear and consistent pattern emerges. The total number
of admits is monotonically increasing in academic preparation; however, the share of admits
that are LDC decreases dramatically as academic preparation improves.70 For example, in
the second academic index decile there are only 52 white admits, of which 67% are LDC. In
contrast, there are 952 white admits in the top academic decile, of which only 20% are LDC.
A similar pattern is seen across other racial groups, though it is muted, since there are so
few non-white LDC applicants.
       The patterns in the share of admits that are LDC across academic deciles are consistent
with two ideas. First, Harvard employs large preferences for LDC applicants. Second, on
non-academic measures, such as the personal, athletic, extracurricular, and school support
ratings, LDC applicants are stronger. This second mechanism suggests that most of the
non-academic qualifications that positively influence admission favor highly advantaged ap-
  69
     Harvard's reader guidelines indicate that an applicant's overall rating is closely tied to the probability of
admission and that factors that admissions officers deem valuable to Harvard, such as race, can be factored
in. See Document 421-9, pp. 288, 259, 422. Additionally, the following trial documents all demonstrate
substantial racial preferences for African American and Hispanic applicants: Document 415-8; Document
415-9; Document 419-141; and Document 419-143.
  70
     Note that including athletes in this exercise would only exacerbate these patterns at lower academic
deciles. The number of admits in the bottom deciles would be significantly higher, as would the share of
admits that are ALDC.



                                                       22
plicants. While the standard view of holistic admissions is that it provides a channel for less
advantaged applicants to obtain a leg up, within racial groups the holistic system at Harvard
yields precisely the opposite.


3.4       Recruited Athlete Admits

We now turn to recruited athletes, comparing the internal Harvard ratings of admitted
recruited athletes with non-ALDC applicants and admits. As discussed at the beginning of
Section 3, it is more difficult to recover attributes and Harvard ratings for recruited athlete
applicants from the publicly disclosed documents. For this reason, we focus on the profile
ratings for admitted recruited athletes. This is not particularly limiting, since the admit
rate for recruited athletes is above 85%.
       Table 8 compares the ratings received by recruited athlete admits to those received by
non-ALDC applicants and admits, focusing on the overall rating and the four profile ratings
with the exception of the athletic rating.71 With the publicly available documents, we are
able to form meaningful bounds on the ratings of recruited athletes.72
       Recruited athlete admits are universally weaker than non-ALDC admits on these ratings.
This is not surprising, given that we know athletes are stronger on the athletic rating. But
for some race and rating combinations, the differences are striking. At most, 28% of white
athlete admits receive a 2 or higher on the academic rating. In contrast, 89% of white
non-ALDC admits receive a 2 or higher on the academic rating. 78% of Asian American
non-ALDC admits receive a 2 or higher on the extracurricular rating, while at most 12% of
admitted Asian American athletes receive a similarly high extracurricular rating.
       In many cases--and in contrast to LDC admits--recruited athlete admits are weaker
than non-ALDC applicants. Non-ALDC applicants on average have higher academic and
extracurricular ratings than admitted recruited athletes of the same race for all groups
except Hispanics on the academic rating. On the overall and personal ratings, however,
recruited athlete admits do have higher scores than non-ALDC applicants.
  71
    The athletic rating is by definition 1 for recruited athletes.
  72
    Additional details are provided in Appendix B. For non-ALDC applicants and admits, no range is
necessary as these numbers are exact. Comparisons to recruited athlete applicants, as well as comparisons
on the other Harvard ratings, are available in Appendix Table D3.


                                                   23
       This last result is consistent with the patterns observed for LDC applicants. LDC appli-
cants are much stronger than non-ALDC applicants precisely in the overall, personal, and
athletic ratings. We know that LDC and recruited athlete applicants have similar racial
distributions, but this suggests that recruited athletes may be more similar to LDC appli-
cants than non-ALDC applicants in additional dimensions. We investigate this further by
examining the share of admitted athletes that are disadvantaged. We find that at most 3.2%
of white admitted athletes are economically disadvantaged.73 For non-ALDC admits, the
corresponding number is 14.6%.74 The advantaged status of recruited athletes can be verified
using The Harvard Crimson survey cited earlier.75 For the Class of 2019, 26% of recruited
athlete respondents came from families earning more than $500,000 in income per year. The
corresponding numbers for legacies and all respondents are 40.7% and 15.4%, respectively.
       ALDC applicants, including athletes, are highly advantaged relative to non-ALDC appli-
cants and are admitted at much higher rates. ALDC admits are also significantly weaker than
non-ALDC admits on almost all of Harvard's internal ratings. These patterns strongly sug-
gest that Harvard employs significant preferences for these advantaged groups when making
admissions decisions. However, the descriptive work thus far cannot rule out the possibility
that recruited athletes and LDC applicants are stronger once we account for all charac-
teristics jointly and in the manner that Harvard weighs them in the admissions decision.
In the following sections we investigate this possibility by estimating a model of Harvard
admissions.



4        Estimates of the Legacy and Athlete Advantage
To better understand the source of the gap in admission rates between ALDC and non-ALDC
applicants, we estimate a logistic regression model of Harvard's admissions decisions. A full
discussion of the admissions model we estimate, as well as a list of all controls, is given in
  73
     This number can be derived using Table B.3.2 from Document 415-8 and Table B.3.2R from Document
415-9.
  74
     A similar pattern exists for the other racial groups--the upper bound for athletes is well below the value
for non-ALDC admits. We focus on white athletes since they account for close to 70% of admitted recruited
athletes (see Panel C of Table 3).
  75
     See Klein and Keto (2015).



                                                      24
Appendix C.76 Here, we provide a brief overview.
       The Harvard admissions data cover six admissions cycles and include hundreds of vari-
ables describing each applicant. It is not feasible to include every variable separately in
every year, as we would ultimately have as many regressors as admits. We choose to pool
the application cycles together and estimate a single logistic regression with indicators for
each admissions cycle. Estimating the admissions model with indicators for each admissions
cycle ensures that the predicted number of admits matches the actual number of admits.
       Including only these admissions cycle indicators to capture the time-varying component
of Harvard's admission process would be consistent with Harvard having a single index
of applicant quality in every year. Yet, there is evidence that Harvard cares about the
admitted composition of the class. During the weeks and months that Harvard is making
final admissions decisions, the admissions office publishes statistics about the makeup of
the current admitted class, as well as how these numbers compare to previous classes.77
Admissions officers can use these "one-pagers" to generate similarly constituted admit classes
over time, even if the applicant pool is changing.78 To capture these effects, we include
interactions of many of the variables on the one-pagers with admission cycle indicators.
       We incorporate a broad set of applicant controls in the model, including numerous mea-
sures of socioeconomic status, neighborhood and high school attributes, region, intended
major, and academic aptitude, among others. We incorporate many of Harvard's internal
ratings, including the academic, extracurricular, athletic, the school support measures, and
the alumni interviewer ratings. For each rating we create separate indicator variables for
rating levels from 1 to 5. We do not include either the overall rating or the personal rating.
The overall rating is not included because the rating is specifically designed to incorpo-
rate admissions preferences; the personal rating is not included because there is empirical
evidence that is influenced by preferences as well.79
  76
     Additional details are provided in Section 3.7 of Document 415-8 and Section 8 of Document 415-9.
  77
     See Trial Exhibit P164 for the characteristics that Harvard tracks as they make admissions decisions.
  78
     Arcidiacono, Kinsler, and Ransom (2019) show that the fraction of admitted students that are legacy
and athlete shows no time trend over an 18-year period, despite legacies and athletes making up a decreasing
share of applicants over time.
  79
     For example, Document 415-9 shows that, in contrast to the other ratings (with the exception of the
overall rating), an ordered logit model of the personal rating shows that legacies receive a bonus for this
rating (see Table B.6.7R).



                                                    25
       To allow for the possibility that racial preferences operate differently for LDC applicants,
we also interact each of the LDC categories with race. For similar reasons, we interact race
with a number of other characteristics, such as disadvantaged status and gender.80
       Our preferred model excludes athletes. With the admit rate of athletes at 86% compared
to less than 5.5% for non-ALDCs, what variables matter and how they matter is likely to be
different for athletes.81 In total, our preferred model controls for 370 variables and yields a
Pseudo R2 of 0.56. By comparison, the models in Espenshade, Chung, and Walling (2004)
achieve a Pseudo R2 no larger than 0.20.82
       Appendix Table D4 displays a subset of the estimated coefficients as we vary the set of
controls in the model. Model (5) is our preferred model. Since we interact variables such
as legacy and dean's interest with year, all coefficients are for the base year, the Class of
2014.83


4.1       Transformations

The estimated coefficients on indicators for legacy, double legacy (i.e. both parents are
alumni), faculty or staff child, and being on the dean's interest list are all large, positive, and
statistically significant. To put the size of the LDC preferences in context, we examine how
the probability of admission would change for non-ALDC applicants of different races and
different baseline probabilities of admission using the results from our preferred admissions
  80
      Arcidiacono (2005) shows that racial preferences for African Americans in admissions and financial aid
vary with whether the applicant is low income. African American applicants are disproportionately female
(60%), so if Harvard is interested in gender balance within race African American men may see larger
preferences than African American women. This is in contrast to the applicant pool as a whole, which is
less than 50% female. See Document 415-9, Table B.3.2R.
   81
      As we show in section 5, this is indeed the case. Factors such as the academic rating and extracurricular
rating become less important when athletes are included in the model.
   82
      The Pseudo R-squared is a different measure from the R-squared, and the two are not interchangeable.
As measures, the only similarities the two have is that they run on a scale from 0 to 1, and higher values on
either are indicative of a better fit of the data. The classic citation for what is considered an "excellent fit"
based on the Pseudo R2 is McFadden (1979), p. 307:
         Those unfamiliar with the 2 index should be forewarned that its values tend to be considerably
         lower than those of the R2 index and should not be judged by the standards for a "good fit" in
         ordinary regression analysis. For example, values of 0.2 to 0.4 for 2 represent an excellent fit.
The 2 referred to above later became known as McFadden's R-Squared, or the Pseudo R-squared.
  83
     While the coefficients on legacy interacted with year were included in the publicly released reports, other
interactions between year and special recruiting categories were not reported. Hence, we focus on the Class
of 2014 for the transformation exercises in the next subsection.


                                                        26
model.84 Consider, for example, how the probability of a white non-ALDC applicant with
a baseline probability of admission of X would change if they happened to be a legacy, but
if all other characteristics remained the same. If the baseline probability of admission is X ,
we can calculate the index of observables, Z , for this applicant according to the log odds
formula
                                                       X
                                           Z = ln                                                           (1)
                                                      1-X
which is the inverse of the standard logit formula. If the applicant were a legacy, we simply
add the coefficient on the legacy indicator (2.141) so that the new admissions index would
                                                                                         exp(Z +2.141)
be Z + 2.141. The new admissions probability would then be given by                     1+exp(Z +2.141)
                                                                                                        .    A
similar calculation can be done for other racial groups, where we also need to account for
the race-legacy interaction coefficients.
       Table 9 examines how the probability of admission would change for various hypothetical
non-ALDC applicants. A white applicant with an initial admit probability of 5% would see
their admissions probability increase to 31% if they were a legacy. This number would in-
crease to 47% if they were a double legacy. While these preferences are large, the preferences
for those on the dean's interest list are even larger at 59%. The final column shows that
these preferences are much larger than those given to disadvantaged students, where the
corresponding probability is 21%.
       African Americans also see increases in their probability of admission through being
treated as a legacy or on the dean's interest list. However, the gains are muted. An African
American non-ALDC applicant with an initial admit probability of 5% would see their
admissions probability increase to 16% if they were a legacy and to 29% if they were a
double legacy. African Americans do not receive the full legacy tip. This may be because they
already receive a large tip for being African American. Indeed, the base African American
tip is slightly larger than the preference given to those on the dean's interest list. This
same feature is also present in the last column, which illustrates that disadvantaged African
Americans receive virtually no tip for being disadvantaged.
  84
    Our preferred model excludes the personal rating since there is evidence that the personal rating incor-
porates preferences for ALDC applicants. Using a model that includes the personal rating does not alter the
basic findings.



                                                    27
       The previous results are based on an admissions model that excludes athletes. However,
we also estimate a slightly altered admissions model that includes athletes. This alternative
model contains fewer controls, but is otherwise very similar to the model outlined in the
previous section.85 Appendix Table D5 lists the coefficients from the model including ath-
letes. The coefficient on the recruited athlete variable is substantially larger than any of the
other previously discussed preferences, regardless of the controls we include. To make this
more precise, consider a white, non-ALDC applicant who has only a 1% chance of admis-
sion. If this applicant were treated as a recruited athlete, the admission probability would
increase to 98%. Being a recruited athlete essentially guarantees admission even for the
least-qualified applicants. A similar calculation, but in reverse, emphasizes the advantage
athletes receive. An athlete who has an 86% probability of admission--the average rate
among athletes--would have only a 0.1% chance of admission absent the athlete tip.


4.2       Removing Preferences

The transformation exercises in the previous section tell us how the admit probability for a
hypothetical applicant would change with legacy or athlete status. But because we do not
know the full distribution of attributes for ALDC applicants (nor do we report all coefficients
in the model), we cannot determine what would happen to the admissions chances of ALDC
applicants as a whole if those preferences were removed. However, calculations presented
in Exhibit 287 allow us to address this question. The admissions model used in this public
document is quite similar to the model used to calculate LDC preferences. The one difference
is that athletes were added back into the model and athlete was interacted with race.
       The first sets of rows of Table 10 show the total number of admits and applicants overall
and by LDC and athlete status. These rows are followed by admission rates by ALDC
status. The non-ALDC admit rates range from 4.9% (white) to 7.6% (African Americans).
For ALDC applicants, the admit rates range from 42.6% (Hispanics) to 46.7% (African
Americans). The exhibit makes it possible to show how much of this admit rate gap between
ALDCs and the overall population is the result of ALDC preferences.
  85
   See Figure 7.1 in Document 415-8 for a detailed description of the controls in the model. The relevant
sample is discussed in Section 2.3.3.


                                                   28
   Namely, Exhibit 287 shows what the admit rate would be for previous admits if ALDC
preferences were removed. The exhibit reports the share of admits, by race, that would still
be admitted if ALDC preferences were removed. This calculation follows directly from Bayes'
rule. Denote y = 1 if an applicant was admitted when a preference was in place. Denote
y = 1 as an indicator for whether an applicant would be admitted when the preference
is removed. The probability an applicant would still be admitted after the preference is
removed can be written as:

                                           Pr(y = 1 | y = 1) Pr(y = 1)
                     Pr(y = 1 | y = 1) =                               .                  (2)
                                                    Pr(y = 1)

The first term on the right hand side is, by definition, 1: if an applicant was admitted
without a preference, the applicant will also be admitted when a preference is in place. The
other two terms are the model-predicted probabilities without and with the preference.
   The bottom part of Table 10 shows the results of this exercise. Removing ALDC prefer-
ences would result in an admit rate of 68% for white applicants previously admitted when
ALDC preferences were in place. Note that, by definition, this drop occurs solely for those
in the ALDC category. For whites, the share of applicants who are ALDC is 8%. With the
drop in the admit rate occurring only for this group, the share of white ALDC admits who
would be admitted if they were instead treated as other white applicants would be 26%.
   Table 10 also shows what this implies for the overall admit rate for ALDC applicants.
The admit rate for all white ALDCs applicants would fall from 43.6% to 11.4%, a drop of
over 30 percentage points. We can go one step further and generate an upper bound on the
overall LDC admit rate for white applicants when ALDC preferences are eliminated. If we
assume that all of the athletes are rejected when ALDC preferences are eliminated, it would
imply that the white LDC admit rate would fall from 33.4% to less than 14%. Thus, the
average marginal effect of being an LDC on admissions for white applicants is at least 19.4%.




                                             29
5        Counterfactual Simulations
While the transformation examples and the exercises utilizing Bayes' rule in the previous
section highlight the importance of ALDC preferences, neither approach accounts for capac-
ity constraints. For example, if ALDC preferences are eliminated, the likelihood of ALDC
applicants being admitted would decline, and, with no other change, the class size at Har-
vard would shrink. However, using the admissions model, we can correct for these capacity
concerns.86 In this section, we describe our approach and investigate how the racial distri-
bution of the admitted class would change if these preferences were removed. In describing
the methodology, we focus on legacy preferences for ease of exposition.


5.1       Methodology

We use the estimated admission model to calculate an admission probability for each appli-
cant in the absence of legacy preferences by setting the coefficients related to legacy status to
zero and keeping all other coefficients the same. This rules out Harvard changing the weights
on characteristics that are correlated with legacy status to undo the removal of legacy prefer-
ences. We then aggregate these probabilities up to construct an expected class. In order for
the estimated model to match the racial distribution of the admitted class in every admission
cycle, the estimated admissions model included race-by-year interactions. The race-by-year
coefficients will ensure that the estimated model perfectly matches the actual number of
admits in each racial group in every year.
       One approach to deal with capacity concerns would be to rank applicants according to
their admissions index sans legacy preferences, and then select the highest ranked applicants
such that the number of admits matches the observed data in every cycle. However, this
would treat admissions decisions as if they were deterministic based on the admissions index,
which is incompatible with the assumptions of the logit model and with what we know
about how Harvard evaluates applications.87 Instead, we adjust the admissions index of
  86
     Document 415-9 shows this for legacy preferences and athlete preferences separately, as well as the
combination of removing legacy, athlete, and racial preferences.
  87
     Said differently, the admissions index summarizes one's admissions likelihood based on observable char-
acteristics, but we know that unobservable factors also influence the admissions outcome.



                                                    30
all applicants by the same amount such that the average admission probability when legacy
preferences are eliminated matches the average admission probability with legacy preferences.
Numerically, this means that we solve for an index adjustment t in each admissions cycle

t, such that
                                            Nt             ^N L +  )
                                       1            exp(Xi        t
                                  pt =                                                                  (3)
                                       Nt                    ^
                                                  1 + exp(Xi N L +   t)
                                            i=1

where pt is the actual average probability of admission in admission cycle t, Nt is the size
of the relevant applicant pool in cycle t, Xi reflects the characteristics of applicant i, and
^N L are the estimated coefficients on these characteristics with the coefficients on legacy

and all legacy interactions set to zero. Finding the t that solves this equation guarantees

that when we aggregate the individual admissions probabilities under the assumption of no
legacy preferences, we maintain the exact number of admits each year. The composition
of the class will change, however, since different racial groups will experience heterogeneous
changes to their admissions probabilities.88
       Even though athletes are not part of our preferred model, we can still use the model
to evaluate the removal of athlete or legacy preferences. In the case of removing legacy
preferences, we simply treat the decisions for athletes as fixed. In the case of removing
athlete preferences, we treat athletes like any other applicant and calculate a predicted
admission probability from the admissions model.89


5.2       Counterfactual Results

The results of this exercise split out by applicant race are displayed in Table 11. The first row
for each racial group shows the model-generated number of admits aggregated across the six
years. The model predictions match the racial composition of admits in the data, since the
estimated admissions model includes race-by-year interactions. The second row illustrates
how the number of admits changes when preferences for legacy applicants are eliminated.
The only group of applicants that experiences a decline in the number of admits is white
  88
     We do not model the equilibrium impact on the application margin, because our data only includes
applicants to Harvard and does not include applicants who did not apply to Harvard.
  89
     When we eliminate athlete preferences, we change both the athletic and extracurricular ratings to 2 for
recruited athletes. See page 9 of Appendix A in Document 415-9 for additional details.



                                                     31
applicants. The number of white admits falls by approximately 4%, while the number of
African American, Hispanic, and Asian American admits respectively increase by 4%, 5%,
and 4%. The third row illustrates how the racial composition of the class changes when
athlete preferences are eliminated. In this case, the number of white admits declines by 6%,
while the number of Hispanic and Asian American admits rises by 7% and 9% respectively.
African American admits are essentially unchanged.90
    To be clear, this does not imply that all whites are hurt by the removal of legacy and
athlete preferences, nor do all Asian Americans benefit. The aggregate changes in white
enrollments mask within-race shifts from legacy and athlete admits to those who are not
legacies and athletes.
    When legacy or athlete preferences are eliminated, we estimate that the racial composi-
tion of Harvard's admitted class changes by a non-trivial amount. Yet, we believe that the
numbers reported above likely understate the true impact of eliminating legacy and athlete
preferences on the racial composition of the admitted class. First, while we are able to report
counterfactuals for the elimination of legacy or athlete preferences, we cannot report what
would happen if both of these preferences were eliminated. Moreover, we cannot run the
counterfactual when all ALDC preferences are eliminated. We suspect that if we were able
to run these counterfactuals, the share of white admits would drop by significantly more
than 6% and the share of Asian American admits would rise by more than 9%.
    Second, when we estimate our admissions model, we include LDC applicants as part
of the estimation sample. However, the way characteristics for LDC applicants matter for
admissions may be different than how those same characteristics matter for non-ALDC
applicants. For example, Table 6 shows that, for the bottom decile of the academic index,
no white, Hispanic, or Asian American applicants were admitted. Yet, white LDC applicants
in this decile were admitted at a higher rate (6.35%) than the average across all non-ALDC
applicants (5.46%).
  90
     The last row in Table 11 shows what would happen if in addition to removing legacy and athlete prefer-
ences, we also removed racial preferences. In this case, the coefficients on legacy, athlete, and race/ethnicity
are set to zero as well as their interactions. The counterfactual shows that the number of admitted African
Americans would be a third of what it was when all these preferences were in place. The number of admitted
Hispanics would decline by almost half. Clearly the preferences African Americans and Hispanics receive do
not simply offset the losses they incur from legacy and athlete preferences.



                                                      32
       This phenomenon is illustrated in Table 12, where we show how the coefficients on the
academic rating and the extracurricular rating change when athletes and then LDC appli-
cants are excluded from the model.91 The boost an applicant receives from obtaining an
academic rating of 1 relative to an academic rating of 3 is higher in a model with only
non-ALDC applicants as compared to a model that also includes LDC applicants. The im-
portance of an academic rating of 1 declines even further if athletes are included. The change
in the coefficients is even more dramatic at the bottom of the academic rating. The penalty
for receiving a 4 on the academic rating is much smaller when the model is estimated with
LDC applicants included than when estimated only on non-ALDC applicants and becomes
smaller still if recruited athletes are included as well. Similar patterns hold for the extracur-
ricular rating, with the coefficients becoming attenuated when LDC applicants and recruited
athletes are included in the model.92
       In our counterfactuals, we avoided the athlete-generated coefficient distortions by ex-
cluding them from the admissions model. We were are still able to evaluate the impact of
removing athlete preferences by treating their admissions decisions as fixed except when we
eliminate athlete preferences, in which case we used their characteristics and the coefficients
of the model to predict their admissions probabilities. Ideally, we would have pursued a
similar strategy for the LDC groups. We suspect that the changes in the racial composition
would have been even more stark in this case.



6        Conclusion
Detailed data on how universities practice holistic admissions are virtually never made avail-
able to researchers. Through the SFFA lawsuit, unprecedented access was given to how
Harvard rates their applicants as well as how applicant characteristics, including these rat-
ings, translate into admissions.
  91
    The source for this table is Table 2 of Exhibit 287.
  92
    As mentioned by Norton and Dowd (2018), it is not possible to make direct comparisons of logit coeffi-
cients across specifications or subsamples, because the coefficients depend on the variance of unobservables
(which depends on the model specification and data subsample). When we account for this property of logit
models by dividing each coefficient by the Academic Rating=1 coefficient, the results in Table 12 are nearly
identical. This is because the variance of unobservables is not sensitive to the inclusion of LDCs or athletes
in a model as rich as ours.


                                                     33
   This paper has focused on the substantial preferences ALDC applicants receive. The
advantages for athletes are especially large, with an average admit rate for recruited athletes
of 86%. This high admit rate occurs despite admitted athletes often being worse on Harvard's
ratings than the applicant pool itself. Overall, our results show that only one quarter of white
ALDC admits would have been admitted if they had been treated as a non-ALDC applicant.
   Each of the ALDC preferences primarily benefit white students. Over 43% of white
admits are ALDC, compared to less than 16% of admits for each of the other three major
racial/ethnic groups. Indeed, due in part to the nature of the sports that Harvard offers,
recruited athletes alone make up over 16% of white admits. We show that removing legacy
and athlete preferences results in shifts in admissions away from white applicants with each of
the other groups either increasing or staying the same. At the same time, fewer high-income
applicants would be admitted.
   Harvard--and other institutions that use holistic admissions criteria--may benefit from
employing ALDC preferences, both through donations and through providing amenities to
its student body. But given that the beneficiaries of these practices already come from
quite advantaged backgrounds, and the further evidence that these preferences appear to be
increasing over time (Arcidiacono, Kinsler, and Ransom, 2019), the exposure of the scope of
these practices may lead them to be reevaluated.




                                              34
References
Anderson, Michael L. 2017. "The Benefits of College Athletic Success: An Application of
 the Propensity Score Design." Review of Economics and Statistics 99 (1):119­134.

Arcidiacono, Peter. 2005. "Affirmative Action in Higher Education: How do Admission and
  Financial Aid Rules Affect Future Earnings?" Econometrica 73 (5):1477­1524.

Arcidiacono, Peter, Josh Kinsler, and Tyler Ransom. 2019. "Divergent: The Time Path of
  Legacy and Athlete Admissions at Harvard." Working paper, Duke University.

Bound, John, Brad Hershbein, and Bridget Terry Long. 2009. "Playing the Admissions
  Game: Student Reactions to Increasing College Competition." Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives 23 (4):119­146.

Chappell,    Bill and Merrit Kennedy. 2019.            "U.S. Charges Dozens
 Of       Parents,   Coaches    In   Massive    College     Admissions Scan-
 dal."             NPR      URL    https://www.npr.org/2019/03/12/702539140/
 u-s-accuses-actresses-others-of-fraud-in-wide-college-admissions-scandal.
 Accessed March 23, 2019.

Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, Emmanuel Saez, Nicholas Turner, and Danny Yagan. 2017a.
 "Mobility Report Card: Harvard University." Working paper, UC Berkeley. URL http:
 //eml.berkeley.edu/~yagan/college/Harvard_University.pdf.

------. 2017b. "Mobility Report Cards: The Role of Colleges in Intergenerational Mobility."
  Working Paper 23618, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Clotfelter, Charles T. 2003. "Alumni Giving to Elite Private Colleges and Universities."
  Economics of Education Review 22 (2):109­120.

Dale, Stacy Berg and Alan B. Krueger. 2014. "Estimating the Effects of College Character-
 istics over the Career Using Administrative Earnings Data." Journal of Human Resources
 42 (2):323­358.

Day 3 Trial Transcript. 2018.  In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. Presi-
  dent and Fellows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D.
  Mass).   URL https://github.com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/
  TrialTranscripts/20181017-Day-3.pdf.

Day 5 Trial Transcript. 2018.  In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. Presi-
  dent and Fellows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D.
  Mass).   URL https://github.com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/
  TrialTranscripts/20181019-Day-5.pdf.

Day 6 Trial Transcript. 2018.  In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. Presi-
  dent and Fellows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D.
  Mass).   URL https://github.com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/
  TrialTranscripts/20181022-Day-6.pdf.

                                            35
DeSilver, Drew. 2019. "A Majority of U.S. Colleges Admit Most Students Who Apply."
  Report, Pew Research Center. URL https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/
  04/09/a-majority-of-u-s-colleges-admit-most-students-who-apply/.

Document 415-8. 2017. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fel-
 lows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL
 https://docs.justia.com/cases/federal/district-courts/massachusetts/madce/
 1:2014cv14176/165519/415/1.html. Plaintiff Expert Witness Opening Report.

Document 415-9. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fel-
 lows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL
 https://docs.justia.com/cases/federal/district-courts/massachusetts/madce/
 1:2014cv14176/165519/415/2.html. Plaintiff Expert Witness Rebuttal Report.

Document 419-1. 2015.    In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President
 and Fellows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D.
 Mass).   URL https://www.courtlistener.com/recap/gov.uscourts.mad.165519/
 gov.uscourts.mad.165519.419.1_2.pdf. Deposition of Marlyn McGrath.

Document 419-141. 2017. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fel-
 lows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL
 https://projects.iq.harvard.edu/files/diverse-education/files/expert_
 report_-_2017-12-15_dr._david_card_expert_report_updated_confid_desigs_
 redacted.pdf. Defendant Expert Witness Opening Report.

Document 419-143. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fel-
 lows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL
 https://projects.iq.harvard.edu/files/diverse-education/files/expert_
 report_rebuttal_as_filed_d._mass._14-cv-14176_dckt_000419_037_filed_
 2018-06-15.pdf. Defendant Expert Witness Rebuttal Report.

Document 421-9. 2017.    In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President
 and Fellows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D.
 Mass).   URL https://www.courtlistener.com/recap/gov.uscourts.mad.165519/
 gov.uscourts.mad.165519.421.9_7_1.pdf. Deposition of William Fitzsimmons.

Document 611. 2018.        In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and
 Fellows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass).
 URL https://cases.justia.com/federal/district-courts/massachusetts/madce/
 1:2014cv14176/165519/611/0.pdf?ts=1541565114. List of exhibits that were admit-
 ted into evidence during trial.

Espenshade, Thomas J., Chang Y. Chung, and Joan L. Walling. 2004. "Admission Prefer-
  ences for Minority Students, Athletes, and Legacies at Elite Universities." Social Science
  Quarterly 85 (5):1422­1446.

Exhibit 287. 2018.   In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fel-
  lows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL

                                            36
  https://www.courtlistener.com/recap/gov.uscourts.mad.165519/gov.uscourts.
  mad.165519.512.2_4.pdf. Declaration outlining use of Bayes' rule to compute admissions
  probabilities of previous admits.
Hurwitz, Michael. 2011. "The Impact of Legacy Status on Undergraduate Admissions at
 Elite Colleges and Universities." Economics of Education Review 30 (3):480­492.
Jackson, Abby. 2017.      "Former Ivy League Admissions Officer Reveals How
  Schools Pick Students." Yahoo! Finance URL https://finance.yahoo.com/news/
  former-ivy-league-admissions-officer-150000242.html. Accessed June 24, 2019.
Jacob, Brian, Brian McCall, and Kevin Stange. 2018. "College as Country Club: Do Col-
  leges Cater to Students' Preferences for Consumption?" Journal of Labor Economics
  36 (2):309­348.
Klein, Mariel A. and Elizabeth C. Keto. 2015. "Class of 2019 by the Numbers." The
  Harvard Crimson URL https://features.thecrimson.com/2015/freshman-survey/
  makeup-narrative/. Accessed April 9, 2019.
Lee, Sanghoon and John Ries. 2019. "Noncognitive Skills in Admission Decisions: Impacts on
  Demographics, Academic Performance, and Labour Market Outcomes." Working paper,
  University of British Columbia.
McFadden, Daniel. 1979. "Quantitative Methods for Analysing Travel Behaviour: Some
 Recent Developments." In Behavioural Travel Modeling, edited by David A. Hensher and
 Peter R. Stopher, chap. 13. Croom Helm Ltd.
Meer, Jonathan and Harvey S. Rosen. 2009a. "Altruism and the Child Cycle of Alumni
 Donations." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1 (1):258­286.
------. 2009b. "The Impact of Athletic Performance on Alumni Giving: An Analysis of
  Microdata." Economics of Education Review 28 (3):287­294.
------. 2010. "Family Bonding with Universities." Research in Higher Education 51 (7):641­
  658.
Norton, Edward C. and Bryan E. Dowd. 2018. "Log Odds and the Interpretation of Logit
  Models." Health Services Research 53 (2):859­878.
Riehl, Evan. 2018. "Fairness in College Admission Exams: From Test Score Gaps to Earnings
  Inequality." Working paper, Cornell University.
Sabky, Rebecca. 2017.    "Check This Box if You're a Good Person."       The
  New    York   Times     URL    https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/04/opinion/
  check-this-box-if-youre-a-good-person.html. Accessed June 27, 2019.
Sommeiller, Estelle and Mark Price. 2018.   "The New Gilded Age:     Income
  Inequality in the U.S. by State, Metropolitan Area, and County."       Re-
  port, Economic Policy Institute.    URL https://www.epi.org/publication/
  the-new-gilded-age-income-inequality-in-the-u-s-by-state-metropolitan-area-and-county

                                           37
Trial Exhibit DX 002. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/D002.pdf. 2012
  Casebook.

Trial Exhibit DX 005. 2018.    In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. Presi-
  dent and Fellows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D.
  Mass).   URL https://github.com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/
  TrialExhibits/D005.pdf. Alumni Interviewer Handbook.

Trial Exhibit DX 024. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/D024.pdf. 2012
  Casebook Discussion Guide.

Trial Exhibit DX 706. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/D706.pdf. Share
  of admitted students in ALDC categories.

Trial Exhibit DX 730. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/D730.pdf. Aca-
  demic qualifications and profile ratings of transfer applicants.

Trial Exhibit DX 746. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/D746.pdf. Racial
  composition of admitted ALDC students.

Trial Exhibit P001. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/P001.pdf. Har-
  vard Reading Procedures for Class of 2018.

Trial Exhibit P104. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/P104.pdf. Email
  exchange discussing admission of donors' children.

Trial Exhibit P106. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/P106.pdf. Email
  exchange rating a donor as a "2".

Trial Exhibit P164. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.


                                             38
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/P164.pdf.                One-
  pager.

Trial Exhibit P316. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/P316.pdf. Report
  of the Committee to Study Race-Neutral Alternatives.

Trial Exhibit P555. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/P555.pdf. Office
  of Civil Rights Report.

Trial Exhibit P618. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/P618.pdf. Admit
  rates for ALDCs and non-ALDCs by academic rating.

Trial Exhibit P619. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/P619.pdf. List of
  applicants interviewed and admitted.

Trial Exhibit P621. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/P621.pdf. Rat-
  ings frequencies for baseline sample.

Trial Exhibit P623. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/P623.pdf. Rat-
  ings frequencies for expanded sample.

Trial Exhibit P626. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/P626.pdf. Num-
  ber and share of applicants by academic index decile.

Trial Exhibit P723. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/P723.pdf. Har-
  vard Reading Procedures for Class of 2023.

Zimmerman, Seth D. 2014. "The Returns to College Admission for Academically Marginal
  Students." Journal of Labor Economics 32 (4):711­754.

------. 2019. "Elite Colleges and Upward Mobility to Top Jobs and Top Incomes." American
  Economic Review 109 (1):1­147.

                                            39
Figures and Tables

        Table 1: Number of Applicants and Admit Rate by ALDC Status

     Group                              Number of Applicants   Admit Rate (%)
     Not Athlete                                 165,353             6.0
     Athlete                                      1,374             86.0
     Not Legacy                                  162,083            5.9
     Legacy                                       4,644             33.6
     Not Dean's Interest List                    164,226            6.1
     Dean's Interest List                         2,501             42.2
     Not Child of Faculty or Staff               166,406            6.6
     Child of Faculty or Staff                     321              46.7
    Source: Data presented in Table A.2 of Document 415-8.




                                            40
Table 2: Admit Rates of Harvard Applicants by ALDC Status and Academic Rating

        Academic Rating                            Non-ALDC        LDC      Athlete
                              # of Applicants           612         60        1
                 1            # of Admits               405         58        1
                              Admit Rate (%)           66.18       96.67    100.00
                              # of Applicants         59,731       3,118      303
                 2            # of Admits              5,986       1,528      291
                              Admit Rate (%)           10.02       49.01     96.04
                              # of Applicants         57,874       2,444      821
                 3            # of Admits              1,390        442       716
                              Admit Rate (%)           2.40        18.09     87.21
                              # of Applicants         18,176        373       210
                 4            # of Admits                3           13       167
                              Admit Rate (%)           0.02         3.49     79.52
                              # of Applicants          6,335         46        8
                 5            # of Admits                0            0        4
                              Admit Rate (%)            0.00        0.00     50.00
                              # of Applicants         142,728      6,041     1,343
               Total          # of Admits              7,784       2,041     1,179
                              Admit Rate (%)            5.45       33.79     87.79
       Source: Data presented in Trial Exhibit P618. The final set of rows is computed
       by the authors using the information in the preceding sets of rows.




                                             41
              Table 3: Admissions Statistics by Race and ALDC Status

                         Non-ALDC        Athlete    Legacy     Dean's List      Faculty/Staff
 Panel A: Admission Rates
 White                4.89                87.94      34.07         41.96            45.78
 African American     7.58                86.11      28.57         32.53            20.00
 Hispanic             6.16                88.52      35.63         41.79            42.11
 Asian American       5.13                87.07      35.14         47.83            47.56

 Panel B: Racial Distribution of Applicants by ALDC Status
 White                  40.34      69.28     68.66    68.29                         53.21
 African American       10.97      10.74      5.28     3.58                          3.21
 Hispanic               12.59       4.55      5.65     5.77                          6.09
 Asian American         28.32      8.65      10.54    11.89                         26.28

 Panel C: Racial Distribution of Admits by ALDC Status
 White                  36.15      69.30    69.17    67.17                          52.41
 African American       15.25      10.52    4.46       2.73                          1.38
 Hispanic               14.22       4.58     5.95      5.66                          5.52
 Asian American         26.62      8.57     10.95    13.33                          26.90

 Panel D: Proportion of Total Admits by Race
 White                 56.36      16.36    20.49                   13.32             1.52
 African American      85.27      8.91      4.74                   1.94              0.14
 Hispanic              86.28       4.21     6.86                    4.36             0.62
 Asian American        84.81      4.13      6.63                   5.40              1.60
Notes: All numbers in this table are percentages. Panels B and C should be read vertically, while
Panel D should be read horizontally. The columns in Panels B and C add to less than 100% since
there are other racial groups not shown.
Source: Authors' calculations from data presented in Tables B.3.1R and B.3.2R of Document
415-9. See Appendix B.2.3 for a complete discussion of the calculations.




                                               42
                                              Table 4: Applicant Characteristics by Race and LDC Status

                                                      White             African American             Hispanic            Asian American                 Total
                                               Non-ALDC        LDC     Non-ALDC        LDC     Non-ALDC         LDC     Non-ALDC        LDC     Non-ALDC        LDC
      Panel A: All Applicants
      Admitted                                    4.89        33.42        7.58        27.46       6.16     34.66            5.13     37.14         5.45        33.79
      Disadvantaged                               6.36         0.62       29.21         7.78      24.33      4.81          10.85      2.37         12.58         1.79
      First-generation college                    4.28         1.13       13.90         3.48       21.90     3.02           8.07       1.71         8.76         1.37
      Applied for fee waiver                      8.20         1.54       42.63        13.57      35.58      6.33           13.16      3.03        17.08         2.47
      Financial Aid                              73.75        35.25       93.46        63.25      88.56     42.45           76.41     35.36        78.45        37.39
      Application read by 3rd reader             15.03        62.65       18.02        50.47      18.90     63.06          16.48      63.23        16.41        62.08
      N                                          57,582       4,075       15,664        295       17,970     352           40,415      727        142,728       6,041
      Share of applicants who are LDC                 6.61                     1.85                    1.92                      1.77                   4.06

      Panel B: Admitted Applicants
      Disadvantaged                               14.61        0.57        28.48      3.59         37.40     3.25          21.86        3.38        22.11       1.46
      First-generation college                     4.05        1.17         7.67      0.00         19.96     0.82           9.65        1.15         8.54        1.17
43




      Applied for fee waiver                      12.15        0.90        28.14      6.22         35.59     1.64          18.39        2.17        19.75        1.36
      Financial Aid                               72.17       24.25        90.73     48.15         88.98    27.03          77.27       27.74        79.07       25.73
      Application read by 3rd reader              94.78       90.52        95.11     84.00         97.11    90.16          96.14       89.29        95.57       89.75
      N                                           2,814       1,362        1,187       81          1,107     122           2,072        270         7,784       2,041
      Share of admits who are LDC                     32.61                     6.39                   9.93                    11.53                    20.77
     Note: All variables are binary and the reported means are expressed as percentages.
     Source: Authors' calculations from data presented in Tables B.3.1R and B.3.2R of Document 415-9. See Appendix B.2.4 for a complete discussion of the calculations.
Table 5: Share of Applicants and Admits Receiving a 2 or Higher on Various Ratings, by
Race and LDC Status

                            White             African American              Hispanic            Asian American
                     Non-ALDC        LDC      Non-ALDC        LDC     Non-ALDC         LDC    Non-ALDC        LDC
 Panel A: Applicants
 Overall                  4.43       21.60        5.29        19.66        3.88       18.47        4.84       25.58
 Academic                45.29       54.43        9.19        15.25       16.74       41.19       60.21       63.27
 Extracurricular         24.35       36.22       15.54        30.85       16.83       31.53       28.23       37.83
 Athletic                12.79       21.89        6.82        15.93        7.51       18.18        4.81       14.86
 Personal                21.27       40.88       19.01        40.68       18.68       38.92       17.64       35.49

 Panel B: Admits
 Overall                 59.70       57.27       59.14        62.96       50.14       50.00       62.36       62.22
 Academic                88.77       78.34       59.39        43.21       65.40       70.49       94.40       85.56
 Extracurricular         73.03       55.80       51.98        55.56       56.64       50.00       78.28       60.37
 Athletic                20.97       27.90       14.24        28.40       15.27       23.77        7.19       18.15
 Personal                83.76       70.19       74.39        80.25       77.87       63.93       73.26       60.37
Source: Authors' calculations from data presented in Trial Exhibit P621 and Trial Exhibit P623. See Appendix B.2.5 for
a complete discussion of the calculations.




                                                         44
           Table 6: Shares and Admission Rates of Applicants by LDC Status, Race, and Academic Index Decile

                     White             African American            Hispanic            Asian American                Total
              Non-ALDC        LDC     Non-ALDC       LDC      Non-ALDC        LDC    Non-ALDC        LDC     Non-ALDC        LDC
      Panel A: Share of Applicants in each Decile
      1          4.91      3.10      37.95      25.76            19.98        4.83       3.75         2.34       10.25        4.21
      2          7.67      7.03      23.08      20.00            20.94       12.50        5.07       5.78        10.30       7.82
      3         10.57      9.88      14.68      14.92            16.32       13.64        6.56        7.15       10.55       10.24
      4         11.07     11.62       8.24      10.17            12.17       13.07        7.49        9.22        9.74       11.45
      5         13.33     13.22       5.75      15.93             9.59       12.78        9.61       12.93       10.84       13.22
      6         10.31     12.21       3.26       3.73             6.01       11.65       8.97        11.55        8.51       11.73
      7         12.28     12.36       2.85       5.76             5.29        9.94       11.23       11.83        9.94       11.56
      8         11.28     11.35       2.09       1.36             4.57        8.52       13.19       12.38       10.01       10.57
      9          9.95     10.88       1.26      0.34             3.01         7.10       16.21       13.62       10.05       10.54
      10        8.64       8.35       0.85      2.03             2.12         5.97       17.92       13.20        9.83       8.66
45




      Total      57,451       4,070      15,601       295        17,930       352       40,308        727      142,356       6,036

      Panel B: Admit Rates of Applicants in each Decile (%)
      1          0.00     6.32       0.03       3.19       0.00              0.00        0.00         6.29        0.01        5.27
      2          0.39    12.20       1.03       6.61      0.32               11.54        0.20        7.16       0.53        10.47
      3          0.56    16.67       5.19      25.36       1.95               8.15        0.64       11.53        1.65       15.56
      4          1.82    22.62      12.76      39.94       5.50              30.20        0.86       23.90        3.29       23.72
      5          2.57    26.18      22.41      48.92       9.13              42.45        1.86       21.28        4.40       28.39
      6          4.20    31.85      29.72      54.73      13.65              41.46        2.49       29.78        5.64       33.70
      7          4.79    36.04      41.12      82.43      17.28              48.49        3.98       40.45        6.61       38.51
      8          7.53    47.49      44.48      75.01      22.93              49.85        5.12       53.17        8.22       47.66
      9         10.77    56.94      54.59      99.90      26.16              43.98        7.55       56.45       10.40       56.67
      10        15.27    57.07      56.06      83.43      31.32              95.10       12.69       63.02       14.58       60.64
      Total       4.90        33.47       7.58       27.52        6.16       34.73       5.14        36.75       5.46        33.73
     Source: Authors' calculations from data presented in Tables 5.1R, 5.2R, B.5.1R and B.5.2R of Document 415-9. See Appendix B.2.6
     for a complete discussion of the calculations.
                       Table 7: LDC Share of Admits by Academic Index Decile and Race

                 White          African American           Hispanic         Asian American             Total
           % LDC      Admits    % LDC      Admits     % LDC      Admits    % LDC      Admits     % LDC     Admits
      1    100.00          8     57.69         4         --          0      100.00        1       90.17        15
      2    67.01          52     9.52         41       29.71        17      42.36         7       38.87      127
      3    66.33         101      8.58       130        6.41        61      26.16        23       27.97       344
      4    48.04         223      6.81       176       10.38       134      38.14        42       26.44       620
      5    41.72         338     10.26       224       10.85       176      21.73       92        25.03      905
      6    38.88         407      3.83       157       10.37       164      21.75       115       25.89      922
      7    34.92         519      7.11       197        9.38       181      16.18       215       22.33      1204
      8    31.02         707      2.03       148        7.37       203      14.95       320       20.61      1476
      9    29.06         868      0.93       108        7.23       152      10.18       549       19.50      1848
      10   20.38         952     6.34         79       14.37       139       6.19       977       13.46      2357
     Source: Authors' calculations from data presented in Tables 5.1R, 5.2R, B.5.1R and B.5.2R of Document 415-9. See
46




     Appendix B.2.7 for a complete discussion of the calculations.
     Table 8: Upper and Lower Bounds on the Share of Applicants and Admits Receiving a 2 or Higher on Various Ratings, by
     Athlete Status and Race

                                         White                          African American                            Hispanic                          Asian American
                                                   Recruited                             Recruited                              Recruited                             Recruited
                               Non-ALDC             Athlete          Non-ALDC             Athlete          Non-ALDC              Athlete          Non-ALDC             Athlete
      Rating               Applicant     Admit       Admit       Applicant     Admit       Admit       Applicant     Admit       Admit        Applicant     Admit       Admit
      Overall
      Lower bound                                    0.2705                                0.1290                                0.1481                                 0.2376
                             0.0443      0.5970                    0.0529      0.5914                    0.0388      0.5014                     0.0484      0.6236
      Upper bound                                    0.3035                                0.1935                                0.3333                                 0.3960
      Academic
      Lower bound                                    0.2460                                0.0000                                0.1111                                 0.4158
                             0.4529      0.8877                    0.0919      0.5939                    0.1674      0.6540                     0.6021      0.9440
      Upper bound                                    0.2791                                0.0645                                0.2963                                 0.5743
      Extracurricular
      Lower bound                                    0.0832                                0.0645                                0.0000                                 0.0000
                             0.2435      0.7303                    0.1554      0.5198                    0.1683      0.5664                     0.2823      0.7828
      Upper bound                                    0.1163                                0.1290                                0.1667                                 0.1188
      Personal
47




      Lower bound                                    0.4676                                0.6290                                0.5185                                 0.2871
                             0.2127      0.8376                    0.1901      0.7439                    0.1868      0.7787                     0.1764      0.7326
      Upper bound                                    0.5006                                0.6935                                0.7037                                 0.4455
     Source: Authors' calculations from the following sources: Trial Exhibit P623; Tables 4.2, B.3.2, B.4.1, and B.5.1­B.5.6 from Document 415-8; and Tables A.5R and B.5.1R­B.5.6R
     from Document 415-9. See Appendix B.2.8 for a complete discussion of the calculations.
               Table 9: Admissions Probabilities as ALDC or Disadvantaged

                                             Admission Probability when...
 Applicant Race         Non-ALDC       Legacy     Double Legacy Dean's List          Disadvantaged
                            0.01        0.079          0.146             0.215            0.049
                            0.05        0.309          0.471             0.588            0.213
 White                      0.10        0.486          0.653             0.751            0.364
                            0.15        0.600          0.749             0.827            0.476
                            0.20        0.680          0.809             0.872            0.563
                            0.01        0.037          0.072             0.072            0.011
                            0.05        0.169          0.288             0.288            0.053
 African American           0.10        0.300          0.460             0.461            0.105
                            0.15        0.405          0.575             0.576            0.158
                            0.20        0.491          0.657             0.658            0.209
                            0.01        0.038          0.073             0.067            0.027
                            0.05        0.170          0.290             0.272            0.128
 Hispanic                   0.10        0.303          0.464             0.440            0.236
                            0.15        0.408          0.578             0.556            0.329
                            0.20        0.494          0.660             0.639            0.410
                            0.01        0.138          0.242             0.315            0.058
                            0.05        0.456          0.625             0.705            0.241
 Asian American             0.10        0.639          0.779             0.835            0.402
                            0.15        0.737          0.848             0.889            0.516
                            0.20        0.799          0.888             0.919            0.602
Source: Authors' calculations based on Appendix Table D4 (which in turn is an excerpt of Table B.7.2R
of Document 415-9) and using the formula in Equation (1) and discussion in the following paragraph. See
Appendix B.2.9 for a complete discussion of the calculations.




                                                  48
                  Table 10: ALDC Admit Rates when Preferences are Removed

                                                           White       African American            Hispanic    Asian American
 Total Admits                                               4,993               1,392               1,283             2,443
 LDC Admits                                                 1,362                 81                 122               270
 Athlete Admits                                              817                 124                  54               101

 Total Applicants                                          62,586               16,103              18,383            41,258
 LDC Applicants                                             4,075                295                 352               727
 Athlete Applicants                                          929                 144                  61               116

 Non-ALDC Admit Rate                                       0.0489               0.0758              0.0616            0.0513
 ALDC Admit Rate                                           0.4355               0.4670              0.4262            0.4401
 LDC Admit Rate                                            0.3342               0.2746              0.3466            0.3714

 Remove ALDC Preferences
 Admit Rate for Previous Admits                            0.6778               0.9164              0.9352            0.8952
 Admit Rate for Previous ALDC Admits                       0.2617               0.4323              0.5276            0.3099
 ALDC Admit Rate                                           0.1140               0.2019              0.2248            0.1364
 LDC Admit Rate, Upper Bound                               0.1399               0.3004              0.2638            0.1581
Source: Authors' calculations based on the following sources: Table 3 of Exhibit 287; Equation (2); Table B.3.2 from
Document 415-8; and Tables B.3.1R and B.3.2R from Document 415-9. See Appendix B.2.10 for a complete discussion
of the calculations.

 Table 11: Total Admits by Race under Different Admissions Policies, Expanded Sample

                                        White         African American           Hispanic     Asian American
      Model                              4,802                 1,367               1,365             2,358
      No legacy preferences              4,598                 1,423               1,428             2,458
      No athlete preferences             4,499                 1,366               1,462             2,569
      No race/legacy/athlete             4,947                  428                 792              3,564
    Source: Data presented in Panel 2 of Table 8.2R of Document 415-9.

   Table 12: Inclusion of ALDC Applicants Distorts Effect of Other Admissions Criteria

                                                                                                         % Increase
                                  Baseline          Expanded        Expanded          % Increase       over Expanded
                                 Coefficients       Coefficients   plus Athletes    over Expanded       plus Athletes
 Academic Rating=4                  -3.990            -2.426           -1.184              64.5%             237.1%
 Academic Rating=2                   1.425             1.206            1.209              18.2%              17.8%
 Academic Rating=1                   4.094             3.806            3.787               7.6%               8.1%
 Extracurricular Rating=4           -1.301            -0.952           -0.171              36.7%             662.1%
 Extracurricular Rating=2           1.990             1.689             1.646              17.8%              20.9%
 Extracurricular Rating=1           4.232             3.795             3.726              11.5%              13.6%
Source: Data presented in Table 2 of Exhibit 287.


                                                            49
A     Description of Legal Documents Used
We list in Appendix Table A1 all publicly released documents pertaining to the SFFA v.
Harvard trial that we use in our analysis. A complete list of exhibits admitted into evidence
during trial is available as Document 611.

                          Table A1: List of Legal Documents Used

 Document                 Description
 Document 415-8           Plaintiff's expert witness opening report
 Document 419-141         Defendant's expert witness opening report
 Document 415-9           Plaintiff's expert witness rebuttal report
 Document 419-143         Defendant's expert witness rebuttal report
 Document 419-1           Deposition of Harvard Admissions Director Marlyn McGrath
 Document 421-9           Deposition of Harvard Admissions Dean William Fitzsimmons
 Exhibit 287              Declaration of plaintiff's expert witness
 Day 3 Trial Transcript   Transcript of Day 3 of trial proceedings
 Day 5 Trial Transcript   Transcript of Day 5 of trial proceedings
 Day 6 Trial Transcript   Transcript of Day 6 of trial proceedings
 Trial Exhibit DX 002     2012 Harvard admissions reader casebook
 Trial Exhibit DX 005     2013­2014 Harvard alumni interviewer handbook
 Trial Exhibit DX 024     2012 Harvard admissions reader casebook discussion guide
 Trial Exhibit DX 706     Share of admitted students in ALDC categories
 Trial Exhibit DX 730     Academic qualifications and profile ratings of transfer applicants
 Trial Exhibit DX 746     Racial composition of admitted ALDC students
 Trial Exhibit P001       Class of 2018 application reading procedures
 Trial Exhibit P104       Email exchange discussing admission of donors' children
 Trial Exhibit P106       Email exchange rating a donor as a "2"
 Trial Exhibit P164       Class of 2018 one-pager
 Trial Exhibit P316       Report of Harvard's Committee to Study Race-Neutral Alternatives
 Trial Exhibit P555       Office for Civil Rights Report (1990)
 Trial Exhibit P618       Admit rates for ALDCs and non-ALDCs by academic rating
 Trial Exhibit P619       List of applicants interviewed and admitted
 Trial Exhibit P621       Ratings frequencies for baseline sample
 Trial Exhibit P623       Ratings frequencies for expanded sample
 Trial Exhibit P626       Number and share of applicants by academic index
 Trial Exhibit P723       Class of 2023 application reading procedures




                                              50
B         Recovering Data from Public Sources

B.1        General Approach

As discussed in Section 2.2, the analysis presented in the current paper is based entirely on
publicly available documents since we no longer have access to the underlying application
data. This presents a number of challenges since the publicly released reports do not focus
on ALDC applicants or admissions. As an example, none of the reports provide summaries
of the application characteristics of ALDCs. We are able to overcome these limitations in a
number of ways.
       For LDC applicants (i.e. legacy, dean's interest list, and children of faculty and staff),
we are able to provide detailed and precise analysis of their demographic characteristics,
internal Harvard ratings, and academic preparation by exploiting the fact that Document
415-9 reports findings for two samples: one that includes LDC applicants (expanded) and one
that excludes these special applicants (baseline). Using the contrast in characteristics and
ratings between these two samples we are able to infer information about LDC applicants
and admits.93
       Isolating the characteristics for recruited athletes is more challenging. In Document 415-
9, athletes are excluded from both the baseline and expanded sample. However, in Document
415-8, recruited athletes are part of the expanded sample, along with LDC applicants. This
suggests that a comparison between the expanded sample across the two reports would
identify athlete attributes. However, there are other minor modifications to the expanded
sample across the two reports that make direct comparisons impossible.94 There are 150,701
applicants in the expanded sample in Document 415-8 including athletes, while there are only
148,769 applicants in the expanded sample in Document 415-9 excluding athletes. There are
  93
     The calculations for demographic characteristics in Table 4 are based upon shares that have already
been rounded. As a result, the numbers we report will have rounding error in them. It is straightforward to
show that the rounding bias is sensitive to the ratio of the number of applicants/admits among non-ALDCs
to LDCs. Because this ratio will be much smaller for admits, rounding error will be smaller when describing
the characteristics of admitted LDCs. Additionally, we do not report average SAT score and academic
index among LDC applicants and admits since only two significant digits are included in the original report,
exacerbating rounding concerns.
  94
     For example, a small group of applicants are dropped from the sample in Document 415-9 as a result of
recoding some of the profile ratings as missing.



                                                    51
1,343 recruited athlete applicants, which means that the expanded sample in Document
415-8 has 589 additional applicants that are non-athletes. Simply comparing attributes
across the two expanded samples will confound the characteristics of recruited athletes with
these additional 589 applicants. If we focus on describing admitted athletes, we can be more
precise. Of the 589 non-athlete, extra applicants in Document 415-8, only 64 are admitted.95
Among the 1,343 recruited athlete applicants, 1,179 are admitted. As a result, if we compare
the characteristics of admitted applicants in the expanded sample across the two reports,
95% of the gap is related to recruited athletes.
       Our descriptive analysis of athletes follows the strategy outlined above, where we infer
recruited athlete attributes by taking the difference across the expanded sample in Document
415-8 and Document 415-9. We account for the presence of non-athletes in this comparison
by providing upper and lower bounds for athlete attributes. These bounds are generated by
assuming that the non-athlete applicants and admits all have a particular feature or all fail
to have a particular feature.
       In addition to descriptives for ALDC applicants, we are also interested in understanding
the advantages that ALDC applicants receive in the admission process and how the admit-
ted class would change if these preferences were removed. Because we do not have access
to the underlying application data, here we must rely on the admissions models and coeffi-
cients presented in Document 415-8 and Document 415-9, along with additional calculations
contained in Exhibit 287 (Plaintiff declaration).


B.2        Table Details

In this section, we provide the exact steps we take to construct each of the main tables.


B.2.1       Table 1

Table 1 is constructed from numbers contained in Table A.2R in Document 415-9. The
sample utilized in constructing this figure consists of all applicants to Harvard, excluding:
  95
   None of these 64 admits are recruited athletes as the total number of admitted recruited athletes from
Document 415-8 Table B.3.2 matches the number of admitted recruited athletes in Document 415-9 Table
A.5R.



                                                   52
(1) transfer and foreign applicants; (2) applications that were withdrawn, incomplete, or
departed; and (3) repeat applicants. To see this, note that the total sample size is 166,727
applicants, which matches the remaining observations after these groups are eliminated in
Table A.5R of Document 415-9.


B.2.2   Table 2

Table 2 is directly constructed from numbers contained in Trial Exhibit P618.


B.2.3   Table 3

Table 3 is constructed using information from Tables B.3.1R and B.3.2R in Document 415-9
and Table B.3.2 in Document 415-8.
   The racial distribution of non-ALDC applicants and admits (Panels B and C) can be
determined using Table B.3.1R since we know the total number of applicants and admits by
race. The racial distribution of athlete applicants and admits is based on Table B.3.2. We
use the share of applicants and admits that are athletes, by race, to calculate the number of
athlete applicants and admits by race and then divide by the total number of athlete admits.
To avoid rounding issues here, we confirm our numbers for admits with Trial Exhibit DX 746,
although we cannot do this for Hispanics because they are combined with other race groups
in the exhibit. The racial distribution of LDC applicants and admits is determined using
Table B.3.2R. We use the total number of applicants and admits by race along with the share
of applicants and admits that are legacies, dean's interest, and child of faculty/staff by race
to calculate the number in each group and then divide by the total number in each group.
When constructing values for children of faculty or staff, we simply add the two groups
together. We know there is essentially no overlap between the groups since the number of
admitted faculty children and staff children constructed from Table B.3.2R matches the total
number of combined faculty/staff admits in Trial Exhibit DX 746.
   Admit rates by race for non-ALDC applicants come directly from Table B.3.1R. We use
Table B.3.2 to calculate admit rates for athletes by race. This is based on the total number
of admits and applicants along with the share of admits and applicants that are athletes
by racial group. We perform a similar calculation for LDC applicants using Table B.3.2R,

                                              53
where again we simply add the children of faculty and staff together.
   Finally, to calculate the proportion of admits that belong to each of the applicant groups
by race, we exploit information already accumulated. The total number of admits for each
race is given by the totals at the bottom of Table B.3.2R, plus the number of admitted
athletes for each race as determined by Table B.3.2. Then, we simply calculate the share of
total admits for each race that fall into each applicant group.


B.2.4   Table 4

Table 4 is constructed using Tables B.3.1R and B.3.2R from Document 415-9. The only
difference between the two tables is the inclusion of LDC applicants in Table B.3.2R. Thus,
to construct Table 5 we calculate the number of disadvantaged students, for example, who
are admitted and rejected by race for each table using the available shares and totals. The
difference in these values across the two tables then tells us how many LDC admits and
rejects are disadvantaged. Using these values plus the total number of LDC admits and
rejects, we construct the share of LDC applicants that are disadvantaged. We utilize an
identical approach for the other applicant characteristics.


B.2.5   Table 5

Table 5 is constructed using Trial Exhibits P621 and P623 along with Tables B.3.1R and
B.3.2R from Document 415-9. Trial exhibits P621 and P623 provide the raw counts of the
number of admits, rejects, and total applicants within each rating bin for all of Harvard's
internal ratings. P621 includes only non-ALDC applicants, while P623 includes non-ALDC
and LDC applicants. Thus, taking the differences between the raw counts across trial ex-
hibits tells us the number of LDC admits, rejects, and applicants within each rating bin.
When constructing the share of LDC applicants receiving higher than a 3+, we use as the
denominator the total number of LDC admits, rejects, and applicants, which we know from
Tables B.3.1R and B.3.2R. The corresponding numbers for non-ALDC applicants can be
constructed using P621 and Table B.3.1R.




                                             54
B.2.6    Table 6

Table 6 is constructed using Tables 5.1R, 5.2R, B.5.1R and B.5.2R from Document 415-
9. The share of non-ALDC applicants in each decile is taken directly from Table 5.1R. The
share of LDC applicants in each decile is calculated by taking the difference in the raw counts
across Tables 5.1R and B.5.1R, since the only difference is the inclusion of LDC applicants
in the latter table. We then divide the number in each decile by the total number of LDC
applicants by race. The admit rates for non-ALDC applicants in each decile come directly
from Table 5.2R. For LDC applicants, we use the admit rates along with the totals in each
decile to calculate the number of admits in each decile for the non-ALDC sample and the
sample that also includes LDC applicants. Taking the difference provides the number of
LDC admits in each decile, which we then divide by the total number of LDC applicants in
each decile.


B.2.7    Table 7

Table 7 is constructed using Tables 5.1R, 5.2R, B.5.1R and B.5.2R from Document 415-
9. The total number of admits in each decile is calculated by taking the total number of
applicants in each decile from Table B.5.1R and multiplying by that admit rate in each decile
from Table B.5.2R. The total number of non-ALDC admits can be generated in a similar
manner using Tables 5.1R and 5.2R. The number of LDC admits in each decile is simply the
difference between the total admits and non-ALDC admits in each decile.


B.2.8    Table 8

Table 8 is constructed using Trial Exhibit P623, Tables 4.2, B.3.2, B.4.1, and B.5.1­B.5.6
from Document 415-8, and Tables A.5R and B.5.1R­B.5.6R from Document 415-9.
   The challenge in constructing ratings for athletes is that these numbers are never directly
reported in any publicly released document, and unlike for LDC applicants, there are no two
samples we can directly compare that will describe only athletes. The closest we come
is to compare the ratings distribution for the expanded sample in Document 415-8 with
the ratings distribution for expanded sample in Document 415-9 since the former includes


                                              55
athletes while the latter does not. However, differences in ratings between these two samples
does not identify only athletes as there are additional sample changes to account for.
   Relative to the rebuttal expanded sample in Document 415-9, the original expanded
sample in Document 415-8 contains athletes and additional applicants with missing profile
ratings. There are respectively 1,343 and 1,179 athlete applicants and admits in the original
expanded sample (verified from Table B.3.2) that are excluded from the rebuttal expanded
sample (verified in Table A.5R). In addition, the original expanded sample includes 64 admits
and 589 applicants that are not athletes and not included in the rebuttal expanded sample
(Add the athlete numbers to the expanded sample totals in Table B.3.2R and examine the
difference between these and the expanded sample totals in Table B.3.2). We can then use the
change in the number of admits and applicants receiving each Harvard rating across reports
to determine the rating distribution for the composite group of athletes and applicants
missing ratings.
   There is one additional complication to the above procedure. While we know precisely the
number of admits and applicants in each rating group for the rebuttal expanded sample (see
Trial Exhibit P623), we do not know the corresponding numbers for the original expanded
sample. Table B.4.1 provides the shares in each rating group for the original expanded
sample, but for some of the ratings we exclude missing ratings when calculating the share
(we do the same thing in Table B.4.1R in the rebuttal, but because we have P623 we can
overcome this). Thus, we cannot directly calculate the number of individuals in each bin
since we do not know the precise denominator. We overcome this with a multi-step process.
   First, the academic index decile tables (B.5.1-B.5.6 and B.5.1R and B.5.6R) provide
information on the share of applicants receiving a 2 or higher on each rating, including the
missing. If this share represented all of the applicants, we could use this number to infer
for each rating how many applicants are excluded because they lack a valid rating. There is
one small correction that needs to be made first, which is that the decile analysis excludes
individuals whose GPAs appear incorrect. However, because P623 tells us the actual number
receiving a 2 or higher in the rebuttal expanded sample, we can determine how many of the
excluded GPA group have a 2 or higher. Because the number of missing GPA individuals is
essentially identical across the original and expanded samples (compare the totals in Tables


                                             56
B.5.1 and B.3.2 with the totals in Tables B.5.1R and B.3.2R), we also know the distribution
of 2 or higher ratings for missing GPA applicants in the original expanded sample. In other
words, none of the missing GPA applicants are athletes or missing ratings such that they
are eliminated in the rebuttal expanded sample. Using the fact that we know the number
of invalid GPA excluded from the decile analysis and the share of these that receive a 2 or
higher for each rating, we can calculate the share of applicants receiving a 2 or higher on
each rating, including the missing for the original expanded sample.
   With this knowledge we can directly calculate the total number of applicants with an
invalid rating that are excluded from the calculations in Table B.4.1 and 4.2 focused on
all applicants. Note that Table 4.2 includes the overall rating for the expanded sample in
the original report. However, we still do not know the number of invalid ratings that are
rejects and admits. Appendix B.3 provides the formulas for calculating these values using
knowledge of the total number of missing, along with share of admits receiving a 2 or higher
excluding the invalid ratings.
   Once we know the total number of applicants and admits with invalid ratings for each
category, we can determine the total number of individuals receiving a 2 or higher on each
rating for the expanded sample in the original report. Note that for the Overall, Academic,
Personal, and Extracurricular ratings, we do not adjust for missing since the share receiving
a 2 or higher from the decile tables (Tables B.5.3-B.5.6) matches almost exactly the shares
reported in Table B.4.1. This indicates that there are no applicants with invalid ratings,
which is consistent with the sample selection criteria described in Table A.5.
   The above procedure essentially allows us to create an analog to Trial Exhibit P623 for
the expanded sample in the original report. We can then easily determine the number of
athletes and missing rating applicants and admits with a 2 or higher for each rating by taking
the difference in the totals across the two samples. Once we have this number we proceed to
generate lower and upper bounds for the share of athlete applicants and admits receiving a
2 or higher by either assuming all of the missing rating applicants and admits received a 2 or
higher, or that none of them received a 2 or higher. For non-ALDC applicants and admits,
the numbers come from Table 6.



                                             57
B.2.9    Table 9

Table 9 is constructed using Model (5) from Table B.7.2R of Document 415-9. This table
provides coefficient estimates for the impact that being a legacy, double legacy, dean's interest
list, and disadvantaged applicant has on the probability of admission. When performing the
admission probability transformations, we focus on transformations in the base year. The
formula for the transformations is provided in the body of the paper.


B.2.10     Table 10

Table 10 is constructed using the "Full Sample" panel of Table 3 of Exhibit 287, Table B.3.2
of Document 415-8, and Tables B.3.1R and B.3.2R of Document 415-9. The top half of
the table is constructed using information from the tables in the reports to construct total
admits, LDC admits, athlete admits, and the corresponding application numbers. Exhibit
287 provides information on the admit rate for previous admits when ALDC preferences are
removed. Using this number, along with the top of the table, we can construct the remaining
numbers.


B.2.11     Table 11

The numbers in Table 11 are drawn directly from Table 8.2R in Document 415-9. They are
in the second panel for the preferred model.


B.2.12     Table 12

Table 12 is a replica of Table 2 from Exhibit 287.


B.3      Missing Observations in the Ratings Analysis

We assume that, from the decile analysis, we see X , the fraction who received a 2 or better
for some X , and the corresponding number of observations, N . However, in the ratings
analysis, there are some applicants who may be missing a rating, Nm , and this number is
unobserved. We know that this rating will be classified as worse than a 2 in the decile



                                               58
                                                                                          
analysis. The ratings analysis gives X . The relationship between X and X is given by:

                                               (N   - Nm )
                                        X=X                                                          (B.1)
                                                    N

Solving for Nm yields:

                                                        NX
                                        Nm = N -                                                     (B.2)
                                                        X

We now want to solve for the share of the Nm that have been admitted versus rejected. Let
                                                             R               A
 R give the fraction of Nm that rejected. We observe X               and X        , the share receiving a 2
or higher among rejects and admits when those missing the rating are excluded.
                                                                         A            R
   We then use the following relationships to recover  R , X , and X :

                                    A
                     A          - (1 -  R )Nm )
                             A (N
                   X =X                                                                              (B.3)
                                   NA
                              R     R
                    R    R (N -  Nm )
                   X =X                                                                              (B.4)
                                 NR
                                            A                  R
                       (N A - (1 -  R )Nm )X + (N R -  R Nm )X
                   X =                                                                               (B.5)
                                         N - Nm

One we have these for both the baseline and expanded samples, we can partition out the
ratings for ALDCs where missing ratings are present.
   Using the third equation, we can solve for  R :

                                                                     A            R
                         R   X (N - Nm ) - (N A - Nm )X                  - N RX
                      =                             A        R
                                                                                                     (B.6)
                                           Nm ( X       -X       )




                                               59
C      Modeling choices
In this section, we discuss our basic approach to modeling Harvard admissions. The admis-
sions data made available to us as part of the SFFA lawsuit cover six admissions cycles and
include hundreds of variables describing each applicant. It is not feasible to include every
variable in every year, as we would ultimately have as many regressors as admits. In the
paragraphs to follow we briefly discuss some of the key modeling decisions we make that
allow us to capture admissions decisions in a simple, yet accurate manner.
    The first decision we face is whether to pool the data and estimate a joint admissions
model with indicators for admissions cycle, or estimate separate admissions models for each
cycle. Our preferred approach is to utilize a pooled model. The advantage of pooling the
data is greater statistical power for uncovering some of the intricate patterns in admissions
choices that are time-invariant. The drawback of the pooled model is that the threshold
for admission may change across cycles. If the pool of applicants is simply becoming more
competitive over time, meaning that the baseline admit probability is declining, allowing
for admission cycle indicators will capture this. However, there may be some applicant
characteristics that Harvard seeks to balance within each admissions cycle. As an example,
Harvard might target an admitted class where 20% of the students are humanities majors.
This would mean that the probability of being accepted as an intended humanity major
will vary with the number of other intended humanity major applicants in a given cycle. A
pooled admissions model can capture this heterogeneity by including interactions between
intended major and indicators for admission cycle. In an admission cycle where there are
many intended humanities majors, the interaction coefficient will be negative relative to the
baseline humanity effect.
    While the admissions impact of certain characteristics is likely to change over time,
most applicant characteristics are likely to be valued similarly across admissions cycles. For
example, there is little reason to expect that Harvard would value an academic or personal
rating of 1 differently from year to year. When employing a pooled model, the question is
a matter of knowing which applicant characteristics are likely to have time-varying impacts.
Fortunately, during the weeks and months that Harvard is making final admissions decisions,


                                             60
the admissions office publishes statistics about the makeup of the current admitted class, as
well as how these numbers compare to previous classes. Admissions officers can use these
"one-pagers" to generate similarly constituted admit classes over time, even if the applicant
pool is changing. We use these "one-pagers" as guidance and include in our pooled regression
interactions of admissions cycle with applicant characteristics included in the "one-pagers"
such as gender, docket, intended major, and disadvantaged status.
   The second critical decision when modeling Harvard admissions decisions is which ap-
plicant characteristics to include in the model. Our approach in this dimension is to first
include variables that Harvard readily admits influence admissions decisions, such as the
various internal Harvard ratings, race, and disadvantaged status. Choosing among the po-
tentially hundreds of other variables such as test scores, high school GPA, intended major,
and high school and neighborhood characteristics is more challenging. The basic rubric we
apply is as follows. First, to be included a variable must be reasonably related to the ad-
missions decision and have no other variable already in the model that captures the same
dimension of the applicant. Second, the variable itself cannot be contaminated by other pref-
erences we are seeking to measure. For example, if an applicant's overall rating is influenced
by the ALDC status of the applicant, then it is inappropriate to include the overall rating
when investigating the impact of ALDC status on admissions. Third, the variable should
display consistent patterns over time, an indication that it is a reliable measure. Finally,
the variable must be available every admissions cycle, otherwise we cannot include it in our
pooled model.
   Employing the above criteria results in more than 350 variables being identified as rel-
evant controls in a model of admissions. Yet, there are a few variables we omit from our
preferred specification that are worth discussing. Parental occupation and intended career
are two variables we exclude from our model. First, both variables have analogs that we
include in the model. Parental occupation is essentially a proxy for socioeconomic status, a
variable we measure with controls such as disadvantaged status, first generation indicator,
and application fee waiver indicator. Intended career is closely tied to intended major. More-
over, both parental occupation and intended career exhibit wild swings across admissions
cycles, indicating that they are not consistently measured and thus unreliable. Another vari-


                                             61
able we exclude from our preferred admissions model is whether the applicant received a staff
interview. As illustrated in Trial Exhibit P619, ALDC applicants receive staff interviews at
a vastly higher rate that non-ALDC applicants. Thus, a measure of whether an applicant
simply receives a staff interview is inappropriate to include in a model aimed at estimating
preferences for ALDC applicants. The staff interview indicator itself embeds preferences
for ALDC applicants. Finally, Harvard's personal rating is a subjective measure of an ap-
plicant's leadership skills and courage. This is a highly contentious variable, since there is
ample evidence that the personal rating is heavily influenced by preferences for ALDCs and
particular racial groups. As a result, we estimate admissions models with and without this
variable.
   The final modeling choice we make is which variables to interact in the admissions prob-
ability. Conditional on the set of variables identified above, there are potentially thousands
of interactions one could generate. Our approach to this issue is driven by knowledge of the
college admissions process and past research. For example, previous research finds that the
admissions tip associated with being a disadvantaged applicant is different for applicants of
different races (Arcidiacono, 2005). As a result, we include interactions between race and dis-
advantaged. Similarly, racial preferences for applicants are likely to vary according to ALDC
status, and thus we include these interactions in the model. The list below describes the full
set of variables we include in each of our admissions models. This list comes from Figure 7.1
of Document 415-8, with additional information reported in Section 8.1 of Document 415-9.

   · Model 1: Race/ethnicity, female, disadvantaged, application waiver, applied for finan-
      cial aid, first generation college student, mother's education indicators, father's edu-
      cation indicators, year effects, docket-by-year effects, early decision, athlete, legacy,
      double legacy, faculty or staff child, Dean Director's list, intended major

   · Model 2: Model 1 plus SAT math,* SAT verbal,* SAT2 average,* missing SAT2 average
      times race/ethnicity, converted GPA,* academic index,* academic index squared times
      academic index greater than zero, academic index squared times academic index less
      than zero, flag for converted GPA=35 (* indicates variable was z-scored)

   · Model 3: Model 2 plus female times intended major, female times race/ethnicity,

                                              62
  race/ethnicity times disadvantaged, race times early decision, race times legacy, and
  race interacted with an indicator for dean/director's list and/or faculty/staff child

· Model 4: Model 3 plus College Board variables on the characteristics of applicant high
  schools and home neighborhoods (many are interacted with an indicator for whether
  the state is an SAT majority state), whether the mother or father is deceased, whether
  a parent attended an Ivy League university (other than Harvard), whether a par-
  ent attended graduate school at Harvard, the type of high school the applicant at-
  tended, an indicator for rural, an indicator for being a permanent resident, and year
  interacted with indicators for disadvantaged, first-generation, early decision, legacy,
  dean/director's list or faculty/staff, financial aid, permanent resident, intended major,
  flag for converted GPA=35, and missing SAT2 average

· Model 5: Model 4 plus indicators for each academic, extracurricular, teacher 1, teacher
  2, counselor, alumni personal, and alumni overall ratings, interactions with missing
  alumni overall rating and race/ethnicity, indicators for whether the applicant had each
  possible combination of a two or better on Harvard's academic, extracurricular, and
  athletic profile ratings, indicators for whether the applicant had two or three 2's or
  better on their school support measures, and an indicator for whether the applicant
  had 2's or better on both of the alumni ratings

· Model 6: Model 5 plus indicators for each personal rating and indicators for whether
  the applicant had each possible combination of a two or better on Harvard's profile
  ratings related to the personal rating




                                           63
D       Supporting Tables
This section reports additional tables in support of the main tables discussed in the exposi-
tion.




                                             64
                       Table D1: Applicant Ratings by Race and LDC Status

                               White             African American              Hispanic            Asian American
                       Non-ALDC        LDC      Non-ALDC         LDC     Non-ALDC         LDC    Non-ALDC        LDC
 Overall
     2 or better           4.43        21.60        5.29         19.66       3.88       18.47         4.84       25.58
     3                     71.39       69.25        42.28        48.47      55.05       69.32        74.44       64.24
     4 or worse            24.18        9.15        52.44        31.86      41.07       12.22        20.72       10.18
 Academic
     2 or better           45.29       54.43         9.19        15.25      16.74       41.19        60.21       63.27
     3                     44.83       40.42        40.06        51.19      47.81       47.73        31.80       31.64
     4 or worse            9.88        5.15         50.75        33.56      35.44       11.08        7.99         5.09
 Extracurricular
     2 or better           24.35       36.22        15.54        30.85      16.83       31.53        28.23       37.83
     3                     71.94       61.89        76.82        66.10      77.37       64.77        69.78       60.66
     4 or worse            3.02        1.62          6.48        2.71       4.79         3.13        1.63         1.38
 Athletic
     2 or better           12.79       21.89        6.82         15.93      7.51        18.18        4.81        14.86
     3                     52.98       52.34        49.28        54.58      48.67       53.41        47.74       52.41
     4 or worse            31.65       23.93        39.33        27.12      40.13       24.43        45.35       31.22
 Personal
     2 or better           21.27       40.88        19.01        40.68      18.68       38.92        17.64       35.49
     3                     78.30       58.85        80.52        58.64      80.85       60.51        81.88       64.24
     4 or worse            0.43        0.27          0.47        0.68       0.48         0.57        0.48         0.28
 Teacher 1
     2 or better           30.42       39.26        17.12        28.47      21.59       31.82        30.79       38.10
     3                     66.23       59.68        72.04        68.14      70.06       66.76        66.51       60.66
     4 or worse            0.52        0.37          0.92        0.68       0.78         0.28        0.47         0.41
 Teacher 2
     2 or better           27.13       36.47        14.80        23.05      18.84       32.67        27.41       37.69
     3                     54.77       51.83        55.01        57.97      55.36       57.67        57.40       52.68
     4 or worse            0.37        0.27          0.50        1.02       0.57         0.00        0.41         0.00
 Counselor
     2 or better           25.28       37.13        13.86        24.75      16.47       37.22        25.12       36.86
     3                     69.09       60.74        73.73        71.53      73.59       61.36        70.27       61.49
     4 or worse            0.57        0.22          1.62        0.68       1.09         0.28        0.58         0.00
 Alumni Personal
     2 or better           49.92       67.85        42.98        58.98      41.39       68.47        50.33       68.50
     3                     23.63       21.18        24.95        25.76      23.84       19.60        24.24       19.81
     4 or worse            5.52        3.78          7.23        4.41       6.77         3.69        6.28         5.50
 Alumni overall
     2 or better           36.49       55.34        20.84        37.97      23.61       52.27        40.89       55.98
     3                     28.02       28.29        24.93        32.54      24.66       29.26        26.38       26.27
     4 or worse            13.70       8.66         27.28        17.29      22.06       9.66         12.69       10.59
Source: Authors' calculations from Tables B.3.1R and B.3.2R in Document 415-9 and data presented in Trial Exhibit P621
and Trial Exhibit P623. Numbers do not sum to one since we do not show the share with missing/invalid ratings. 2 or
better includes 2-, 2, 2+, and all ratings with a leading 1. 3 includes 3-, 3, and 3+. 4 or worse includes 4-, 4, 4+, and
all ratings with a leading 5.




                                                            65
                          Table D2: Admit Ratings by Race and LDC Status

                               White              African American               Hispanic            Asian American
                        Non-ALDC        LDC      Non-ALDC         LDC     Non-ALDC          LDC     Non-ALDC        LDC
 Overall
     2 or better            59.70       57.27        59.14        62.96       50.14        50.00       62.36        62.22
     3                      40.19       42.29        40.86        37.04       49.86        50.00       37.64        37.78
     4 or worse             0.11        0.44          0.00        0.00        0.00          0.00       0.00          0.00
 Academic
     2 or better            88.77       78.34        59.39        43.21       65.40        70.49       94.40        85.56
     3                      11.19       20.93        40.52        56.79       34.60        29.51        5.60        14.44
     4 or worse             0.04        0.73          0.08        0.00        0.00          0.00       0.00          0.00
 Extracurricular
     2 or better            73.03       55.80        51.98        55.56       56.64        50.00       78.28        60.37
     3                      26.15       43.76        47.18        43.21       42.10        48.36       21.53        39.26
     4 or worse             0.11        0.37          0.25        1.23        0.09          1.64       0.00          0.00
 Athletic
     2 or better            20.97       27.90        14.24        28.40       15.27        23.77       7.19         18.15
     3                      44.78       48.02        48.53        41.98       42.82        50.00       43.97        50.74
     4 or worse             28.78       22.76        32.60        28.40       35.59        22.95       44.16        29.63
 Personal
     2 or better            83.76       70.19        74.39        80.25       77.87        63.93       73.26        60.37
     3                      16.24       29.66        25.61        19.75       22.13        36.07       26.74        39.63
     4 or worse             0.00        0.15          0.00        0.00        0.00          0.00       0.00          0.00
 Teacher 1
     2 or better            77.40       62.11        59.56        65.43       63.50        45.90       74.61        60.00
     3                      22.60       37.89        40.44        34.57       36.50        54.10       25.34        40.00
     4 or worse             0.00        0.00          0.00        0.00        0.00          0.00       0.00          0.00
 Teacher 2
     2 or better            74.73       57.49        55.69        51.85       64.23        54.10       72.78        53.33
     3                      22.28       36.78        39.93        34.57       31.71        42.62       23.75        39.26
     4 or worse             0.00        0.15          0.00        0.00        0.00          0.00       0.05          0.00
 Counselor
     2 or better            76.01       61.97        57.88        58.02       58.36        60.66       73.17        63.33
     3                      23.03       37.08        41.45        40.74       40.11        39.34       26.11        35.93
     4 or worse             0.00        0.00          0.00        0.00        0.00          0.00       0.00          0.00
 Alumni Personal
     2 or better            91.47       82.01        87.78        80.25       91.42        89.34       91.75        85.19
     3                       5.76       13.51        8.93         17.28        6.41         5.74        6.27        10.74
     4 or worse             0.50        1.17          1.10        1.23        0.27          1.64       0.34          2.22
 Alumni overall
     2 or better            86.57       73.94        73.46        62.96       80.13        80.33       90.35        79.26
     3                      10.20       20.19        21.82        30.86       16.08        15.57        7.43        14.81
     4 or worse             0.82        2.28          2.19        4.94        1.81          0.82       0.43          3.70
Source: Authors' calculations from the following sources: Trial Exhibit P623; Tables 4.2, B.3.2, B.4.1, and B.5.1­B.5.6 from
Document 415-8; and Tables A.5R and B.5.1R­B.5.6R from Document 415-9. See Appendix B.2.8 for a complete discussion
of the calculations. 2 or better includes 2-, 2, 2+, and all ratings with a leading 1. 3 includes 3-, 3, and 3+. 4 or worse
includes 4-, 4, 4+, and all ratings with a leading 5.




                                                             66
Table D3: Upper and Lower Bounds on the Share of Applicants and Admits Receiving a 2
or Higher on Various Ratings, by Athlete Status and Race

                                 White                  African American                  Hispanic                  Asian American
                                       Recruited                    Recruited                     Recruited                    Recruited
 Rating                Non-ALDC         Athlete Non-ALDC             Athlete      Non-ALDC         Athlete Non-ALDC             Athlete
 Panel A: Applicants
 Overall
 Lower bound                             0.0667                       0.0000                        0.0000                       0.0000
                          0.0443                       0.0529                        0.0388                       0.0484
 Upper bound                             0.2713                       0.1667                        0.3115                       0.3621
 Academic
 Lower bound                             0.0990                       0.0000                        0.0000                       0.0000
                          0.4529                       0.0919                        0.1674                       0.6021
 Upper bound                             0.3036                       0.0694                        0.3115                       0.7759
 Extracurricular
 Lower bound                             0.0000                       0.0000                        0.0000                       0.0000
                          0.2435                       0.1554                        0.1683                       0.2823
 Upper bound                             0.1410                       0.2361                        0.5082                       0.2759
 Personal
 Lower bound                             0.3111                       0.0000                        0.0000                       0.0000
                          0.2127                       0.1901                        0.1868                       0.1764
 Upper bound                             0.5156                       0.8056                        1.0000                       0.5259
 Teacher 1
 Lower bound                             0.2034                       0.0000                        0.0000                       0.0000
                          0.3042                       0.1712                        0.2159                       0.3079
 Upper bound                             0.4080                       0.4167                        0.8361                       0.6034
 Teacher 2
 Lower bound                             0.1507                       0.0000                        0.0000                       0.0000
                          0.2713                       0.1480                        0.1884                       0.2741
 Upper bound                             0.3552                       0.3125                        0.7705                       0.5345
 Counselor
 Lower bound                             0.1830                       0.0000                        0.0000                       0.0000
                          0.2528                       0.1386                        0.1647                       0.2512
 Upper bound                             0.3875                       0.3819                        0.8361                       0.6724
 Alumni Personal
 Lower bound                             0.2820                       0.0000                        0.0000                       0.0000
                          0.4992                       0.4298                        0.4139                       0.5033
 Upper bound                             0.4865                       0.7986                        1.0000                       0.8448
 Alumni Overall
 Lower bound                             0.2024                       0.0000                        0.0000                       0.0000
                          0.3649                       0.2084                        0.2361                       0.4089
 Upper bound                             0.4069                       0.5000                        0.9344                       0.6983

 Panel B: Admits
 Overall
 Lower bound                             0.2705                       0.1290                        0.1481                       0.2376
                          0.5970                       0.5914                        0.5014                       0.6236
 Upper bound                             0.3035                       0.1935                        0.3333                       0.3960
 Academic
 Lower bound                             0.2460                       0.0000                        0.1111                       0.4158
                          0.8877                       0.5939                        0.6540                       0.9440
 Upper bound                             0.2791                       0.0645                        0.2963                       0.5743
 Extracurricular
 Lower bound                             0.0832                       0.0645                        0.0000                       0.0000
                          0.7303                       0.5198                        0.5664                       0.7828
 Upper bound                             0.1163                       0.1290                        0.1667                       0.1188
 Personal
 Lower bound                             0.4676                       0.6290                        0.5185                       0.2871
                          0.8376                       0.7439                        0.7787                       0.7326
 Upper bound                             0.5006                       0.6935                        0.7037                       0.4455
 Teacher 1
 Lower bound                             0.3329                       0.2339                        0.2963                       0.2079
                          0.7740                       0.5956                        0.6350                       0.7461
 Upper bound                             0.3660                       0.2984                        0.4815                       0.3663
 Teacher 2
 Lower bound                             0.2962                       0.1774                        0.2593                       0.2475
                          0.7473                       0.5569                        0.6423                       0.7278
 Upper bound                             0.3293                       0.2419                        0.4444                       0.4059
 Counselor
 Lower bound                             0.3256                       0.2661                        0.2593                       0.2673
                          0.7601                       0.5788                        0.5836                       0.7317
 Upper bound                             0.3586                       0.3306                        0.4444                       0.4257
 Alumni Personal
 Lower bound                             0.3696                       0.4435                        0.2963                       0.3762
                          0.9147                       0.8778                        0.9142                       0.9175
 Upper bound                             0.4027                       0.5081                        0.4815                       0.5347
 Alumni Overall
 Lower bound                             0.3390                      0.3629
                                                                    67                              0.3704                       0.3168
                          0.8657                       0.7346                        0.8013                       0.9035
 Upper bound                             0.3721                       0.4274                        0.5556                       0.4752
Source: Authors' calculations from the following sources: Trial Exhibit P623; Tables 4.2, B.3.2, B.4.1, and B.5.1­B.5.6 from Document 415-8;
and Tables A.5R and B.5.1R­B.5.6R from Document 415-9. See Appendix B.2.8 for a complete discussion of the calculations.
        Table D4: Selected Coefficients, Admissions Model of LDCs and non-ALDCs

                                               (1)          (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
 Legacy                                       1.238      1.650       1.697      1.720      2.141       2.329
                                             (0.046)    (0.051)     (0.059)    (0.123)    (0.155)     (0.164)
 Double Legacy                                0.511      0.372        0.377      0.337      0.689       0.738
                                             (0.090)    (0.101)     (0.101)    (0.106)    (0.130)     (0.135)
 Faculty or Staff                             1.260       1.410       1.692      1.875      2.472       2.630
                                             (0.139)    (0.159)     (0.310)    (0.319)    (0.359)     (0.353)
 Dean's Interest                              1.495      1.931       2.379      2.449      3.301       3.246
                                             (0.053)    (0.059)     (0.356)    (0.366)    (0.417)     (0.417)
 African American                             0.486       2.290       2.604      2.815      3.596       3.674
                                             (0.038)    (0.047)     (0.071)    (0.075)    (0.097)     (0.103)
 Hispanic                                     0.393      1.190       1.271      1.338      1.908       1.959
                                             (0.037)    (0.042)     (0.061)    (0.064)    (0.081)     (0.086)
 Asian American                               0.047      -0.400      -0.529     -0.321     -0.389      -0.257
                                             (0.030)    (0.032)     (0.050)    (0.053)    (0.066)     (0.070)
 Disadvantaged                                1.172      1.243       1.494      1.616      1.640       1.527
                                             (0.041)    (0.047)     (0.070)    (0.106)    (0.132)     (0.139)
 Legacy × African American                                           -0.725     -0.716     -0.792      -0.872
                                                                    (0.214)    (0.223)    (0.281)     (0.297)
 Legacy × Hispanic                                                   -0.536     -0.672     -0.779      -0.736
                                                                    (0.183)    (0.192)    (0.235)     (0.240)
 Legacy × Asian American                                              0.398      0.331      0.626       0.612
                                                                    (0.142)    (0.150)    (0.187)     (0.195)
 Other Special × African American                                    -0.882     -0.788     -1.261      -1.267
                                                                    (0.349)    (0.364)    (0.485)     (0.529)
 Other Special × Hispanic                                            -0.729     -0.692     -1.343      -1.328
                                                                    (0.230)    (0.243)    (0.287)     (0.295)
 Other Special × Asian American                                       0.377      0.491      0.515       0.471
                                                                    (0.160)    (0.175)    (0.208)     (0.219)
 Disadvantaged × African American                                    -1.023     -1.121     -1.582      -1.565
                                                                    (0.104)    (0.108)    (0.135)     (0.142)
 Disadvantaged × Hispanic                                            -0.278     -0.356     -0.618      -0.616
                                                                    (0.096)    (0.102)    (0.127)     (0.133)
 Disadvantaged × Asian American                                       0.020      0.023      0.159       0.162
                                                                    (0.090)    (0.093)    (0.115)     (0.121)
 N                                           148,769 148,741       148,741     141,701    134,365    134,349
 Pseudo R Sq.                                 0.136   0.294         0.297       0.318      0.555      0.599
 Demographics                                   Y       Y             Y           Y          Y          Y
 Academics                                      N       Y             Y           Y          Y          Y
 Race and Gender Interactions                   N       N             Y           Y          Y          Y
 HS and NBHD Variables                          N       N             N           Y          Y          Y
 Ratings (excluding Personal)                   N       N             N           N          Y          Y
 Personal Rating                                N       N             N           N          N          Y
Source: Data presented in Table B.7.2R of Document 415-9. All models include year indicators and year indicators
interactions.


                                                       68
       Table D5: Selected Coefficients, Admissions Model of ALDCs and non-ALDCs

                                                  (1)          (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
 Athlete                                         4.487        7.153      7.141    7.245     8.532      7.849
                                                (0.088)      (0.116)   (0.116)   (0.117)   (0.147)   (0.153)
 Legacy                                          1.244        1.662     1.682     1.658     2.058      1.840
                                                (0.045)      (0.051)   (0.058)   (0.059)   (0.073)   (0.082)
 Double Legacy                                    0.509       0.370      0.381    0.354     0.607      0.629
                                                (0.090)      (0.100)   (0.100)   (0.101)   (0.121)   (0.133)
 Faculty or Staff Child                           1.252       1.389      1.409    1.407     1.822      1.704
                                                (0.138)      (0.157)   (0.157)   (0.158)   (0.187)   (0.203)
 Dean's Interest                                 1.499        1.941      1.913    1.873     2.307      2.322
                                                (0.053)      (0.059)   (0.059)   (0.059)   (0.072)   (0.077)
 African American                                 0.420       2.163      2.533    2.622     3.333      2.659
                                                (0.038)      (0.046)   (0.070)   (0.071)   (0.091)   (0.104)
 Hispanic                                        0.329        1.092      1.170    1.180     1.700      1.419
                                                (0.038)      (0.043)   (0.063)   (0.065)   (0.080)   (0.091)
 Asian American                                   0.005       -0.438    -0.529    -0.457    -0.436    -0.271
                                                (0.029)      (0.032)   (0.049)   (0.050)   (0.062)   (0.071)
 Female                                          -0.039       0.250     0.239     0.248     0.145     0.127
                                                (0.022)      (0.025)   (0.057)   (0.057)   (0.068)   (0.076)
 Disadvantaged                                   1.154        1.224     1.482     1.472     1.364      1.083
                                                (0.040)      (0.046)   (0.069)   (0.069)   (0.085)   (0.093)
 First Generation                                 0.006       0.170      0.156    0.136     0.074      0.023
                                                (0.050)      (0.056)   (0.056)   (0.057)   (0.069)   (0.077)
 Early Decision                                  1.611        1.449     1.383     1.384     1.333     1.282
                                                (0.029)      (0.031)   (0.046)   (0.046)   (0.056)   (0.062)
 N                                      150,701              150,633   150,633   150,587   149,425   144,189
 Psuedo R2                               0.187                0.331     0.337     0.343     0.568     0.649
 Demographics                              Y                    Y         Y         Y         Y         Y
 Academics                                 N                    Y         Y         Y         Y         Y
 Race and Gender Interactions              N                    N         Y         Y         Y         Y
 HS and NBHD Variables                     N                    N         N         Y         Y         Y
 Ratings (excluding Personal & Overall)    N                    N         N         N         Y         Y
 Personal & Overall Ratings                N                    N         N         N         N         Y
Source: Data presented in Table B.7.2 of Document 415-8.




                                                        69
E       Varsity Athletics at Harvard
Harvard fields 42 varsity teams, the most among the nation's NCAA Division I colleges and
universities.96 Nearly 1,200 Harvard undergraduates--or 20 percent of the student body--
participate in intercollegiate athletics. In contrast, Stanford's student body (which has about
300 more undergraduates) has 300 fewer athletes: "The Department of Athletics offers 36
varsity sports--20 for women, 16 for men (sailing is a co-ed sport). ... Stanford offers
over 350 athletic scholarships and approximately 900 students participate in intercollegiate
sports."97 Harvard has more student athletes than even Ohio State, which supports 1,038
student athletes in 30 different sports98 with an undergraduate enrollment of nearly 46,000.
      Appendix Table E1 contains a complete list of sports offered by Harvard and when
Harvard began offering them.




 96
     See also Document 419-1, p. 41.
 97
     https://facts.stanford.edu/campuslife/athletics/, accessed March 29, 2019.
  98
     https://www.collegefactual.com/colleges/ohio-state-university-main-campus/
student-life/sports/, accessed April 4, 2019.


                                              70
      Table E1: List of varsity sports offered at Harvard

 Academic Year of Inception   Team
 1852-1853                    Men's Heavyweight Crew
 1865-1866                    Baseball
 1873-1874                    Football
 1876-1877                    Men's Outdoor Track
 1881-1882                    Men's Lacrosse
 1893-1894                    Men's Fencing
 1897-1898                    Men's Ice Hockey
 1900-1901                    Men's Basketball
 1902-1903                    Men's Cross Country
 1905-1906                    Men's Soccer
 1913-1914                    Wrestling
 1921-1922                    Men's Lightweight Crew
 1922-1923                    Men's Indoor Track
 1923-1924                    Men's Golf
 1924-1925                    Men's Squash
 1925-1926                    Men's Tennis
 1928-1929                    Men's Sailing
 1930-1931                    Men's Swimming and Diving
 1933-1934                    Men's Skiing
 1970-1971                    Women's Heavyweight Crew
 1973-1974                    Women's Tennis
 1974-1975                    Women's Basketball
 1974-1975                    Field Hockey
 1974-1975                    Women's Lightweight Crew
 1974-1975                    Women's Outdoor Track and Field
 1974-1975                    Women's Swimming and Diving
 1974-1975                    Women's Squash
 1975-1976                    Women's Fencing
 1975-1976                    Women's Lacrosse
 1976-1977                    Women's Cross Country
 1976-1977                    Women's Sailing
 1976-1977                    Women's Skiing
 1977-1978                    Women's Indoor Track and Field
 1977-1978                    Women's Soccer
 1978-1979                    Women's Ice Hockey
 1980-1981                    Softball
 1980-1981                    Men's Volleyball
 1980-1981                    Men's Water Polo
 1981-1982                    Women's Volleyball
 1983-1984                    Women's Water Polo
 1993-1994                    Women's Golf
 2013-2014                    Women's Rugby
Source:         https://www.gocrimson.com/information/history/
Beginning_Years, accessed March 29, 2019.


                               71
