                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE BOSS IS WATCHING:
                HOW MONITORING DECISIONS HURT BLACK WORKERS

                                       Costas Cavounidis
                                          Kevin Lang
                                       Russell Weinstein

                                      Working Paper 26319
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26319


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019




This research was funded in part by NSF grants SES-1260917 and SES-1851636. It draws on
similar intuition to Cavounidis and Lang (2015) but greatly simplifies the theory and adds an
empirical section testing the main new prediction. We are grateful to Cheonghum Park for
excellent research assistance and to Gautam Bose, Sambuddha Ghosh, Larry Katz, Ed Lazear,
Calvin Luscombe, Ioana Marinescu, Derek Neal, Marina Soley-Bori, Bill Spriggs and
participants in seminars and conferences at Boston University, Cornell, IZA/OECD, NBER,
Tufts, the University of California, Riverside and West Point Military Academy for helpful
comments and suggestions on this and the earlier paper. The usual caveat applies. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Costas Cavounidis, Kevin Lang, and Russell Weinstein. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Boss is Watching: How Monitoring Decisions Hurt Black Workers
Costas Cavounidis, Kevin Lang, and Russell Weinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 26319
September 2019
JEL No. J01,J3,J71

                                         ABSTRACT

African Americans face shorter employment durations than apparently similar whites. We
hypothesize that employers discriminate in either acquiring or acting on ability-relevant
information. We construct a model in which firms may "monitor" workers. Monitoring black but
not white workers is self-sustaining: new black hires are more likely to have been screened by a
previous employer, causing firms to discriminate in monitoring. We confirm the model's
prediction that the unemployment hazard is initially higher for blacks but converges to that for
whites. Two additional predictions, lower lifetime incomes and longer unemployment durations
for blacks, are known to be strongly empirically supported.

Costas Cavounidis                              Russell Weinstein
Department of Economics                        School of Labor and Employment Relations
Warwick University                             and Department of Economics
Coventry, CV4 7AL                              University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Tel: +44 2476528420                            504 E. Armory Avenue
United Kingdom                                 Champaign, IL 61820
C.Cavounidis@warwick.ac.uk                     weinst@illinois.edu

Kevin Lang
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
lang@bu.edu
1 Introduction
Many Americans, especially African Americans, believe black workers `don't
get second chances'1 or that they face additional scrutiny in the workplace.
Similarly, black workers are admonished to be `twice as good'2 in order to
succeed. If black workers are subject to higher standards or scrutinized more
heavily, we expect this to be reflected in more separations.
    Indeed, the data support the idea of shorter employment duration3 for
black workers. Bowlus, Kiefer and Neumann (2001) detect and ponder the
disparity in job destruction rates; Bowlus and Eckstein (2002) estimate4 that
young black male high school graduates had roughly 2/3 the job spell duration
of their white counterparts. In addition, more of their job spells end in unem-
ployment, suggesting that blacks have much shorter employment spells. Both
papers assume an exogenously higher separation rate for black workers to fit
their models to the data. Lang and Lehmann (2012) show that differences in
unemployment duration alone are insufficient to account for the black/white
unemployment rate gap and therefore that black workers' employment stints
are shorter. This aspect of labor discrimination has thus far eluded theoretical
explication.
    In this paper, our proposed explanation for differential employment dura-
tions is, in its broadest sense and consistent with the aforementioned observa-
tions, that firms discriminate in the acquisition or use of productivity-relevant
information. That is, firms either learn differently about black workers or,
when information regarding ability is received, they condition how they act
on it on workers' race. Crucially, we establish that such discrimination can be
self-perpetuating.
   1
     This assertion can be found in a range of occupations including football coaching (Reid,
2015), music and films (The Guardian, 2014) as well as more generally (Spencer, 2014).
   2
     Coates, Ta-Nehisi (2012) and Mabry, Marcus (2012)
   3
     Throughout this paper we distinguish between employment duration by which we mean
the length of an employment spell and job duration by which we mean the time a worker
spends with a particular employer. Job duration depends on, among other factors, the
arrival rate of outside offers. Our model abstracts from job-to-job transitions, but can
incorporate them without trouble, as shown in Section 4.5.8.
   4
     Using the NLSY data for 1985 and 1988.


                                             1
   The essence of our model is that, because black workers are more closely
scrutinized, a larger share of low-performance workers will separate into unem-
ployment. As a result, since productivity is correlated across jobs, the black
unemployment pool is `churned' and therefore weaker than the white unem-
ployment pool. Since workers can, at least to some extent, hide their employ-
ment histories, race serves as an indicator of expected worker productivity.
This in turn makes monitoring newly hired black (but not white) workers op-
timal for firms. Figure 1 illustrates employment in the two labor markets.
The churning mechanism is shared with Masters (2014), where information
acquisition takes the form of exogenous pre-employment signals rather than
endogenous monitoring on the job.

                                     White workers
  Birth                                 Hiring                  Employed,
          Job seeking
                                                               no monitoring

                                     Black workers
  Birth                  Hiring      Employed with   Success    Employed,
          Job seeking
                                      monitoring               no monitoring
                        Separation


Figure 1: White workers' perpetual employment, black workers' churning cycle

    Importantly, our model has excess empirical content. It predicts that in-
voluntary separations from employment will initially be higher for blacks than
for whites but that these hazards will converge with seniority. As seniority
increases it is more likely that workers have passed monitoring, and are good
matches with the firm. We test and largely confirm this previously untested
prediction using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79).
The finding is robust to a variety of sample selection decisions, approaches
to smoothing the hazards, measures of seniority and proxies for involuntary
separation, and strengthens with the inclusion of controls.


                                          2
    There are multiple equilibria in our model, a property it shares with mod-
els of rational stereotyping or self-confirming expectations (Coate and Loury,
1993). However, in our model discrimination is not simply a product of coordi-
nation failure; instead, history matters. A group that begins with a low level
of skills for which only the bad (monitoring) equilibrium exists will remain
in that equilibrium even if its skill level rises to a level consistent with the
existence of both the good and bad equilibria. Even if blacks are, on average,
more skilled than whites, whites can be in the good steady-state and blacks
in the bad steady-state because of a history of lower access to schooling and
other human capital investments. Equalizing the human capital that blacks
and whites bring to the labor market may be insufficient to equalize labor
market outcomes. In contrast, in self-confirming expectations models, if we
could just convince blacks to invest in themselves and employers that blacks
have invested, we would immediately jump to the good equilibrium
    There is an abundance of evidence that black workers face lower wages and
longer unemployment duration than white workers. Moreover, these dispar-
ities are less prevalent and, perhaps, in some cases nonexistent for the most
skilled workers as measured by education or performance on the Armed Forces
Qualifying Test. While there are a plethora of models intended to explain wage
or unemployment differentials, none addresses both and their relation to skill.5
Since in our model newly hired black workers are on average less productive
than white ones, their wages are lower and firms that expect to hire blacks an-
ticipate less profit from a vacancy and therefore offer fewer jobs. Consequently,
blacks have longer unemployment durations.
    We derive additional implications from informal extensions to the model.
   5
     Many models (e.g. Aigner and Cain, 1977; Becker, 1971; Bjerk, 2008; Charles and
Guryan, 2011; Coate and Loury, 1993; Fryer, 2007; Lang, 1986; Lang and Manove, 2011;
Lundberg and Startz, 1983; Moro and Norman, 2004) assume market clearing and therefore
cannot address unemployment patterns. Search models (e.g. Black, 1995; Bowlus and
Eckstein, 2002; Lang and Manove, 2003; Lang, Manove and Dickens, 2005; Rosen, 1997)
can explain unemployment differentials, but assume otherwise homogeneous workers and
thus cannot address wage differentials at different skill levels. Peski and Szentes (2013)
treat wages as exogenous. In general, discrimination models have not addressed employment
duration. See the review in Lang and Lehmann (2012).



                                            3
The higher level of scrutiny increases the return to skill for blacks, consistent
with evidence that blacks invest more in schooling compared with apparently
equivalent whites. In addition, if unemployment history is partially observable,
black job seekers who have experienced enough turnover may be permanently
relegated to low-skill, low-wage jobs. Although we do not wish to overstate
the predictive power of the model, we note that until around 1940, blacks and
whites had similar unemployment rates (Fairlie and Sundstrom, 1999), while
blacks faced lower wages. This is consistent with a setting in which, due to
low human capital investments, blacks were assumed to have low productivity
at most jobs and therefore not monitored for quality. `Churning' of the black
labor market would not begin until human capital investments were sufficiently
high.
    We believe that the broad implications of our model can be derived through
a variety of formalizations. The key elements common to these are:

   i. that a worker's productivity at different firms is correlated,

  ii. that workers cannot or do not signal their ability and that they can, at
      least imperfectly, hide their employment histories,6

  iii. that firms must therefore, to some degree, statistically infer worker abil-
       ity,

  iv. that further information about match productivity arrives during pro-
      duction, and is either costly, imperfect, or both, and

  v. that this information, if obtained, may affect retention, so that firm
     behavior affects the average unemployed worker's ability.

    The details of our formal model are driven by our desire for a theoretically
rigorous model of wage-setting in a dynamic framework with asymmetric in-
formation. Firms and workers bargain over wages and use a costly monitoring
technology to assess the quality of the match, which is correlated with the
worker's underlying type.
  6
      In particular, they must sometimes be able to omit or mischaracterize prior bad matches.

                                               4
    Therefore, use of the monitoring technology depends on the firm's prior: if
the belief that a worker is well-matched is sufficiently high or sufficiently low,
it will not be worth investing resources to determine match quality. However,
if the cost of determining the match quality is not too high, there will be
an intermediate range at which this investment is worthwhile. Firm beliefs
about black, but not white, workers fall in this region. Consequently, they are
subject to heightened scrutiny and are more likely to be found to be a poor
match and fired. The increased scrutiny ensures that the pool of unemployed
black workers has a higher proportion of workers who have been found to be a
poor match at one or more prior jobs. And therefore employers' expectations
that black workers are more likely to be poor matches is correct in equilibrium.
This, nested in a search model, generates the empirical predictions discussed
above.7
    This churning equilibrium is hard to escape. This is disheartening since
policy succeeding at convergence of group characteristics may fail to equate
labor market outcomes. Only if the skill level of blacks is raised sufficiently
above that of whites (technically the proportion of good workers is sufficiently
high), does the bad equilibrium cease to exist and white and black workers
receive similar treatment.


2 The Model
2.1 Setup
There are two worker groups, `blacks' and `whites'. Race is observable by the
worker and employers but does not have any direct impact on production.
   At all times a steady flow of new workers is born into each population
group.8 A proportion g  (0, 1) of new workers are type , for whom every job
  7
     Note that our model abstracts from moral hazard and that performance is observed
objectively. MacLeod (2003) develops an interesting model in which biased subjective as-
sessments interact with moral hazard concerns.
   8
     We do not allow for death but could do so at the cost of a little added complexity.




                                           5
is a good match.9 The rest, referred to as type  , have probability   (0, 1) of
being a good match at any particular job. The probability of a worker being
good at a job, conditional on her type, is independent across jobs. Worker
type is private to the worker. Workers begin their lives unemployed. The
probability a new worker is good at a particular job is

                                   0 = g + (1 - g ) .                                     (1)

   Employers cannot directly observe worker type or employment history,10
but can instead draw statistical inferences from race.


2.2 Match Quality
Production, the payment of wages and the use of the monitoring technology
occur in continuous time using a common discount rate r.
    Workers can be either well-suited to a task (a `good' match), producing q
per unit time; or ill-suited (a `bad' match), producing expected output q - c
per unit time. We can interpret the lower productivity of bad workers as errors
or missed opportunities, each costing the firm c, that arrive at a constant rate
. Under this interpretation, opportunities for error are also opportunities to
learn the quality of the match as well-matched workers are observed to avoid
errors.11
    The employer does not know the match quality without monitoring. During
production, the firm may use a technology that may produce a fully informa-
tive signal about match quality. If the signal shows the match to be bad, the
firm may terminate it immediately, receiving 0.
    In keeping with the opportunities-for-errors interpretation, we assume the
signal arrives at a constant hazard rate . The monitoring technology costs
   9
     Having type  workers perform well at every job is not essential to the argument but
simplifies presentation significantly.
  10
     At a more informal level, we believe that workers have some ability to hide their employ-
ment history and that they will not report information speaking to their own low ability.
We show the model is robust to imperfect history revelation in Section 4.5.6.
  11
     Alternatively, we could assume that the flows are q - d and q with d  c and that  is
the arrival rate of opportunities to measure the flows.


                                              6
                                                                            
b per unit time, so that the expected cost of information is 0 be-t dt = b/
                                        
and its expected discounted cost is 0 (e-rt b)e-t dt = b/ ( + r). The princi-
pal benefit of a signal whose arrival is exponentially distributed, rather than
one that arrives deterministically, is that it makes the employment survival
function more realistic. In addition, it allows for a certain stationarity in
the model: so long as no signal has arrived, the underlying incentives do not
change.
   For monitoring to ever be useful, matches revealed to be bad must separate.
A sufficient condition for this is that q - c < 0. Additionally, we intend that
 workers will not be willing to reveal their type in bargaining. To this end, we
make the sufficient and simple assumption that such a match is unproductive,
regardless of the monitoring choice:

                                q          (q - c)   b
(C1)          max q - (1 -  )c,  + (1 -  )         -                            0.
                                r            +r      +r

   It is much stronger than necessary. In general, it is sufficient that any
wage at which a firm would knowingly hire a  worker is low enough that the
worker would rather reject it in order to rematch at a higher (pooling) wage.
Assumption (C1) ensures that such separation in search of a new match is
beneficial regardless of the expected duration of unemployment.


2.3 Job Search
When a worker is born or her match is terminated, she becomes unemployed.
Unemployed workers are stochastically matched to firms, which occurs at a
constant hazard µ. For the moment, we treat this rate as exogenous; it will be
endogenized in Section 4.4 to address unemployment duration. When a match
dissolves, transfers cease and the worker becomes unemployed. A firm does
not recoup a vacancy and therefore receives a payoff of 0 on termination.12
    In the unemployed state, workers merely search for new jobs; we normalize
the flow utility from this state to 0. The value from unemployment is thus
  12
       This occurs naturally due to free entry when vacancy creation is endogenized; see Section
4.4.


                                                7
simply the appropriately discounted expected utility from job-finding and is
                                                               
invariant to history. The expected discount on job-finding is 0 e-rt µe-µt dt =
µ/ (µ + r); the value of a new job will depend on the equilibrium. We denote
the value of the job-finding state in a market where the average worker quality
                                     
is  as U   for type  workers and U     for type  workers. These will be constant
in steady-state. Furthermore, in order to have simple dynamics outside steady-
state, we assume that workers are myopic : they bargain as though the future
wage distribution is identical to the current one.


2.4 Wage Setting
Given the asymmetry in information between the worker, who knows her type,
and the firm, the Nash bargaining model is unusable and the Rubinstein (1982)
one suffers from a multiplicity of equilibria. If a  worker does not want to
reveal her type, as follows from our assumptions, then the  worker will have
to bargain as if she were an  worker. Since in this case the firm cannot
distinguish with which type it is bargaining, it should act as if it were bargain-
ing with a random draw from the unemployment pool. Thus an intuitively
appealing solution is the outcome that would be reached in Nash bargaining
between a firm calculating its rents on the assumption of a random draw from
the pool and a worker calculating her rents as if she were an  worker.
    We posit a simple wage bargaining model akin to Lauermann and Wolinsky
(2016) that produces this outcome albeit only in expectation. When a worker
and firm meet, a wage offer w is randomly drawn from some distribution F .
They then simultaneously choose whether to accept or reject the offer. If either
rejects the offer, the match is dissolved; the firm receives 0 while the worker
searches for the next firm. If both parties accept the offer, production proceeds
at that wage. We are looking for Perfect Bayesian Equilibria in which neither
party uses a (weakly) dominated strategy.13 Using a randomly drawn take-it-
or-leave-it offer allows us to escape both the multiplicity of equilibria caused
by off-path beliefs if the worker can make offers, and the Diamond paradox if
  13
    This is needed to rule out equilibria where mutually acceptable wages are rejected by
both parties.

                                           8
only the firm makes offers.14
    To ensure that the wage process does not end in disagreement in equilib-
rium, we assume only agreeable wages are proposed. Specifically, we assume
that F is a uniform distribution on the set of wages the firm and worker would
both accept; thus, wage negotiation is as though an arbitrator proposes any
wage on the contract curve with equal likelihood. Crucially, this assumption
guarantees that, once we endogenize the job-finding rate, disparities in new
match formation rates are solely caused by lower demand for black workers,
and not the bargaining process.15 Fortuitously, the assumption also results in
simple solutions.
    Jointly, our assumptions will ensure that every match will find a mutually
acceptable wage, that equilibrium in steady-state will be unique, that wages
are uniformly distributed over the contract curve, and that they are on average
equal to the equal-weights Nash bargaining solution (between a firm with
beliefs given by  and an  worker), despite the asymmetric information.


2.5 Steady State
A steady state of a labor market is a mass of  job seekers, a mass of  job
seekers and a mass of monitored  workers along with equilibrium firm and
worker wage acceptance and monitoring strategies that make these populations
constant over time. There are three kinds of steady states: those in which all
employees are monitored until match quality is revealed, those in which no
monitoring occurs, and those in which the monitoring choice depends on the
  14
     Earlier versions of this paper used an alternating-offers bargaining model with off-path
belief restrictions and derived an equivalent set of theoretical results. The somewhat artificial
nature of the current wage-setting structure dramatically simplifies the presentation without
fundamentally changing the results.
  15
     This of course makes F an equilibrium object, as the acceptability of wages in turn
depends on F ; but the solution is unique given our myopia assumption. We could instead
assume F is uniform on [0, q ] but then unacceptable wages would be encountered, and
the probability of disagreeable wages would vary between matches with black and white
workers. Notice that F does not depend on worker type as due to assumption (C1) there
are no wages the firm and  workers would accept but  workers would not. As equilibrium
acceptable wages will form an interval, we could, instead of a uniform, use any distribution
with connected, compact support by scaling it to the acceptable wage interval.


                                               9
wage draw. As the latter are unstable to small perturbations in the parameters,
we focus on the former two.
    Consider the case where no employees are monitored: the white labor
market. Matches never deteriorate and therefore the only source of job seekers
is newly born workers. In this scenario, a firm just matched with a worker
infers his probability of being of type  is the population prevalence g ; the
chance of a white job-seeker being good at a job to which he is matched is
therefore
                           W = 0 = g + (1 - g ).

   Now suppose that all newly hired black employees are monitored and all
bad matches are terminated. Newly matched black workers will be worse than
average.

Lemma 1 The probability a newly hired black worker is in a good match is

                                            
                                 B =                 < W .                       (2)
                                        g + (1 - g )

Proof. See A.1
    Therefore, although monitoring may be individually prudent for each firm,
it creates a negative externality by feeding a stream of workers who are worse
than the population average (i.e. containing more  types) back into the job-
seeker pool. Surprisingly, the steady state B of this process does not depend
on the rate of information , the worker matching rate µ, or the rate at which
new workers enter the market.16


2.6 Parametric Assumptions
Now we impose certain restrictions on the joint values of parameters sufficient
to ensure the existence of both steady states.
    For an equilibrium with no monitoring to exist for white workers, we want
to assume that monitoring costs are not too low. For monitoring not to be
 16
      This is an artifact of the assumption that workers are infinitely lived.



                                               10
optimal, the instantaneous monitoring cost must not be worth paying to detect
bad matches, accounting for the fact that the cost must be recouped on the
surviving fraction of workers.


                b                                 c
(C2)                        >        (1 - W )                   ·                W
                                                  r
          Monitoring cost       Reduction in losses to errors       Proportion of remaining workers


    Our second condition, antisymmetrically to (C2), posits that "monitoring
costs must not be too high"and ensures that all new black employees will be
monitored in equilibrium. As the monitoring decision is increasing in the wage,
for there to be no monitoring in the black labor market, a condition is needed
at the lowest wage in that market. As the lowest wage in the market depends
on the speed at which workers match rather than simply the firm's break-even
point, the relevant expression is a bit more complex.

                            b            c (B µ + 2r) - 2rq
(C3)                          < (1 - B )
                                            r (µ + 2r)

    In other words, B, the belief about the average ability in the black un-
employed pool, must be sufficiently low that acceptably high wages are only
possible if the firm monitors. Strictness of the inequality ensures that switch-
ing to an unchurned market is not simply a matter of switching equilibria (as
the non-monitoring one will not exist here). Notice that as the matching fric-
tions vanish (µ increases), (C3) becomes the opposite inequality of (C2) for
B rather than W .
    Finally, for both labor markets to exist, it must be that workers can be
in expectation gainfully employed; a sufficient condition is that the expected
non-monitoring product of workers drawn from the black unemployed pool is
positive:

(C4)                                q - c(1 - B ) > 0.




                                                 11
3 Solution
First, we will use the model's properties to characterize the firm's and worker's
actions. The main intuition behind the following result is that the firm is more
willing to monitor if the bad matches terminated by monitoring are costlier,
due to higher wages.

Lemma 2 The firm's monitoring decision is increasing in the wage w and
decreasing in its belief about match quality .

Proof. Fix a wage w and a belief  for the firm. If the firm doesn't monitor
the worker, it receives the production net of the wage and the expected cost
of errors, forever:
                            w     q - w - (1 - )c
                          V,N  =                     .                       (3)
                                           r
    On the other hand, the firm can choose to monitor the worker. If it is
optimal to do so at any instant, it is optimal to do so until the signal arrives
as the problem doesn't otherwise change. With probability , the match is
good and the production net of wages q - w is received by the firm forever
as no separation will occur; with the complementary probability the match is
bad so q - w - c is received by the firm only until the signal arrives and the
match ends; in either case, the monitoring cost of b is paid until revelation.
The firm's expected lifetime payoff if it monitors is therefore

                   w      q-w          q - w - c   b
                  V,M =       + (1 - )           -    .                      (4)
                           r              +r       +r

   For monitoring to be optimal for the firm, we need

                                   w    w
                                  V,M  V,N                                   (5)

which reduces to
                                              rb
                            w  q - c +             ,                         (6)
                                            (1 - )
or equivalently
                                         rb
                             1-                  .                           (7)
                                     (w - q + c)

                                       12
   Our next result shows that the wages acceptable to both the firm and the
workers form an interval.

Lemma 3 For a labor market with steady state expected match quality , there
is an interval of wages, [w , w ], the worker and firm both accept.17

Proof. see A.2
    An intervalic structure for the wages in each market will simplify analysis
significantly. From Lemma 3 we have that the mutually acceptable wages are
                
an interval [rU  , w ] = [w , w ]. As  workers never separate once they find a
job, we have that the lowest wage is equal to the expected wage they'd get at
                                                 µ    q        µ
another firm, adjusted for search time: w = µ+     r 0
                                                        wdF = µ+ r
                                                                   [.5w + .5w ],
so that
                                        µ
                                 w =         w .                             (8)
                                      µ + 2r
    We now present the main theoretical results of the paper: existence and
uniqueness of equilibria in the two markets that perpetuate their associated
steady states.


3.1 The Non-Monitored Market
Proposition 1 Assuming (C1)-(C4), the white (non-churned) labor market
has a unique solution where the monitoring technology is not used. The average
wage in this market is

                            avg     µ+r
                           w    =          [q - (1 - W )c] .                              (9)
                             W
                                    µ + 2r

Proof. see A.3
   The main intuition for the proposition comes from Lemma 2. Since the
value of monitoring is increasing in w, for a non-monitoring solution we need
  17
    Incentives are weak at the interval's endpoints, but this is immaterial as F will put zero
probability on them.




                                             13
only check whether the firm chooses to monitor at the break-even wage wW .
And (C2) ensures that monitoring does not occur at that wage.
   Interestingly, since the firm cannot learn the worker's type in this non-
churned equilibrium, type has no effect on wages.


3.2 The Monitored Market
Here, as workers are monitored,  workers sometimes face separation and
therefore have a low outside option. However, they cannot accept low wages
at which monitoring would not occur at beliefs B without revealing their type;
thus, such wages are not accepted by the firm. Therefore this equilibrium is
effectively a pooling one as well, despite the fact  workers receive significantly
lower utility than  workers.

Proposition 2 Assuming (C1)-(C4), the black (churned) labor market has a
solution where the monitoring technology is used in every match. The average
wage in this market is

                    avg     µ+r       r(c(1 - B ) + b)
                   w    =          q-                  .                     (10)
                     B
                            µ + 2r        B + r

Proof. see A.4
    The intuition here again comes from (2), which tells us that the monitoring
decision is increasing in w and therefore if monitoring occurs at w it occurs at
all matches, and (C3) which ensures this condition holds. As the equilibrium
strategies induce monitoring at every equilibrium wage, employees who are
revealed to be in bad matches separate from the firm. This sends only 
workers back into the job-seeking pool, churning the market quality to B .


4 Implications for Labor Markets
The previous sections establish conditions under which there are two distinct
steady-states of the labor market. In this section, we compare labor market
outcomes for workers in these steady states. We first discuss a prediction

                                       14
that has not previously been tested and then discuss the relation of our other
predictions to known labor market regularities.


4.1 Employment Duration
Absent monitoring, there is no new information to dissolve the match. There-
fore, taken literally, the model implies no turnover in the white equilibrium. In
contrast, with monitoring, some workers prove ill-suited for the job and return
to the unemployment pool. We interpret this as predicting that black workers
will have lower average employment duration. Recall that workers who return
to the unemployment pool are all type  . Therefore, turnover is even higher
than if only new entrants were monitored. The model, again taken literally,
implies that the separation hazard for blacks is

                               (1 -  ) (1 - g ) e-t
                         ht =                                               (11)
                              1 - (1 -  ) (1 - g ) e-t

which is decreasing in t.
    Importantly, h declines with t and asymptotes to 0, the hazard rate for
whites. We expect this prediction to be robust to consideration of important
real world elements not addressed by the model. Whether the hazard rates, in
fact, converge is not something we are aware of the literature addressing and
is the subject of our empirical investigation later in this paper.
    As our model abstracts from firm-to-firm hiring, we have no prediction
with regard to it. Although it may seem that firms would be out to poach
black workers with high seniority (that are likely to have passed monitoring),
adverse selection effects (with the worst workers more willing to leave) could
unravel such effects, depending on the ability of outside employers to commit.
Still, our predictions are in terms of employer-initiated separations, not moves
to better jobs. Therefore, in the empirical section, we treat spells that end in
a job-to-job transition as censored.




                                       15
4.2 Wages
     avg      avg
As w  B
         < w   W
                  , blacks, on average, earn less than whites. The highest wage
firms are willing to pay is lower for blacks than for whites since the average
quality of new hires is lower, and the lowest wage blacks are willing to accept is
lower because they expect other employers to pay less, as well. Interestingly,
because whites are not monitored, their lifetime utility does not depend on
type, and both types have higher utility than black s who, in turn, have
higher lifetime utility than black  s:

                                                
                              U W
                                  = UW
                                       > U B
                                             > U B
                                                   .

    It is less obvious whether the wage distributions of blacks and whites will
overlap, and for some parameter values they do not. Figure 2 illustrates an
example of the model where the equilibrium wages for white and black workers
significantly overlap, despite the fact only the latter are monitored.




                                                                                      White wages
                                   w
                Black wages




                                   w
  Wages




                                                                     No Monitoring 
                                                      Monitoring 




            B                      Firms' Belief                                      W


Figure 2: An example where the black and white wage ranges overlap. r =
.05, g = .99, µ = 2,  = .1, q = 1, b = 2,  = 2, c = 4



                                        16
4.3 Persistence of Discrimination
A key result of the churning mechanism in this paper is that deleterious steady
states are persistent. In this section we show just how hard it is to transition to
a good steady state. We regard this as illustrating the difficulty of addressing
labor market discrimination in the context of policy, particularly policy aimed
at improving the skills of black workers. The existence of a range of g values
for which both steady states exist allows us to talk about persistence of the
deleterious equilibrium.
    Heretofore we have assumed that average skill levels for the two population
groups are identical. Suppose instead that skill levels are gB = gW and that
the steady-state of each market provides monitoring for black but not white
workers. Monitoring will persist as the equilibrium in the black labor market
until gB rises above some critical level while the no monitoring equilibrium will
persist in the white market provided that gW remains above a lower critical
level. In principle, we can have the black workers in the bad equilibrium and
the white workers in the good equilibrium provided that (C2) and (C3) hold
for W and B calculated using gW and gB respectively. Put simply, this means
that discrimination in wages and monitoring (and therefore also separations)
can continue even if black workers are significantly better, on average, than
white workers.


4.4 Unemployment Duration
We have so far treated the workers' matching rate, µ, as exogenous. Making
the standard assumption of free entry, we now allow firms to post and maintain
vacancies at a cost k per unit time. When a firm creates a vacancy, it can
direct its search. This can take several forms, most notably locating production
operations in an area with specific population characteristics or advertising the
vacancy in different areas and through different media. In general, a firm can
target markets indexed by i where a proportion i of unemployed workers are
white. The open vacancy cost k is invariant to this target choice. We assume
that in each market i the bargaining equilibria and population group steady


                                        17
states break down along the discriminatory lines described so far.
    Define  as market tightness and let the worker job-finding rate function
follow the commonly assumed form

                                 µ() = m                                   (12)

for constants m > 0 and 0 <  < 1. Note that if firms expect a match to be
worth V , the free-entry level of  in such a market sets

                                µ()
                                    V -k =0                                (13)
                                 

so that
                                     V m 1- 1
                                =(       ) .                              (14)
                                      k
Therefore,  is an increasing function of V .
    Assuming the parametric assumptions hold for the entire breadth of derived
matching rates, we can now derive the free-entry equilibrium level of µi for
each market i. The payoff to a firm for matching is the same as for an 
worker, that is, when hiring from pool i, the firm expects a successful match
to pay

            1                               1       r(c(1 - B ) + b)
 Vi = i          [q - c(1 - W )]+(1 - i )        q-                        (15)
          µ + 2r                          µ + 2r        B + r

   The above expression is increasing in i . Therefore, for the same µ, markets
with more black workers will have a lower expected payoff for a filled vacancy.
Therefore, the free-entry (i ) and µ((i )) are increasing in i , so that workers
searching for jobs in markets with a higher proportion of black workers take
longer, on average, to find employment. A first-order stochastic dominance
argument can then show that black workers take longer, on average, to find
employment, and receive lower average wages.




                                      18
4.5 Extensions
4.5.1 Eventual revelation in all matches

We have assumed unrealistically that the match quality of workers who are
not monitored is never revealed. More plausibly, heightened scrutiny speeds
the rate at which match quality is revealed. In a model in which workers live
forever, this change considered in isolation would eliminate our results because
the composition of the jobless pool is independent of the rate at which bad
matches are revealed. However, if workers do not live forever, then reducing
the rate at which match quality is revealed does affect the quality of the
unemployment pool, and our basic results go through.

4.5.2 Skill level and discrimination

Further, we can allow for observable heterogeneity among workers. If there
are groups of workers for whom g is high, only the no-monitoring equilibrium
will exist for these groups, regardless of race. This is also true at very low
g and very low  (although we have assumed away this case to simplify the
proofs). The first result is consistent with similar outcomes for blacks and
whites with high levels of skill as measured by education or the Armed Forces
Qualifying Test (Neal and Johnson, 1996; Lang and Manove, 2011). The
latter is consistent with some evidence that the bottom of the labor market
is similarly bad for blacks and whites. On the other hand, Lang and Manove
find that the market learns the productivity of white but not black high school
dropouts. This is consistent with an equilibrium in which white unemployed
dropouts are, on average, more skilled than black unemployed dropouts and
therefore in which white but not black dropouts are monitored. Nevertheless,
without additional, largely ad hoc assumptions, this story cannot account for
the very high unemployment rate among black dropouts.




                                       19
4.5.3 Investment in unobservable skills

We have heretofore postulated that the proportion of  types is exogenous.
Assume instead that some fraction of workers are innately of type . Others can
transform themselves from  s into s at some cost  with cdf F ( ) . Provided
that the fraction of natural s satisfies (C2) and (C3), both equilibria will
continue to exist for the right choice of F . However, since in the no-monitoring
equilibrium s and  s receive the same wage, there is no incentive to invest in
becoming an . In contrast, in the monitoring equilibrium, lifetime earnings
are strictly higher for s than for  s. Thus, some individuals will have an
incentive to make the investment.18 This prediction contrasts with Coate and
Loury (1993), where black workers are less willing to invest in skills.

4.5.4 Education

Suppose now that there exists a signal,19 which we identify with education,
that  workers can purchase at some personal cost   F . Assume doing
so ensures that any employer will be immediately aware that the worker is
indeed type . An educated  worker of either population with cost  will
                                                     µ
then anticipate a lifetime utility of VEduc () = µ+2   r
                                                         q - . In Section 4.2
we showed white  workers receive a higher lifetime payoff than their black
counterparts; therefore, the incentive for the latter to invest in education is
                                                               
greater. As this implies that  ¯ W  max{ : VEduc ()  U          W
                                                                  } < max{ :
              
VEduc ()  UB }       ¯ B , we must have that F (¯W ) < F (¯  B ) and therefore
more black workers will purchase education. In particular, there exists some
range of idiosyncratic costs for which black workers will purchase education
but white workers will not. This is consistent with the finding in Lang and
  18
     It might appear that the incentive to undertake such investments would unravel the
monitored equilibrium. However, if this were the case, no worker would have an incentive
to invest. This raises messy dynamic issues which we sidestep by assuming that the fraction
of additional workers who would choose to invest is insufficient to overturn (C3).
  19
     We analyze the case of a pure signal. If education can also turn a  into an , the
analysis is a combination of the analysis in this and the prior subsection since productive
investment increases the fraction of workers who are  but investment that reveals workers
to be  reduces the fraction of unrevealed workers who are .



                                            20
Manove (2011) that, conditional on past test scores, blacks get more education
than whites do. The intuition here is simple; if a worker of high skill is treated
as if she has the average hire's skill for her group, she has a greater incentive
to reveal her high skill if that average is lower.20
    Perhaps equally importantly, this extension suggests that blacks and whites
with high observable skills will have similar outcomes as discussed in the pre-
vious subsubsection.

4.5.5 Imperfect monitoring

We show in Cavounidis and Lang (2015) that one can write a very similar
model in which  workers always match badly but monitoring can result in
false positive good matches. Much of the analysis would remain unchanged in
such a model. Parameters would exist that would force monitoring on blacks
but not whites, the black labor market would churn, and it would produce
lower employment duration, higher unemployment duration and lower lifetime
wages for blacks. In this formulation, black workers succeeding at monitoring
would only be as good as whites who had never been monitored; therefore a
churned market does not necessarily produce better long-run matches for the
successfully monitored.
    However, this alternate model would imply that some workers are purely
parasitic and cannot be matched well, but rather aspire simply to find a job
where their lack of productivity is undiscovered.

4.5.6 Stigma and degeneration into lower-skilled jobs

Our model assumes unrealistically that employers have no information regard-
ing the time that workers have been in the labor market or the number of jobs
they have held. If the other aspects of our model were a rough representation
of reality, it is implausible that firms would not recognize that some workers
were unlikely to be new entrants and therefore very likely to be  types. Then
  20
    Strictly speaking, this creates a feedback loop from lower wages for the uneducated to a
greater measure of education. The right assumptions on F rule out associated complexities.



                                            21
workers who do not find a good match sufficiently quickly will be permanently
barred from the monitoring sector.
    Somewhat more formally, as an extension to the model, we can relax the
assumption that past history is entirely unobservable. Assume instead that
each separation has a probability  of becoming public common knowledge.
Any worker who has a revealed separation is known to be of type  in any
new match. Thus, a newly hired worker who does not have such a stigma
will be of average quality B = [ + g (1 -  )] / [g + (1 - g ) + g (1 -  )].
If we assume B satisfies (C3), churning can persist but will be primarily a
phenomenon for relatively young workers.
    But what will happen to workers revealed to be  s? It is straightforward
to extend the model to allow for a second occupation type (q , c ) lacking
monitoring technology21 that is less skill intensive than the task described so
far, i.e. q > q and q - c < q - c . Unrevealed  types can be strictly better
off than revealed ones in a new match of the first task, but revealed  s are
forced to enter the market for the second occupation.
    In this scenario, a fraction of black workers are relegated to low-wage jobs
while white workers with similar skills can always get better jobs.

4.5.7 Changing screening and monitoring technology

Autor and Scarborough (2008) examine the effect of bringing in a new screen-
ing process. They find that the screening process raised the employment du-
ration of both black and white workers with no noticeable effect on minority
hiring. In our model, we can think of this technology as allowing the firm to
screen for job match quality prior to employment. This increases the propor-
tion of hired blacks who become permanent workers since some bad matches
are not hired. If the screening mechanism is good enough, the firm will choose
not to monitor the black workers it hires, and all black workers will be perma-
nent. Formally, since all white workers are permanent in the absence of the
screen, the screen does not affect this proportion. Informally, if poor matches
  21
     Or, more palatably, the same technology but without the incentives to use it, as in the
case of a small enough c .


                                            22
are more likely to depart even without monitoring, then there will also be pos-
itive effects on white employment duration.22 Similarly, Wozniak (2015) shows
that drug testing increases black employment and reduces the wage gap; we
interpret this as confirming evidence for the notion that employers are more
uncertain about the quality of black workers, and therefore that black workers
benefit more from early resolution of such uncertainty.23
    We note that improved technology appears to have reduced monitoring
costs. This is unambiguously good for blacks who share the cost of being
monitored. Unless the reduction shifts whites into the monitoring equilibrium,
they are unaffected by the cost reduction. However, if firms begin monitoring,
 workers and firms will initially be better off. Firms will be able to better
screen their workers, and as a consequence can offer higher wages, which should
make  workers better off as the monitoring does not put them at risk. On the
other hand,  workers will generally be worse off. In a collective bargaining
setting, the union might resist monitoring. The more interesting point is that
since monitoring creates an externality, it is easy to develop an example in
which monitoring makes both types of workers and capital worse off in the
long run.24

4.5.8 Job-to-job transitions

There are many ways to incorporate job-to-job transitions in a search model.
Some would not alter our results qualitatively, and others would, while yet
others would produce a multiplicity of equilibria. Of particular import is the
  22
      Formally, the model would have to be modified to ensure that some  workers are never
perfectly matched and/or that some  workers are still in bad matches when they exit the
labor force.
   23
      Wozniak (2015) is not to be interpreted as evidence that monitoring is good for black
workers on the aggregate. As in the present paper, it can beneficial on an individual level
(as it allows good workers to get higher wages than otherwise); our model, however, shows
it can also create a worse externality.
   24
      Suppose that g0 is just sufficient to sustain a no-monitoring equilibrium. A small re-
duction in b puts the labor market into a monitoring equilibrium. Initially,  workers and
firms would experience a slight gain, but the churning will wipe this out and more. Firms
always make zero profit on vacancies, but if we allow for a distribution of vacancy costs,
then the rents earned by firms with low costs of creating vacancies will also fall.



                                            23
information accessible to outside firms. Under the simplest assumption, that
of information symmetry across firms, an outside firm that meets an employed
worker learns whether monitoring has concluded successfully (or, alternatively,
the worker could disclose this). Keeping with the wage offer structure, such an
outside firm and worker pair would draw a wage uniformly among all mutually
acceptable wages. Wages would jump on transition, but our predictions re-
garding average wages by race would be preserved, conditional on any of age,
experience, or job spell duration. The monitoring state of the worker would
persist from firm to firm (as incentives to monitor increase in the wage, but
white workers are not monitored even at firms' break-even wage) so that our
predictions regarding employment spell duration go through.


5 Empirics
We test the model's prediction that the hazard into nonemployment is initially
higher for blacks but converges to that for whites. To our knowledge this pre-
diction has not previously been tested. The model also predicts longer unem-
ployment durations and lower lifetime incomes for blacks relative to whites.
These are known to be strongly empirically supported (see Lang and Lehmann
2012).


5.1 Methods
We estimate the hazard of entering a period of nonemployment using the
first fulltime spell of each individual at each employer. Because the model is
about separation into nonemployment, not job to job transitions, we censor
spells ending in a job to job transition. For these spells, we assert we do
not know when the spell would have ended in nonemployment. We use both
nonparametric and semiparametric survival analysis methods to estimate the
hazard.
    First, using standard techniques, we calculate the hazard over time inter-
vals with the intervals large enough not to require further smoothing. For each


                                      24
nonoverlapping time interval, (tj -1 , tj ], j = 1...k + 1, we obtain the number of
employment spells at the start, the number of spells ending in nonemployment
(failures) over the interval, and the number of spells ending but not in nonem-
ployment (censored). A conventional way of calculating the hazard in this
setting is to assume that censoring and death times are uniformly distributed
within each interval. The hazard at the midpoint m for each nonoverlapping
interval is then :
                          ^ (tmj ) =            dj
                          h                              d
                                                                              (16)
                                     [(tj - tj -1 )(Yj - 2j )]
The variable Yj is the number of spells at the start of the interval minus half
of the spells censored over the interval, and dj is the number of failures over
the interval (Klein and Moeschberger 2003).25
    Each interval must have at least one failure in order to calculate the hazard,
and so we use smaller intervals at shorter durations when there is more data.
We use intervals of 13 weeks until this size interval no longer includes a failure.
Starting at week 546 we use intervals of 26 weeks, until this no longer includes
a failure. Starting at week 832 we use intervals of 52 weeks. We calculate the
hazard separately over these intervals for black and white workers. We obtain
confidence intervals based on the estimated standard deviation of the hazard
function at the midpoint of interval j , using that the number of failures in the
interval is a binomial random variable.26
    This nonparametric method does not allow controlling for covariates, and
so we additionally plot baseline hazard functions for blacks and whites from a
Cox proportional hazards model stratified by race. The stratified Cox model
allows for different baseline hazard functions for blacks and whites, rather than
assuming the baseline hazards for blacks and whites are proportional. As in
the traditional Cox model, we constrain the coefficients on the covariates to
be the same for blacks and whites.
    We use the time intervals defined above as our measures of time, so that
the baseline estimates do not require further smoothing. Using time inter-
  25
   This is referred to in the literature as the life table method.
  26
   The formula for the estimated standard deviation of the hazard is found in Klein and
Moeschberger (2003) and used in STATA. A similar formula is derived in Gehan (1969).


                                          25
vals rather than week as a measure of time creates more instances of failures
occurring at the same "time", since time is now a larger unit.27
    The baseline contributions we obtain from this model are the same as
the Nelson-Aalen contributions in the case of no covariates, using the week
intervals as a measure of time.28
    Specifically, we estimate

                              h(t|W, Z) = hW (t)exp(Z )                                  (17)

    The variable W is an indicator for whether the individual is white and
Z includes whether the individual had completed any college, indicators for
geographic region (Northeast; North Central; South; West is omitted), whether
the individual lived in an urban area, age, blue collar, non-blue and non-white
collar occupation (white collar is omitted), and year fixed effects, all measured
at the start of the spell, and the standardized AFQT score.
    While we are able to use the default STATA program for our main hazard
estimates, there is no built-in program to obtain bootstrapped standard errors
for the baseline hazard contributions and so we describe the estimation in de-
tail. Following Kalbfleisch and Prentice (2002), we obtain the baseline hazard
contributions at each failure time by maximizing the likelihood function

                                      exp[Zj (ti )  ]              exp[Zl (ti ) ]
               k
               i=1 j Di 1 - i                           lR(ti )-Di i                     (18)

where 1 - i is the baseline hazard at each failure time ti , i = 1, ...l, Di is the
set of individuals who fail at time ti , and R (ti ) is the set of individuals at risk
of failing just prior to time ti . Maximizing (18) with respect to i implies the
maximum likelihood estimate of i is the solution to
  27
     There are several methods for dealing with these ties, all requiring assumptions about
the timing of these failures. We present results using the Breslow approximation, one of the
conventional methods and the STATA default. This is based on the assumption that the
subjects failed at different times, but we do not know the order.
  28
     There are several estimators of the baseline hazard rate in a proportional hazards model.
We use the estimator from Kalbfleisch and Prentice (2002), which is also the default in
STATA.




                                               26
                                          exp[Zj (ti )^
                                                       ] -1
                                  ][1 - i
                     exp[Zj (ti )^                    ]       =             exp[Zl (ti )^
                                                                                        ]   (19)
              j Di                                                lR(ti )

    This is solved using an iterative procedure. Because these baseline contri-
butions are functions of the estimated coefficients  on the covariates, to obtain
standard errors, we use a parametric bootstrap in which we draw 10,000 sets of
coefficients using the variance-covariance matrix of our estimated coefficients
and calculate the estimated baseline hazard contribution at each time using
(19).29 We use the standard deviation of these estimated contributions to form
the confidence intervals.
    For robustness, we determine the hazards at each week, rather than for an
interval of weeks, and then smooth using a kernel-smoother and local linear
smoothing. These methods require choices of kernels and bandwidths, and, in
the former case, an approach to addressing bias in the boundary regions.


5.2 Data
We test the model's prediction using the NLSY79, a nationally representative
sample of 12,686 individuals, 14-22 years old when first surveyed in 1979,
with oversamples of blacks, Hispanics and poor whites. These individuals are
surveyed annually through 1994, and biennially afterwards.
   We construct employment spells using the Employer History Roster which
greatly facilitates linking job spells across survey years, by assigning each job
a unique identification number consistent across surveys.30 We define employ-
ment spells as the first fulltime spell with each employer, defining fulltime
as at least 30 hours per week. For each survey year in which an individual
reported employment at a given employer, we collect the start and end week
  29
     For the iterative procedure to solve (19), we use the initial value suggested by Kalbfleisch
and Prentice (2002): 1-i0 = di { lR(ti ) exp[Zl (ti )^   ]}-1 , where di is the number of failures
over the interval.
  30
     Information for jobs six through 10 reported in some of the early survey years may not
have been added by NLSY to the roster due to difficulty recovering these data. This is
unlikely to have a large impact on the results given these jobs are a small proportion of
those ever reported, for a small proportion of individuals (National Longitudinal Survey of
Youth 2019).


                                               27
of employment with that employer reported in the survey. We construct the
total length of the employment spell by grouping all consecutive fulltime spells
at the employer across survey years.
    We treat an employment spell as ending in nonfulltime employment if there
is more than one week between the spell's end and the start of the next fulltime
employment spell, reported at any other employer in any survey year. We treat
all exits into nonfulltime employment as involuntary, regardless of the reason
the spell ended (including the worker being fired, quitting, or losing a job
because of a layoff). For robustness, we also show results from treating quits
into nonfulltime employment as censoring the spell.
    If a spell with an employer ends in a job-to-job transition we treat the
employment spell as censored. We treat spells for which individuals report
employment at the time of the interview but do not respond to the next survey
as censored. Thus, if the individual reports working at the time she was last
surveyed, that spell is censored.
    We restrict the sample to non-Hispanic males and exclude spells in which
the worker ever reports self employment or working for a family business. We
further exclude individuals with missing start or end weeks for any fulltime
spell, and individuals with fulltime spells that end before they begin.31 These
missing or unclear start and end weeks make it difficult to know whether any
of the individual's spells end in nonfulltime employment, and so we exclude
all spells for these individuals.
    The Employer History Roster also shows weeks within a span in which the
individual reported not working at the employer for reasons such as pregnancy,
health issues, quits, and temporary layoffs. Since we do not know whether the
spell is at risk of ending during the gap, our main specifications include only
spells without within-job gaps. This sample restriction excludes about 5000
spells.
    Because the survey is conducted every two years starting in 1994, we do
  31
    Due to rounding week numbers, it is possible that the start week of the span is greater
than the end week. In cases when the start week is up to two weeks greater than the end
week, we replace the start week equal to the end week (National Longitudinal Survey of
Youth 2019).


                                            28
not know the values of some of the control variables in some years and must
impute their values from adjacent years. The online appendix describes these
imputations in detail. In order to avoid excluding individuals with missing
values of the covariates, we include an indicator for whether the individual is
missing the value of the covariate, and set the value of the covariate to zero.
We define occupations as white, blue collar or neither based on Gibbons and
Katz (1991).32
    As Table 1 shows there are nearly 34,700 employment spells in the sample,
which are the first fulltime employment spells at each employer for individuals
in the sample. There are over 23,100 employment spells for white workers and
nearly 11,600 employment spells for black workers. For both, the average spell
duration is approximately 80 weeks. On average there are nearly seven employ-
ment spells for each white worker in the sample, and nearly eight employment
spells for each black worker in the sample. While 55% of white employment
spells end in nonfulltime employment, 63% of black employment spells end
in nonfulltime employment. The table shows other differences between the
average white and black employment spells, including age, education, AFQT,
urban location, blue-collar versus white-collar occupations, and region. Im-
portantly, the stratified Cox proportional hazard models will include these as
covariates.


5.3 Results
Figure 3 shows the hazard estimates using bins. We plot the hazard function
only at durations less than or equal to 1000 weeks because of small sample
sizes with longer durations. We see evidence that a gap opens up by 39 to 52
weeks, with blacks substantially more likely than whites to separate. Although
the estimates become imprecise at longer durations, after ten years there is
little evidence of a gap in the separation rate.
     Appendix Figure A2 shows nonparametric plots with hazards by week
rather than larger bins, smoothed using kernel smoothers with various band-
  32
   Agricultural and private household workers are coded as neither blue nor white collar.
Details in the appendix.

                                           29
                     Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                   White      Black
End in Nonemployment                                 0.55      0.63
                                                      [.5]     [.48]
Duration                                            78.13     76.96
                                                   [159.7]   [146.37]
Age at Spell Start                                  25.21     27.33
                                                    [7.45]    [8.07]
Any College Completed at Spell Start                 0.32      0.25
                                                     [.47]     [.43]
AFQT (standardized)                                   0.3      -0.63
                                                      [1.]     [.76]
Urban Location at Spell Start                        0.74      0.85
                                                     [.44]     [.36]
Region at spell start: Northeast                     0.18      0.16
                                                     [.39]     [.37]
Region at spell start: North Central                 0.28      0.16
                                                     [.45]     [.37]
Region at spell start: South                         0.34      0.59
                                                     [.47]     [.49]
Region at spell start: West                           0.2      0.08
                                                      [.4]     [.28]
Spells per Person                                    6.69       7.9
                                                     [5.1]    [5.25]
Blue Collar Occupation at Spell Start                0.55      0.66
                                                      [.5]     [.47]
White Collar Occupation at Spell Start               0.26       0.2
                                                     [.44]      [.4]
Spells at Risk of Ending in Nonemployment at
200 weeks                                           2220      1077
400 weeks                                            992      435
600 weeks                                            522      214
800 weeks                                            289      114
1000 weeks                                          159        66

Total Spells                                       23112     11580

Notes: Standard deviations in brackets.


                                   30
Figure 3: Nonparametric Estimates of the Hazard into Nonfulltime Employ-
ment by Week Bins: first fulltime spell of non-Hispanic males at each employer.
Confidence intervals based on the estimated standard deviation of the hazard
function at the midpoint of the interval, using that the number of failures in
the interval is a binomial random variable.


widths and kernels, as well as local linear smoothing. Most, but not all, of
these plots show a smaller or nonexistent gap in the first year followed by an
opening of the gap, which closes by roughly year 10.
    One potential reason for the initially higher hazard for white workers in
Figure 3 is that white workers are more likely to quit in the early stages of
their job due to better outside options. While this is not a part of our model,
we estimate an additional specification in which we treat quits as censored
rather than as failures.33 As expected, Appendix Figure A1(a) shows this
reduces the hazard rate and also suggests slightly higher hazards for black
workers starting from the beginning of their employment spell. These results
also suggest a widening of the gap between black and white workers followed
 33
      See appendix for details on coding quits.


                                              31
by convergence. We are inclined to believe that our model fits well past a
normal probationary period of six months to a year but probably does not fully
describe what is going on during the probationary period when all workers are
being scrutinized and workers are trying to figure out whether they want to
stay at the job.
    In Figure 4, we present Cox proportional hazard estimates using the multi-
week intervals as units of time. While the pattern is quite similar to that
in Figure 3, the gap in the hazard rate opens up earlier when adjusting for
individual-level covariates.34
    The online appendix shows additional plots in which we estimate Cox re-
gressions using week rather than larger bins, and smoothing hazard contribu-
tions using kernel smoothers with various bandwidth and kernels, as well as
local linear smoothing. The results also show an initial gap in the hazards of
black and white workers, which eventually becomes nonexistent.
    We also estimated a Cox model with the same covariates, but modeled the
percentage gap between the black and white hazards to be a cubic in seniority.
To allow the effect of race on the hazard to vary over time, we include an
observation for each job spell at each failure time in the data (as Cox models
are only estimated when failures occur). We find that the gap at week 1 is a
statistically significant 6.7 percent but initially grows (Appendix Figure A3).
Over the range from 1 to 1000 weeks, the gap hits its maximum of 74 percent
at 294 weeks (roughly five years and eight months). It then falls, ceasing to
be significant at the 5% level at approximately twelve years and six months,
and continues falling for durations through 872 weeks (nearly 17 years). At
872 weeks, the point estimate suggests a gap of 8.3%.
  34
     Workers in blue-collar occupations at the start of the spell have higher hazards while
those with at least some college, higher AFQTs, and who are older have lower hazards
(details in the online appendix). The larger initial gap between blacks and whites in the
Cox estimation than in the nonparametric estimation is importantly affected by controlling
for age at start of spell and fixed effects for year of spell start. Because they have more spells,
blacks on average are older at spell start. Controlling for year of spell start, older workers
have lower hazards. As a result, controlling for the fact that blacks are on average older at
spell start shifts up their baseline hazard relative to not controlling for this difference.




                                                32
Figure 4: Estimates of the Hazard into Nonfulltime Employment by Week
Bins, Based on a Cox Model Stratified by Race. Confidence intervals based
on a parametric bootstrap of 10,000 sets of coefficients.


5.4 Robustness
The incentive to monitor new workers is relevant mainly for individuals hired
out of nonemployment. For robustness, we identify employment spells for
which the individual entered from nonemployment, and restrict to those spells.
We continue to see that a gap in black-white hazards disappears over time with
some suggestive evidence that convergence takes a longer time, more than ten
years.
    In the main specification, if there are any gaps in employment at an em-
ployer, the employment spells are treated separately, and we include only the
first of these spells. As discussed above, there are two ways in which an
individual can report gaps at an employer. The individual could report mul-
tiple employment spells at the same employer, reporting a start and end week
for each span. Additionally, for any given spell the individual can report a


                                     33
within-job gap at the employer and the start and end week of that gap. For
robustness, we treat gaps of less than or equal to 26 weeks as continuations
of the same employment spell at the employer, but subtract the length of the
gap from the duration. The appendix shows the hazard functions for this
robustness specification look quite similar to the principal results.
    Results also look similar when restricting to workers who are no more than
30 at the start of the spell. Finally, for robustness we treat transitions to
part-time employment as censoring the spell rather than as spells ending in
nonemployment. This has little effect on the results (see appendix).


6 Conclusion
We develop a model that predicts known disparities between blacks and whites:
blacks earn lower wages, have longer unemployment duration, and obtain more
education conditional on measured ability. It also predicts one previously un-
studied disparity: the hazard for separation from employment into unemploy-
ment is higher for blacks at low tenure but the hazard rates converge as tenure
increases. As we have argued previously, while the model, of necessity, relies on
some special assumptions, the key elements are 1) that worker productivity is
correlated across jobs, 2) that ability is neither perfectly observed or signalled
and workers can to some extent hide past firings, 3) that firms therefore use
race to statistically infer worker ability, 4) that additional information arrives
during employment and is either imperfect, costly or both so that a worker's
productivity can never be known perfectly at zero cost, and 5) that firms can
and do act on new information by firing some workers.
    The prediction is largely confirmed. In our stratified Cox models, condi-
tional on observables, at the beginning of a job black workers are more likely to
exit the job into unemployment. There is little evidence of a gap after roughly
10 years of seniority. Contrary to the model's prediction, many but not all
of our results show that conditional on observables the gap is much smaller
over roughly the first year on the job before growing. Obviously, it is up to
the reader to decide how problematic this is. Our interpretation is that the

                                       34
first year is a period when all worker/firm pairs are discovering whether they
are grossly mismatched, information that both the worker and firm receive
for free. The mechanism we underline becomes increasingly important with
tenure and dominates after this initial probationary period.
    Our message is in some ways depressing. Simply addressing education
or human capital disparities between blacks and whites need not eliminate
labor market disparities. The `bad equilibrium' in which many blacks find
themselves is difficult to escape.




                                     35
References
Autor, David H. and David Scarborough, 2008. "Does Job Testing Harm
    Minority Workers? Evidence from Retail Establishments," Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 123(1):219-277.

Becker, Gary S. 1971. The Economics of Discrimination, 2nd edition. Chicago,
    IL: Chicago University Press.

Bjerk, David. 2008. "Glass Ceilings or Sticky Floors? Statistical Discrimina-
    tion in a Dynamic Model of Hiring and Promotion." Economic Journal,
    118(530): 961-982.

Black, Dan A. 1995. "Discrimination in an Equilibrium Search Model." Jour-
    nal of Labor Economics, 13(2): 309-333.

Bowlus, Audra J., and Zvi Eckstein. 2002. "Discrimination and Skill Differ-
   ences in an Equilibrium Search Model." International Economic Review,
   43(2): 1309-1345.

Bowlus, A. J., Kiefer, N. M. and Neumann, G. R. 2001. "Equilibrium Search
   Models and the Transition from School to Work."International Economic
   Review, 42(2), 317-343.

Cameron, A. Colin and Pravin K. Trivedi. 2009. Microeconometrics: Meth-
   ods and Applications, 8th edition. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
   University Press.

Cavounidis, Costas and Kevin Lang. 2015. "Discrimination and Worker
    Evaluation." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
    21612.

Charles, Kerwin, and Jonathan Guryan. 2008. "Prejudice and The Eco-
    nomics of Discrimination." Journal of Political Economy, 116(5): 773-
    809.



                                    36
Coate, Stephen, and Glenn C. Loury. 1993. "Will affirmative-action Policies
    Eliminate Negative Stereotypes?" American Economic Review, 83(5):
    1220­1240.

Coates, Ta-Nehisi. 2012. "Fear of a Black President."The Atlantic. Retrieved
    on January 12th, 2016 from: http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2012/09/fear-
    of-a-black-president/309064/#

Epanechnikov, V. A. 1969. "Non-Parametric Estimation of a Multivariate
   Probability Density." Theory of Probability and its Applications, 14(1):
   153-158.

Fairlie, Robert W. and William A. Sundstrom. 1999. "The Emergence,
     Persistence, and Recent Widening of the Racial Unemployment Gap."
     Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 52(2): 252-70.

Fryer Jr., Roland G. 2007. "Belief Flipping in a Dynamic Model of Statistical
    Discrimination. Journal of Public Economics, 91(5-6): 1151-1166.

Gehan, Edmund A. 1969. "Estimating Survival Functions From The Life
   Table." Journal of Chronic Diseases. 21: 629-644.

Guardian, 2014. "Prince: Black People Don't Get Second Chances," Febru-
   ary 25, 2014, http://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/feb/25/prince-
   black-people-dont-get-second-chances, accessed January 24, 2015.

Kalbfleisch, J. D., and R. L. Prentice. 2002. The Statistical Analysis of
    Failure Time Data. 2nd ed. New York: Wiley.

Klein, J. P., and Ml. L. Moeschberger. 2003. Survival Analysis: Techniques
    for Censored and Truncated Data. 2nd ed. New York: Springer.

Lang, Kevin. 1986. "A Language Theory of Discrimination." Quarterly Jour-
    nal of Economics, 101(2): 363-382.

Lang, Kevin and Jee-Yeon K. Lehmann. 2012. "Racial Discrimination in the
    Labor Market: Theory and Empirics." Journal of Economic Literature.
    50(4): 959-1006.

                                    37
Lang, Kevin, and Michael Manove. 2003. "Wage Announcements with a
    Continuum of Types." Annales d'Economie et de Statistique. 71-72:
    223-244.

Lang, Kevin, and Michael Manove. 2011. "Education and Labor Market
    Discrimination." American Economic Review, 101(4): 1467-1496.

Lang, Kevin, Michael Manove, and William T. Dickens. 2005. "Racial Dis-
    crimination in Markets with Announced Wages." American Economic
    Review, 95(4):1327-40.

Lauermann, Stephan and Wolinsky, Asher. 2016. "Search with adverse se-
    lection. "Econometrica, 84(1):243-315.

Lundberg, Shelly J., and Richard Startz. 1983. "Private Discrimination and
   Social Intervention in Competitive Labor Markets." American Economic
   Review, 73(3): 340-7.

Mabry, Marcus. 2007. Twice as Good: Condoleezza Rice and Her Path to
   Power. New York: Modern Times. Print.

MacLeod, W. Bentley, 2003. "Optimal Contracting with Subjective Evalua-
   tion." American Economic Review, 93(1):216-240.

Masters, Adrian. "Statistical discrimination from composition effects in the
   market for low-skilled workers." Labour Economics, 26 (2014): 72-80.

Moro, Andrea, and Peter Norman. 2004. "A General Equilibrium Model of
   Statistical Discrimination." Journal of Economic Theory, 114(1): 1-30.

National Longitudianl Survey of Youth. 2019. "NLSY 1979 Appendix 18:
    Work History Data. " https://www.nlsinfo.org/content/cohorts/nlsy79/other-
    documentation/codebook-supplement/nlsy79-appendix-18-work-history-
    data, accessed, April 15, 2019.

Neal, Derek A., and William R. Johnson. 1996. "The Role of Premarket
    Factors in Black-White Wage Differences." Journal of Political Economy,
    104(5): 869-95.

                                    38
Peski, Marcin, and Balazs Szentes. 2013. "Spontaneous Discrimination."
    American Economic Review, 103(6): 2412-36.

Reid, Alvin. 2015. "Black Head Coaches Don't Get Second Chances," St.
    Louis American, Aug 31, 2015, http://newpittsburghcourieronline.com/2015/08/31/black-
    head-coaches-dont-get-second-chances, accessed, January 24, 2016.

Rosen, Asa. 1997."An Equilibrium Search-Matching Model of Discrimina-
    tion." European Economic Review, 41(8): 1589-1613.

Rubinstein, Ariel. 1982."Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model."Econometrica
    50(1): 97-109.

Spencer, DeShuna. 2014. "For Black Youth in America, There Are No Second
    Chances," emPower, February 5, 2014, http://www.empowermagazine.com/black-
    youth-america-second-chances, accessed January 24, 2016.

Wozniak, Abigail. 2015. "Discrimination and the Effects of Drug Testing on
   Black Employment."Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(3): 548-566.




                                   39
A Appendix
A.1 Proof of Lemma 1
Proof. Define the quantities

                  Flow mass of workers born per unit time
       A          Mass of unemployed black type  workers
       B          Mass of unemployed black type  workers
                  Mass of currently monitored black type  workers



    As g is the fraction of new workers that is type  and unemployed  workers
are becoming employed each at a Poisson rate µ and never separate, A obeys

                               dA
                                  = g - µA
                               dt

    Similarly, a proportion (1-g ) of new workers is type  and such unemployed
workers are also being hired at a Poisson rate µ each. However, as  workers
who are of type  are being monitored, a flow mass (1 -  ) of black 
workers are separating after monitoring reveals a bad match are also coming
in to the black unemployed pool. Hence, B obeys

                     dB
                        =  (1 - g ) - µB + (1 -  ).
                     dt

   Finally, unemployed  workers are becoming employed with monitoring
at a Poisson rate µ and once they are employed they cease being monitored
when match quality is revealed, which occurs at a rate . Thus the mass of
monitored black  workers  must satisfy

                               d
                                  = µB - .
                               dt

                                     40
   Steady state implies that

                               dA   dB   d
                                  =    =    = 0.
                               dt   dt   dt

   Solving, we obtain
                                                g
                                         A=
                                                µ
                                            (1 - g )
                                     B=
                                              µ
and therefore the proportion of  workers in the unemployed pool is
                                       g
                          A            µ                     g
                             =             -g )
                                                  =         1             .
                         A+B        g
                                    µ
                                      + (1
                                         µ
                                                       g+   
                                                              (1   - g)

   Thus, a new match from the black job-seeker pool is of average quality

            g                              g                           
           1             ·1+   1-        1              · =                      B .
      g+   
             (1   - g)              g+   
                                           (1   - g)               g + (1 - g )

As  < 1 this is less than W .


A.2 Proof of Lemma 3
Proof. As we require that strategies are not weakly dominated and form a
PBE, the worker must at every wage draw be using an undominated action.
As the worker's action doesn't affect his payoff if the firm rejects the wage,
but does if the firm accepts it, she must always act as though the firm will
accept the wage. Then, it follows that  workers will accept the wage offer if

                                            
                                       w  rU .                                         (20)

On the other hand,  workers will accept wages of

                                             
                                        w  rU                                          (21)


                                           41
regardless of whether they think the firm is likely to monitor and possibly
fire them.35 As  workers can mimic the  acceptance rule and not suffer
                              
separation, we have U     U    .
                                                                             
    There are thus no wages  workers accept that  workers do not. If U         >
   
U there are wages that  workers accept that  workers do not; but then the
firm will assign probability 1 to a worker accepting such a wage being type 
                                                             
and by (C 1) refuse such a wage. Thus no wage below rU          is ever accepted
by both parties. On the other hand, since all workers accept higher wages,
accepting such a wage does not shift beliefs; therefore, firms will accept all
                      
wages higher than rU     at which they make profits when they believe . The
requirement that the firm makes nonnegative expected profit corresponds to
                  w         w
at least one of V,M  and V,N    being positive; as they both are decreasing and
continuous in w, we have that there is a single upper cutoff

                                       w     w
                       w = max{w| max{V,M , V,N }  0}.                              (22)

The fact that wB and wW are positive follows from C4 and the fact that both
 w         w                                                             
V,M  and V,N   are increasing in . Accordingly the lower cutoff is w = rU  .



A.3 Proof of Proposition 1
Proof. First, we show that in the white labor market, at the maximal wage
wW , the employer does not monitor the worker. Suppose w = q - (1 - W )c.
Then we have

                           q-w              q - w - c   b
              Vw
               W ,M
                    = W          + (1 - W )           -                             (23)
                             r                 +r       +r
                           1                      b
              Vw
               W ,M
                       =         W (1 - W )c -                                      (24)
                         r( + r)                  
  35                                                      
    Considerations about monitoring by other firms enter U , but the worker's decision to
accept a match does not depend on whether the firm will monitor.




                                           42
From C2 this expression is negative. As Vw W ,M
                                                is decreasing in w, we must have
that wW = q - (1 - W )c. Therefore, no monitoring occurs at the upper end
of the equilibrium wage interval. From Lemma 2 we have that the employer's
monitoring decision is increasing in w; therefore, there is no monitoring in the
market with belief W . Given that, W = 0 is the resulting steady state belief
about newly hired workers.
    The average wage in the market is therefore


  avg                                  µ          µ+r
 w    = .5wW + .5wW = .5wW + .5             w W =        [q - (1 - W )c]. (25)
   W
                                     µ + 2r       µ + 2r




A.4 Proof of Proposition 2
Proof. Consider the wage at which the firm would break even if it does not
monitor, wn
          B . It is given by


                   q - (1 - B ) - wn
                                   B = 0                                   (26)
                                   wn
                                    B = q - (1 - B )c.                     (27)

Assume for contradiction that this is the highest equilibrium wage. As the
monitoring decision is increasing in w, it must also not monitor at the lowest
                                           µ   n
equilibrium wage, which by (8) is wnB = µ+2r w B . Furthermore, we have from
(6) that such a non-monitoring wage must satisfy

                                             rb
                          wn
                           B  q - c +             .                        (28)
                                           (1 - )

But that implies
                      b           c(B µ + 2r) - 2rq
                         (1 - B )                   ,                      (29)
                                     r(µ + 2r)
a direct contradiction to (C3). Therefore, we conclude that the firm would
                       µ
monitor at a wage of µ+2  wn , that the highest equilibrium wage is the break-
                         r B



                                      43
even monitoring wage wm                  m     n
                          B , and that w B > w B . It then follows from the fact
        µ
that µ+2   wn was a wage at which the firm would monitor and the increasing
          r B
                                                        µ
monitoring decision that the firm would monitor at µ+2     wm , as well. There-
                                                          r B
fore, all workers are monitored and the average unemployed worker's quality
is in steady state at B .
    The average wage in the back labor market is thus


 avg                                   µ         µ+r       r(c(1 - B ) + b)
w    = .5wB +.5wB = .5wm
                       B +.5                wm
                                             B =        q-                   .
  B
                                     µ + 2r      µ + 2r        B + r
                                                                        (30)



A.5 Empirical Appendix
A.5.1 Constructing Individual Covariates

The stratified Cox estimation adjusts for whether the individual has completed
at least some college at the time the employment spell begins. If the individual
is surveyed in the year the employment spell begins, this is simply an indicator
for whether highest grade completed that year is at least 13. If the individual
is not surveyed in that year, we impute the value of this variable as described
below.
    If the highest grade completed is the same in the previous and subsequent
surveys, we impute the value for highest grade completed in the survey of
interest. We first impute the values for survey years based on previous and
subsequent surveys. After imputing these, we impute the value for nonsurvey
years based on previous and subsequent surveys.36
    The indicator for completion of any college at the time the spell began
will still be missing for individuals whose spell begins in nonsurvey years,
  36
    This addresses the problem arising from missing highest grade completed in 1998, but
nonmissing in 1996 and 2000. Imputing the nonsurvey years and the survey years together,
the value in 1997 would still be missing since the next survey year is 1998. Imputing
the survey years first implies that 1998 becomes nonmissing, and so then 1997 becomes
nonmissing as well because both 1996 and 1998 are nonmissing.


                                          44
and whose highest grade completed changes between the previous and the
subsequent surveys. For these individuals, we impute the value of any college
at the beginning of the spell using highest grade completed at the last survey
before the start of the spell, and years since this survey. For example, if the
highest grade completed at the last survey was at least 13, then we impute a
value of one for any college at the beginning of the spell. If the highest grade
completed at the last survey was 11, and there was less than or equal to one
year between the last survey and the beginning of the spell, then the individual
has not completed at least 13 years of education at the time the spell begins.
We impute a value of zero.
    If the individual is not surveyed in the year the spell begins, we determine
the individual's geographic region at the beginning of the spell, and whether
they live in an urban or rural location, using the value of these variables in
surrounding years. We impute only if the value of these variables is the same
in the previous and subsequent surveys.
    We standardize AFQT scores so they have a mean of zero and standard
deviation of one.

A.5.2 Kernel- and Local-Linear Smoothing to Obtain Hazard Estimates: Methods

The principal results use intervals of weeks to smooth the hazard estimates.
For robustness, we use week as a unit of time, the smallest unit of time for
which we know employment status. We obtain the steps (hazard contribu-
tions) of the Nelson-Aalen cumulative hazard, and smooth them using a kernel
smoother.37 We obtain the cumulative hazard separately for black and white
workers.
    The cumulative hazard at time tj is denoted H (tj ). Then, the hazard
contributions at each time tj in which some individual moves from employment
  37                                       ^ (t) =           d j
     The Nelson-Aalen cumulative hazard is H          j |tj t nj , where dj is the number of
failures at time tj and nj is the number at risk of failure at time tj . The steps of this
                      d
function are equal to njj
                          .




                                            45
to nonemployment are defined as:

                                ^ (tj ) = H
                                H         ^ (tj ) - H
                                                    ^ (tj -1 )                               (31)

       We plot the smoothed hazard function separately for black and white work-
ers
                                            D
                             ^ (t) = b-1                 t - tj  ^ (tj )
                             h                    Kt (          )H                           (32)
                                           j =1
                                                           b

    The hazard estimate at time t, h(t), is based on the the hazard contri-
butions H^ (tj ) at all failure times j , where each contribution is weighted by
the kernel function K and bandwidth b. We use the Epanechnikov kernel,
with the bandwidth equal to .5*Silverman's plug-in estimate.38 This yields a
bandwidth of 75 for black workers and 87 for white workers.
    We use a boundary-adjusted Epanechnikov kernel (based on M¨         uller and
Wang (1994)) to address bias in the boundary regions (tmin  t < b; tmax - b <
t  tmax ) from using a symmetric kernel. As a further alternative to using a
boundary-adjusted kernel, we show hazard estimates only outside the bound-
ary region. For those results, we smooth the hazard contributions using the
version of the Epanechnikov kernel described in Epanechnikov (1969).39 This
yields equivalent results to the version of the Epanechnikov kernel described
in the paper if the bandwidth in the principal specifications in the paper is
            
divided by 5. This implies the boundary region is smaller when using this
kernel, which is helpful given we plot only outside the boundary. These plots
show a clear gap at the boundary of roughly 35-40 weeks which closes over
time.
    We also smooth the hazards using kernel-weighted local linear regression
  38
     The version of the Epanechnikov kernel we refer to here is K [z ] = .75(1 - z 2 ) if |z | < 1.
Silverman's plug-in estimate is given by b = 1.3643N -.2 min(s, iqr/1.349) where  depends
on the kernel and is 1.7188 for the Epanechnikov kernel, N is the number of unique failure
times, s is the sample standard deviation of the failure times and iqr is the interquartile
range of the failure times. Cameron and Trivedi (2005) suggest using Silverman's plug-in
estimate, as well as bandwidths half and twice the size. Because Silverman's plug-in estimate
for the bandwidth is quite large, we present estimates using bandwidths half the size as well
as the actual Silverman plug-in estimate.
                                     
  39                  1 2
     K [z ] = .75(1 - 5 z ) if |z | < 5


                                                  46
which does not yield biased estimates in the boundary regions (see Nielsen and
Tanggaard 2001 and Cameron and Trivedi 2005).
    We additionally estimate Cox models stratified by race, and use the same
Epanechnikov kernel and bandwidth as in the nonparametric specifications to
smooth the baseline hazard contributions from the Cox model. These models
include the same covariates as in the principal results.


A.6 Coding Quits
The respondents' choices for why they left their job change with the surveys.
For most years the reasons why the respondent left their job include several
which are explicitly named "quits" for example quit for pregnacy or family
reasons or quit to look for another job, and several which are clearly not quit
related. In the first survey year, as well as the surveys starting in 2002, there
are several additional categories that do not include the word "quit" that we
code as quits as they are arguably voluntary separations.
    In 1979, these include "Pregnancy" and family changed jobs or moved, or
family reasons. In years after 2002, these include "transportation problems"
"no desirable assignments available" "retirement" "job assigned through a
temp agency or a contract firm became permanent" and "dissatisfied with job
matching service". There are few instances of spells ending for these reasons.


A.7 Blue- and White-Collar Workers
We use data on occupation from the Employer Roster. Up until 2000, the
1970 Census occupation codes are used to define blue- and white-collar work-
ers. We define the following as white collar: managers, officials, and propri-
etors; professional, technical, and kindred; clerical and kindred; sales workers.
The following are defined as blue collar: craftsmen, foremen, and kindred; op-
eratives and kindred; laborers, except farm; service workers, except private
household. Starting in 2002, the 2000 Census occupation codes are used. The
following codes are defined as white collar: management; business and finan-
cial operations; computer and mathematical; architecture and engineering;

                                       47
legal; education, training, and library; arts, design, entertainment, sports, me-
dia (except equipment workers); healthcare practitioners and technical; sales
and related; office and administrative support; life, physical, and social sci-
ences; community and social services. The following are defined as blue collar:
healthcare support; protective service; food preparation and serving related;
building and grounds cleaning and maintenance; personal care and service;
construction and extraction; installation, repair, and maintenance; produc-
tion; transportation and material moving; arts, design, entertainment, sports,
and media (only equipment workers).
    There are several individuals in the main sample who have employment
roster data, but are not in the occupation roster data. Other individuals are
in the occupation roster data, but do not have a valid occupation code. Both of
these groups of individuals are coded as missing occupation, and have a value
of zero for the indicators for whether they are blue- or white-collar workers,
or neither blue- nor white-collar workers. Through 2002, invalid occupation
codes include those less than or equal to zero, or greater than or equal to 995.
Starting in 2004, invalid occupation codes include those less than or equal to
zero, or greater than or equal to 9950.
    There is one individual in the main sample with the same week intervals at
the same employer, reported in two consecutive survey years, and who reports
a valid occupation code in one year but not the other. We take the observation
with the valid occupation code. For this individual, in one year the reported
start week is one week greater than the end week. As discussed in the paper,
we set the start week equal to the end week for these observations because of
the possibility of rounding week numbers. After making this adjustment, the
start and end weeks are the same across the two consecutive survey years for
this individual.




                                       48
References
Cameron, A. Colin and Pravin K. Trivedi. 2009. Microeconometrics: Meth-
   ods and Applications, 8th edition. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
   University Press.

Epanechnikov, V. A. 1969. "Non-Parametric Estimation of a Multivariate
   Probability Density." Theory of Probability and its Applications, 14(1):
   153-158.

Nielsen, Jens Perch and Carsten Tanggaard. 2001. "Boundary and Bias Cor-
     rection in Kernel Hazard Estimation." Scandinavian Journal of Statis-
     tics, 28: 675-698.




                                   49
Appendix Figure A1: Robustness Hazard Estimates using Week Bins

   (a) Quits as Censoring the Spell, Nonparametric                        (b) Quits as Censoring the Spell, Cox




                                                             .6
                                                             .4
                                                             .2
                                                             0
                                                                  0                 259                      519     1195
                                                                                    Duration in Job Spell (Weeks)

                                                                                           White             Black




 (c) Enter Spell from Nonemployment, Nonparametric                     (d) Enter Spell from Nonemployment, Cox



                                                             1
                                                             .8
                                                             .6
                                                             .4
                                                             .2
                                                             0




                                                                  0                 259                      519     1195
                                                                                    Duration in Job Spell (Weeks)

                                                                                           White             Black



(e) 26 Week Interruptions as Same Spell, Nonparametric                (f) 26 Week Interruptions as Same Spell, Cox
                                                             .8
                                                             .6
                                                             .4
                                                             .2
                                                             0




                                                                  0                 259                      519     1195
                                                                                    Duration in Job Spell (Weeks)

                                                                                           White             Black
       (g) Including Parttime Spells, Nonparametric                                             (h) Including Parttime Spells, Cox




                                                                                    .8
                                                                                    .6
                                                                                    .4
                                                                                    .2
                                                                                    0
                                                                                         0                259                      519             1195
                                                                                                          Duration in Job Spell (Weeks)

                                                                                                                 White             Black




         (i) Age  30 at Spell Start, Nonparametric                                                  (j) Age  30 at Spell Start, Cox




                                                                                    .8
                                                                                    .6
                                                                                    .4
                                                                                    .2
                                                                                    0




                                                                                         0                259                      519             1195
                                                                                                          Duration in Job Spell (Weeks)

                                                                                                                 White             Black




Notes: This figure presents robustness results, using both nonparametric methods and stratified Cox regressions. These are the same methods as
used in the principal results described in Figures 3 and 4. The plots in (a) and (b) treat quits into nonemployment as censoring the employment
spell, rather than the spell ending in nonemployment. The plots in (c) and (d) restrict to employment spells for which the individual entered from
nonemployment. The plots in (e) and (f) treat  26 week gaps in spells at the same employer as the same spell. The plots in (g) and (h) include
parttime spells and treat transitions to parttime employment as censored rather than as failures. The plots in (i) and (j) restrict to spells for which
the individual was less than or equal to 30 at the start of the spell. For all plots showing confidence intervals, bands around estimates are 95%
confidence intervals.
Appendix Figure A2: Robustness Kernel-Smoothed Hazard Estimates

            (a) Boundary-adjusted, Smaller Bandwidth,                        (b) Boundary-adjusted, Smaller Bandwidth, Cox
                           Nonparametric




                                                                       .08
 .02




                                                                       .06
 .015




                                                                       .04
 .01




                                                                       .02
 .005




                                                                       0
 0




        0          200        400             600         800   1000         0       200        400             600         800   1000
                         Duration in Job Spell (Weeks)                                     Duration in Job Spell (Weeks)

                                White             Black                                           White             Black




            (c) Boundary-adjusted, Larger Bandwidth,                         (d) Boundary-adjusted, Larger Bandwidth, Cox
                         Nonparametric
                                                                       .08
 .02




                                                                       .06
 .015




                                                                       .04
 .01




                                                                       .02
 .005




                                                                       0
 0




        0          200        400             600         800   1000         0       200        400             600         800   1000
                         Duration in Job Spell (Weeks)                                     Duration in Job Spell (Weeks)

                                White             Black                                           White             Black




   (e) Exclude Boundary Region, Smaller Bandwidth,                     (f) Exclude Boundary Region, Smaller Bandwidth, Cox
                   Nonparametric
 .01




                                                                       .05
 .008




                                                                       .04
 .006




                                                                       .03
 .004




                                                                       .02
 .002




                                                                       .01
 0




                                                                       0




        0          200        400             600         800   1000         0       200        400             600         800   1000
                         Duration in Job Spell (Weeks)                                     Duration in Job Spell (Weeks)

                                White             Black                                           White             Black
         (g) Local Linear Smoothing, Smaller Bandwidth,                                   (h) Local Linear Smoothing, Larger Bandwidth,
                          Nonparametric                                                                   Nonparametric




                                                                                   .02
  .02




                                                                                   .015
  .015




                                                                                   .01
  .01




                                                                                   .005
  .005
  0




                                                                                   0
         0        200         400             600         800    1000                     0       200         400             600         800    1000
                         Duration in Job Spell (Weeks)                                                   Duration in Job Spell (Weeks)

                                White             Black                                                         White             Black




Notes: The plot in (a) presents kernel-smoothed hazard contributions from the Nelson-Aalen cumulative hazard, using the boundary-adjusted
alternative Epanechnikov kernel, with bandwidth equal to 87 weeks for whites and 75 weeks for blacks, these are one half of the Silverman plug in
for this kernel (174 weeks for whites, 149 weeks for blacks). The plot in (b) presents kernel-smoothed hazard contributions from a Cox
Proportional Hazards model, stratified by race. The kernel and the bandwidth are the same as those in (a). The explanatory variables in the Cox
model are the same as those included in Figure 4. The plots in (c) and (d) are analogous to (a) and (b), but use the Silverman plug-in bandwidth
rather than half of the Silverman plug-in bandwidth as in (a) and (b). The plots in (e) and (f) are analogous to (a) and (b), but use the Epanechnikov
kernel (1969 version), with bandwidth equal to half the Silverman plug in for this kernel, and show results only outside the boundary regions. The
plot in (g) uses local linear smoothing of the hazard contributions, using the alternative Epanechnikov kernel with bandwidth equal to half the
Silverman plug-in estimate. The plot in (h) is the same as in (g), but uses the Silverman plug-in estimate as the bandwidth. For all plots showing
confidence intervals, bands around estimates are 95% confidence intervals. Vertical lines show boundary regions for black and white workers.
Appendix Figure A3: Black to White Hazard Ratio Controlling for Covariates in a Cox Model, Allowing
the Percentage Gap in Hazards to be a Cubic in Seniority



                        2
          Black to White Hazard Ratio
               1        .5    1.5




                                        0   200        400            600         800          1000
                                                  Duration in Job Spell (Weeks)




Notes: This is a plot of the Black to White Hazard ratio from a Cox model controlling for the same
covariates included in Figure 4. Additionally, we include an indicator for black, and interact this with a
cubic in seniority (duration in job spell in weeks). In order to allow the effect of race to vary over time,
we include an observation for each job spell at each failure time in the data (as Cox models are only
estimated when failures occur in the data). We obtain the linear combination of the coefficients on
black, for values of week from 1 to 1000. We then exponentiate these to obtain the hazard ratio.
Dashed lines are the 95% confidence intervals.
Appendix Table A1: Coefficients from Cox Model Stratified by Race

Any College Completed at Spell Start                -0.0713***
                                                      [0.0200]
Any College Completed at Spell Start Missing            0.101
                                                       [0.171]
AFQT (standardized)                                 -0.0260***
                                                     [0.00932]
AFQT (standardized) Missing                            -0.0461
                                                      [0.0339]
Region at spell start: Northeast                    -0.0912***
                                                      [0.0261]
Region at spell start: North Central                 -0.0578**
                                                      [0.0245]
Region at spell start: South                         -0.164***
                                                      [0.0233]
Region at spell start: Missing                       -0.183***
                                                      [0.0524]
Urban Location at Spell Start                         -0.00161
                                                      [0.0194]
Urban Location at Spell Start Missing                  -0.0321
                                                      [0.0371]
Blue Collar Occupation at Spell Start                 0.327***
                                                      [0.0203]
Non-Blue Non-White Collar Occupation at Spell Start 0.543***
                                                      [0.0601]
Occupation at Spell Start Missing                     1.413***
                                                      [0.0280]
Age at Spell Start                                  -0.0553***
                                                     [0.00341]
Observations                                            34692

Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors in parentheses. Coefficients are from a Cox
Proportional Hazards model stratified by race, using week bin as a unit of time. Each observation is
a job spell. We model hazard into nonemployment, and the failure variable is an indicator for
whether the job spell ended in nonemployment. See text for details.
