                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DIVERGENT: THE TIME PATH OF LEGACY AND ATHLETE ADMISSIONS AT
                               HARVARD

                                       Peter Arcidiacono
                                         Josh Kinsler
                                        Tyler Ransom

                                      Working Paper 26315
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26315


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019




Peter Arcidiacono served as an expert witness for Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. (SFFA) in
the SFFA v. Harvard case. SFFA is not funding his work on this paper. Josh Kinsler worked as
a consultant for SFFA in the SFFA v. Harvard case. SFFA is not funding his work on this
paper. The views expressed and conclusions reached in this paper are those of the authors; they
do not purport to reflect the views of SFFA. To the extent this paper relies on records from the
SFFA v. Harvard case, it relies solely on the public records from the case. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Peter Arcidiacono, Josh Kinsler, and Tyler Ransom. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Divergent: The Time Path of Legacy and Athlete Admissions at Harvard
Peter Arcidiacono, Josh Kinsler, and Tyler Ransom
NBER Working Paper No. 26315
September 2019
JEL No. I23,I24,J15

                                          ABSTRACT

Applications to elite US colleges have more than doubled over the past 20 years, with little
change in the number of available seats. We examine how this increased competition has affected
the admissions advantage that legacies and athletes (LA) receive. Using data on Harvard
applications over 18 years, we show that non-legacy, non-athlete (NLNA) applications grew
considerably and that LA applications remained flat. Yet, the share of LA admits remained stable,
implying substantial increases in admissions advantages for legacies and athletes. We develop a
simple theoretical model of university admissions to frame our empirical analysis. Viewed
through the lens of the model, stability in the share of LA admits implies that elite colleges treat
the number of LA admits and overall admit quality as complements. Our empirical analysis
reveals that, if the admissions advantages for LA applicants had been constant throughout this
period, there would have been a large increase in the number of minority admits.

Peter Arcidiacono                                Tyler Ransom
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
201A Social Sciences Building                    University of Oklahoma
Duke University                                  158 CCD1
Durham, NC 27708                                 308 Cate Center Drive
and NBER                                         Norman, OK 73072
psarcidi@econ.duke.edu                           ransom@ou.edu

Josh Kinsler
University of Georgia
jkinsler@uga.edu
1         Introduction
Admissions at elite colleges in the US have become increasingly competitive. Application
rates have soared with little change in the number of seats available (Smith, 2018). For the
Class of 2023, Harvard College received 43,330 applications and only admitted 1,950 (Caldera
and Mohammadzadeh, 2019).1 As a result of the increased competition for a fixed number
of seats, the preferences elite colleges give to specialized applicant groups have received
greater scrutiny (Desai, 2018). The college admissions scandal that came to light in early
2019 was especially incendiary, in part because it showed that elite colleges' preference for
athletes gives further opportunity to applicants from wealthy backgrounds who may not be
as academically qualified as the typical admitted student (Chappell and Kennedy, 2019).
        In this paper, we examine how increased competition for spots at elite colleges has af-
fected the admissions outcomes of legacies and athletes. We focus on Harvard applicants for
the Classes of 2000 to 2017 where--as a result of the Students for Fair Admissions v. Har-
vard lawsuit--information on admissions for legacies and athletes (LA) and those who are
neither legacies or athletes (NLNA) was unsealed (see Trial Exhibit DX 042).2 The overall
application trends at Harvard during this time frame parallel the trends in the elite college
market, with total applications almost doubling over the period. Yet, the rise in applications
to Harvard was driven almost entirely by growth in NLNA applications. Consequently, LA
applicants accounted for an increasingly smaller share of the applicant pool, falling from
7.5% to 4%.
        To frame how a university might respond to a substantial increase in NLNA applications,
we develop a simple theoretical model of university admissions. We show that if a university
views the quality of admitted students and the number of LA admits as substitutes, then
increasing NLNA applicants will decrease the number of LA admits. As the NLNA applicant
pool expands, Harvard would be willing to reduce the number of LA admits in favor of higher
quality NLNA applicants. However, student quality and the number of LA admits could
also be complements if, for example, legacy admits boost fundraising and the productivity
    1
    Class refers to the year applicants would graduate from Harvard if they did so in four years.
    2
    Legacy refers to those who have at least one parent who attended Harvard. Admissions information
is not separately available for legacy and athlete applicants. As a result, all of the analysis in this paper
combines these two categories.


                                                     2
of institutional spending is increasing in student quality.3 In this case, the relationship
between the number of the NLNA applicants and the number of LA admits is ambiguous. A
substantial increase in NLNA applicants can then result in large changes in the admissions
rates of NLNA applicants with little change in the admissions rates for LA applicants. This
best describes what we observe at Harvard.
       Despite the significant drop in the LA applicant share, Harvard data show no time trend
in the share of admits who are legacies or athletes. This share has been relatively stable over
time at an average of 24%. The large difference in the LA share of applicants and admits
reflects the very high admit rates for legacies and athletes, with admit rates ranging from
41% to 48% over this period.4 For the Class of 2000, admit rates were four times higher for
legacies and recruited athletes than for NLNA applicants. But by the Class of 2017, admit
rates were nine times higher for legacies and recruited athletes.
       While the application and admission patterns we observe are consistent with comple-
mentary preferences over LA admits and admit quality, an alternative hypothesis is that
NLNA applicants became relatively weaker over time. We provide evidence that this is
unlikely. First, Harvard data on applicant SAT scores over this time period show a slight
upward trend, implying that the quality of NLNA applicants increased.5 Second, we find
that matriculation rates for NLNA admits decreased slightly over this time period, but that
matriculation rates for LA admits increased by over 10 percentage points from a base of
80%. The increase in matriculation rates for LA admits suggests that the outside options
for LA admits got worse. Increases over time in the admissions advantages LA applicants
receive result in relatively lower quality LA admits. LA admits to Harvard are then more
likely to accept their Harvard offer since their next best option is declining.
       The levels and trends in LA applications and admits suggest that these groups receive
a significant and growing admissions advantage at Harvard. Arcidiacono, Kinsler, and Ran-
som (2019) show that LA applicants are more likely to be white and come from high income
   3
      See also Cowen (2017) for a more detailed discussion of this point in the popular press.
   4
      Admit rates are heterogeneous within this category. Arcidiacono, Kinsler, and Ransom (2019) show,
using data from the end of this period, that athletes had admissions rates well over 80%, while legacies'
admissions rates were over 30%.
    5
      While SAT scores rose overall, this is not the case for African American applicants. See page 26 of
litigation Document 415-8 for further detail.



                                                   3
households. However, because of recent policy trends related to affirmative action and fi-
nancial aid, there is a growing sense that other racial groups and less advantaged households
are finally in a position to benefit from legacy preferences.6 In the final section of the paper,
we investigate whether this intuition has merit and how the increased admission advantage
for LA applicants affected the racial distribution of the admitted class over time.
       We accomplish this using data on the racial distribution of applicants, admits, and ma-
triculants by LA status over the same time period. The raw numbers show an increasing
number of minority LA applicants and admits, consistent with the intuition above. How-
ever, the level of white LA applicants and admits remains an order of magnitude larger
than the other groups. As a result, an increase in the LA admissions advantage will still
tend to predominantly benefit white applicants. Moreover, there was substantial growth in
minority NLNA applications over this period such that the white share of NLNA applica-
tions declined. Thus, even though a greater number of minority applicants stood to gain
from LA preferences, an even larger number of minority NLNA applicants applied. Using
information on the ratio of LA/NLNA admit rates and trends in the LA share of applicants
by racial/ethnic groups, we show that the increasing LA admissions advantage between the
Classes of 2000 and 2017 reduced racial diversity at Harvard.
       The favorable treatment that legacies and athletes receive in the admissions process at
elite colleges is well documented. In 1990, the Office for Civil Rights (OCR) concluded
its investigation of Harvard and revealed that legacies and athletes were admitted at much
higher rates than other applicants for the Classes of 1983­1992. Lamb (1993) illustrates that
Yale had similar patterns in admit rates over the same time period. A number of books have
been written on the topic, including Bowen and Levin (2003), Karabel (2005) and Golden
(2006). The general findings from this literature are that elite institutions in the US provide
substantial admissions boosts for legacies and athletes. Golden (2006) documents specific
ways by which legacies and athletes obtain admission over more academically qualified ap-
plicants. Karabel (2005) focuses on the rise of holistic admissions as a means of admitting
   6
     During the Students for Fair Admissions v. Harvard trial, the Harvard Dean of Admissions testified to
this point. When asked whether "...the legacy applicant pool is on average less ethnically diverse than the
non-legacy applicant pool?", he responded "At the moment it is, but it's fast changing." See Day 1 Trial
Transcript. See also Lattimore (2018) for a discussion in the popular press.



                                                    4
a certain type of student (and one who is not the most academically qualified). Bowen
and Levin (2003) focus on the large fraction of athletes and legacies at Ivy League schools
and other private, elite universities, and provide recommendations for resolving some of the
corresponding issues.
    Going beyond simple differences in admit rates, a handful of papers estimate the size
of the admissions advantage that legacies and athletes receive. Hurwitz (2011) uses data
from the fall of 2007 admissions cycle at thirty private colleges and universities and finds
that legacy applicants are three times more likely to be admitted than non-legacy applicants.
Arcidiacono, Kinsler, and Ransom (2019) show that, for the Harvard Classes of 2014 to 2019,
legacy and athlete applicants are highly advantaged relative to NLNA applicants and receive
large admissions preferences. Using admissions data from three elite research universities
during the 1983, 1993, and 1997 admissions cycles, Espenshade, Chung, and Walling (2004)
estimate the admissions preferences that legacies and athletes receive. Overall, the authors
find large admissions preferences for athletes and legacies. In addition, between 1983 and
1997, the admissions advantage for legacies declined, while for athletes it expanded.
    We add to this literature by investigating how legacy and athlete admissions advantages
at an elite school have changed over time in a more recent period that is characterized by
a surge in applicant competition. We show that the admissions advantage for legacies and
athletes dramatically increased at Harvard over the 18-year period ending in fall 2012. We
also demonstrate that these advantages act to the detriment of minority applicants who are
not legacies or athletes.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we present a simple theoretical
model of admissions. Section 3 shows the main trends in Harvard applications, admissions,
and matriculation. In Section 4, we explain how we separate composition effects in the
growth in LA admissions advantages. Section 5 concludes.



2     A Model of College Admissions
We begin by considering how changes in the applicant pool affect admissions decisions under
different types of university objective functions. Given the tremendous rise in applicants to


                                             5
Harvard and other elite institutions, we are particularly interested in how an increase in the
number of applicants--and in particular changes in the number of NLNA applicants--affects
admissions decisions differently for LA and NLNA applicants.
      We model the university as valuing two characteristics in its admitted class: student
                  +
quality, x            , and whether the student is a legacy, s  {l, n}.7 Student quality refers to
all attributes which the university values (both observed and unobserved) other than legacy
status. In the population of s-status students, x is distributed according to a cumulative
distribution function s (x) with a corresponding probability density function s (x). The
university receives Nl legacy applications and Nn non-legacy applications. The university
can admit at most N students. Consistent with trends in the actual data, we assume that
N is fixed.
      We consider two different ways by which preferences for legacy status can operate, with
proofs given in Appendix A. In the first, the university maximizes the sum of x for its
admitted students plus an additional term that is an increasing function of the number of
                                                              +      +
admitted legacies. Denote this function as h(·) :                        whose first derivative is positive
and second derivative is negative. Clearly, if the university finds it optimal to admit a
legacy (non-legacy) student with index x then it will also be optimal to admit all legacy
(non-legacy) students with x > x . There is then a cutoff value of x for both legacy and non-
legacy students, cl and cn , where students above these cutoffs are admitted. Further, since
h(·) is increasing in the number of admitted legacy students, cl < cn . We then characterize
what happens to the number of legacy admits when the number of non-legacy applicants
increases.

Theorem 1 Suppose the university's maximization problem is given by


                       max Nl        xl (x)dx + Nn        xn (x)dx + h(Nl [1 - l (cl )])
                       cl ,cn   cl                   cn

                                         s.t. Nl (1 - l (cl )) + Nn (1 - n (cn )) = N .


If both legacy and non-legacy applicants are admitted, then increasing the number of non-
legacy applicants increases the cutoff for legacy applicants at the solution to the maximization
  7
      For ease of exposition, throughout the model section we use legacy rather than legacy and athlete.

                                                      6
                cl
problem, i.e.   Nn
                     > 0. This results in fewer legacy applicants being admitted.

Proof In Appendix A.1.

   When the university's preferences are additive in the quality of the student body and a
function of the number of legacy admits, an increase in the number of non-legacy applicants
results in a decrease in the number of legacy admits. The increased number of non-legacy ap-
plicants means that there are more non-legacy applicants of high quality who crowd out some
of the legacies who would have been admitted absent the increase in non-legacy applicants.
   A second potential objective function for the university is one in which legacy preferences
are multiplicative. Namely, the university could instead maximize the sum of x for admitted
students times an increasing function of the number of admitted legacies. Just as in the
                                                                         +        +
additive preferences case, denote this function as h(·) :                             whose first derivative
is positive and second derivative is negative. As before, the solution to this maximization
involves admissions cutoffs cl and cn . Under this objective function, an increase in the
number of non-legacy applicants may actually increase the number of legacy admits.

Theorem 2 Suppose the university's maximization problem is given by


                 max Nl            xl (x)dx + Nn         xn (x)dx h(Nl [1 - l (cl )])
                 cl ,cn       cl                    cn

                                       s.t. Nl (1 - l (cl )) + Nn (1 - n (cn )) = N .


If both legacy and non-legacy applicants are admitted, then, at the solution to the maximiza-
                            cl
tion problem, the sign of   Nn
                                    is determined by the sign of:


                                                         cn
                                                              xn (x)dx
                            h (·)Nn n (cn ) cn -                         + h(·)                          (1)
                                                         1 - (cn )

Proof In Appendix A.2.

                 cl
   The sign of   Nn
                      is then the sum of two terms. The second term is positive. Now consider
the first term. Each of the terms multiplying the term in brackets is positive. What is inside
the brackets is negative: as a condition of admission, the cutoff value for non-legacies must

                                                    7
be less than the expected value of x for admitted non-legacies. The larger in magnitude this
term is, the larger the gains are for adding more legacy admits. These gains are tempered by
h (·): when there are already many legacy admits, the curvature of h(·) diminishes the gains
from the interaction between the number of legacy admits and the quality of the student
body.
       In the next section, we show that this second model--where the quality of the student
body and the number of legacy admits are complements--best matches the empirical patterns
in the data.8 As Nn rises, the gap between the admissions cutoffs cn and cl expands. In the
data this will manifest as an increasing admissions advantage for LA applicants over time.
Note that this does not imply that Harvard's admissions preferences are changing, simply
that the marginal gain from an additional LA applicant is rising.
       The question is why student quality and the number of legacy admits would be comple-
mentary. If Harvard is interested in maximizing the intellectual output of its students, then
both features of the admitted class are important. Boosting the number of legacy admits
enhances Harvard's ability to raise funds for investments in physical capital and human cap-
ital in the form of faculty.9 The productivity of Harvard's investment is greater the higher
the skill level of the students.10
       A second possibility is related to the demand side of the elite college market. Accord-
ing to Jacob, McCall, and Stange (2018), high ability, high wealth students will demand
both academic quality and consumption amenities. One aspect of academic quality is peer
quality, while consumption amenities can be purchased more easily with increased donations
stemming from additional legacy admits. Athlete admits also fit into this framework since
they generate a consumption amenity for the other students in the class.
   8
      An alternative model that would also fit the data is one where Harvard is constrained to keep the number
of athlete and legacy admits fixed over time. It is difficult to motivate why such a constraint would exist, and
thus we prefer the model allowing for complementarity in admit quality and the number of legacy admits.
    9
      For evidence regarding the link between legacy admissions and giving, see Meer and Rosen (2009) and
Meer and Rosen (2010).
   10
      Zimmerman (2019) and Riehl (2018) find that the return to attending a high quality college is larger for
students from wealthy backgrounds. However, Dale and Krueger (2014) and Zimmerman (2014) find that
the returns to college quality are large for low income and historically disadvantaged groups.




                                                       8
3        Aggregate Trends in Harvard Admissions
Our theoretical model provides a lens through which we can examine changes in Harvard
admissions over time. In this section, we describe how application shares and admission
rates for special status applicants have changed over an 18-year period. For the analysis,
we rely primarily on Trial Exhibit DX 042. This document lists the number of LA and
NLNA applicants, admits, and matriculants by race/ethnicity for the Classes of 2000­2017.
We supplement the aggregate admissions data with other documents introduced as evidence
(and unsealed) as part of the SFFA v. Harvard trial. All documents we cite are publicly
available either at the URL in the bibliography, or on the Public Access to Court Electronic
Records (PACER) website at https://www.pacer.gov/.


3.1       Applications

The aggregate admissions data reported in Trial Exhibit DX 042 reveal tremendous increases
in the number of domestic applicants to Harvard over this time period. However, most of
the growth in applications has occurred for non-legacy and non-athlete (NLNA) applicants.
Figure 1 shows the growth in domestic applicants relative to the Class of 2000 separately for
NLNA applicants and legacy and recruited athlete (LA) applicants.11 Over this period, the
number of domestic NLNA applicants increased from 14,841 to 27,512, a rise over 85%. In
contrast, domestic LA applicants increased from 989 to 1,094, a boost of only 11%. The data
reported in Trial Exhibit DX 042 do not allow for separate analysis of athlete and legacy
applications. However, Document 415-9 indicates that for the Harvard Classes of 2014­2019,
legacy applicants outnumbered athlete applicants by approximately three to one. Note that
the categories are not mutually exclusive as a legacy can also be a recruited athlete.
       An open question is why the number of applications to Harvard increased over this
time period. While Harvard made changes to its own admissions and financial aid policies,12
  11
     Appendix Table B1 provides the raw application, admit, and matriculant numbers for domestic NLNA
and LA applicants by Harvard graduating class.
  12
     First, Harvard eliminated (Class of 2012) and then restored (Class of 2016) their early action admissions
program (see Trial Exhibit DX 728; Finder and Arenson, 2006; and Lewin, 2011). Second, Harvard pursued
a number of financial aid reforms over this time period, including an affordability initiative for the Class of
2012 (see The Harvard Gazette, 2007; Trial Exhibit DX 728).



                                                      9
looking beyond Harvard it is clear that other elite colleges and universities experienced similar
growth. In Appendix Figure B3, we graph the number of applications (Panel (a)) and the
growth in applications (Panel (b)) for Harvard and other elite institutions.13 The overall
trends in applications are very similar, with both Harvard and other elite schools seeing
their application totals rise by over 100% between the Classes of 2005 and 2021. There are a
number of factors that could be driving these broader trends, including: (1) an expanding set
of high school graduates; (2) increases in the number of applications conditional on applying
to college; and (3) increases in the share of high school graduates that apply.14
       Interestingly, none of the above explanations for the rise in applications to Harvard is
likely to boost LA applications. First, there is simply a smaller population of potential legacy
and recruited athlete applicants, making it difficult to expand this group further. Second,
legacy and recruited athlete applicants at Harvard tend to come from highly advantaged
families.15 Historically, these applicants applied to and attended 4-year schools regardless of
ability, leaving little scope for additional applications (Belley and Lochner, 2007).
       The growth in the NLNA applicant pool could be driven by poorly qualified applicants.
However, this does not appear to the case. The aggregate admissions data reported in Trial
Exhibit DX 042 also lists the average SAT scores among all applicants and admits over this
time period.16 As depicted in Appendix Figure B1, the average SAT score in the applicant
pool was 692 for the Class of 2000 and rose to 700 for the Class of 2017. This change in
the average SAT score over time is likely driven by changes in the NLNA population, since
athletes and legacy applicants are a small share of the broader pool.
  13
     Elite institutions are those 4-year public and private universities that have a 75th percentile math
SAT score greater than or equal to 750 between the years of 2001 and 2017 in the US National Center
for Education Statistics' Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS). We drop any school
missing more than one year of SAT scores or missing any application totals. The other elite schools (besides
Harvard) include: Amherst, Caltech, Carnegie Mellon, Columbia, Cornell, Dartmouth, Duke, Harvey Mudd,
Johns Hopkins, MIT, Northwestern, Pomona, Princeton, Rice, Stanford, Swarthmore, Penn, Williams, and
Yale. In Appendix Figure B4, we report similar numbers for Ivy League colleges only.
  14
     Bound, Hershbein, and Long (2009) examine long-run trends in application behavior from the 1970s to
the 2000s. Hoxby (2009) finds that the increase in competition has been concentrated in the top 10 percent
of colleges.
  15
     See Arcidiacono, Kinsler, and Ransom (2019) for additional details.
  16
     We do not have data on SAT score trends by LA or NLNA status.




                                                    10
3.2       Admissions

With the growth rate of NLNA applications far surpassing the growth rate of LA applications,
the share of applications submitted by legacies and recruited athletes is falling over time.
This is reflected in Figure 2(a). The dashed lines show the share of domestic applicants
that are legacies and athletes, along with the corresponding linear prediction. The share
of domestic applicants who are legacies or athletes fell from a high of over 7% in 2001 to
a low of under 4% in 2015. More surprising is the pattern for admits shown in the solid
lines. While the data is noisy, there is no time trend in the share of domestic admits that are
legacies or athletes. The share of admits that are legacies or recruited athletes is consistently
over 21% during this time period. In 2017, the last year of the aggregate data, there were
488 LA admits and 1,094 LA applicants out of a total of 1,837 domestic admits and 28,606
domestic applicants.17 Thus, 26.6% of admits were legacies and athletes despite being only
3.8% of the applicant pool.
      With legacies and athletes becoming a substantially smaller share of the applicant pool
and their share of admits showing no time trend, it must the be the case that the LA
admit rate relative to the NLNA admit rate has grown. Figure 2(b) shows the ratio of the
domestic LA admit rate to the admit rate for domestic NLNA applicants. For the Class of
2000, legacies and athletes were admitted at a rate of 41%, while NLNA applicants were
admitted at a rate of 10%, a ratio of approximately four to one. This ratio has increased
dramatically over time, and by the end of the sample period the admit rate for legacies and
athletes was over nine times that of NLNA applicants. For the Class of 2017, the admit rate
for domestic LA applicants was 45%, while the admit rate for domestic NLNA applicants
was only 5%. The growing admissions advantage for LA applicants is consistent with an
admissions model where student quality and the number of legacy admits are complements.


3.3       Matriculations

Another way to illustrate that the rising admit rate ratio between LA and NLNA applicants
is the result of an increasing admissions advantage for LA applicants is to examine matric-
 17
      See Appendix Table B1 for the raw numbers of domestic admits in each year.



                                                   11
ulation rates. If we assume that Harvard values academics and other activities similarly
to other colleges and universities, an increase in admissions advantages for LA applicants
should imply worse outside options for those who are admitted. In other words, not only
are LA admits becoming relatively weaker at Harvard, they will also be relatively weaker at
other elite institutions. With worse outside options, the matriculation rates for LA admits
should increase. Figure 3 shows that this is indeed the case.
       Panel (a) of Figure 3 shows that the matriculation rate for domestic legacies and athletes
has grown substantially over this period. Indeed, the share of admitted legacies and athletes
who turned down an offer of admission from Harvard fell from 21% to 10%, or by roughly
half.18 This stands in stark contrast to the matriculation rates for domestic NLNA admits.
The matriculation rate for NLNA admits was 78% in the Class of 2000 and 77% in the Class
of 2017, meaning that the profile for this group is flat or slightly decreasing.19 To the extent
that changes in matriculation rates over time reflect changes in outside options relative to
the option to attend Harvard, it would appear as though the outside options for legacies and
athletes have gotten relatively worse over time.
       The matriculation patterns for NLNA and LA admits over time are consistent with the
model presented in Section 2. When admit quality and legacy admits are complements, an
increase in NLNA applicants will result in the admissions threshold for NLNA applicants
rising while the threshold for LA applicants may fall. NLNA admit quality will be higher
when the threshold rises, implying better outside options and a decline in the matriculation
rate. The increasing competitiveness of the elite college market will tend to dampen the drop
in matriculation rates since all schools are becoming more competitive. Alternatively, the
quality of legacy admits will fall if the legacy threshold falls, implying worse outside options
and higher matriculation rates.
       When modeling Harvard's admissions problem, we assumed that the total number of
seats available for domestic NLNA and LA applicants, N , was fixed. Yet, the data suggests
that the number of seats available for domestic applicants is actually shrinking. At the same
time that domestic NLNA applications soared, competition from international applicants
  18
    Raw matriculant totals for LA and NLNA applicant groups are presented in Appendix Table B1.
  19
    The dip for the Classes of 2012 to 2015 coincides with Harvard eliminating early action for these admis-
sions cycles (see Trial Exhibit DX 728).


                                                    12
also increased. Panel (b) of Figure 3 shows the number of domestic and international ma-
triculants over time. The growth in the number of international matriculants is accompanied
by decreases in the number of domestic matriculants. The number of domestic matriculants
declined from a total of 1,527 in the Class of 2000 to 1,474 in the Class of 2017. Regressing
the number of domestic matriculants on year shows a statistically significant negative trend
of 3.6 domestic matriculants per year, on average.
       But these losses are concentrated among NLNA matriculants. Between the Class of
2000 and the Class of 2017, the number of domestic NLNA matriculants declined from
1,203 to 1,037. Regressing the number of domestic NLNA matriculants on year shows a
statistically significant loss of 5.2 domestic NLNA matriculants a year. In contrast, the
number of domestic LA matriculants increased from 324 to 437 over the same period. Thus,
not only are domestic NLNA applicants losing out to domestic LA applicants, they are being
increasingly squeezed by international applicants.
       The evidence presented in this section suggests that, over the past 20 years, Harvard
has provided an increasing admissions advantage to legacy and recruited athlete applicants.
Historically, these applicants are believed to come from primarily white and economically
advantaged households.20 However, there have been broad changes to the higher education
marketplace in the past half-century that may alter the set of individuals able to benefit
from these advantages. The next section explores this idea further by examining how the
trend in LA admissions has impacted the racial composition of admits at Harvard.



4        LA Status and Race
The representation of minority students at elite American colleges and universities increased
in the 1970s, due in part to affirmative action. The children of this earlier generation of
minority students now stand to potentially benefit from legacy admissions.21 On the other
hand, minority students are still under-represented relative to whites among LA applicants
  20
     Arcidiacono, Kinsler, and Ransom (2019) document that LA applicants are more than two-thirds white
and come from families with much higher incomes.
  21
     Howell and Turner (2004) explore this idea using admissions data and trends from the University of
Virginia. At the time of writing in 2002, they projected a three-fold increase in the share of legacy applicants
that are African American by 2025.


                                                      13
and may therefore be hurt by increased advantages for legacies and athletes. In this section,
we examine the impact of these two channels on minority admissions.


4.1       LA and NLNA Trends by Race

To investigate whether minorities benefit more from legacy and athlete admissions advan-
tages in the current period relative to 20 years ago, we begin by replicating Panel (a) of Figure
2 for four racial categories of Harvard applicants: Asian American, African American, His-
panic, and white/unknown.22 The resulting graphs are presented in Figure 4. Consistent
with the overall picture in Figure 2, we see that the LA share of applications is falling over
this period for all racial groups other than Asian Americans.23
       A very different story emerges when we examine trends in the LA share of admits.
Figure 2 indicates that the overall share of admits that are legacies and athletes remained
flat from 2000 to 2017. In stark contrast, Figure 4 shows that, for all racial groups, the
LA share of admits increased. As an example, the LA share of Hispanic admits increased
from approximately 3% in 2000 to 12% in 2017. How is it possible that the overall LA
share of admits is flat, but that the trend is upward within racial groups? The key feature
that explains this result is the declining proportion of white/unknown admits, from 62% in
2000­2002 to 53% in 2015­2017. The LA share of white/unknown admits is approximately
35%, while the same share for the other racial groups is between 5% and 13%. Thus, as
the proportion of the admitted class that is non-white grows, the LA share of all admits
stays flat despite the fact that, within race, LA admits are becoming more prevalent. When
viewed through this lens, it suggests that the admissions advantage for legacy and athlete
applicants is probably growing even faster than what Figure 2 indicates.
  22
      It is important to include in the analysis applicants who fail to report their race, since the patterns
over time are quite different for this group. The number of LA and NLNA applicants and admits who fail
to report race declined considerably between 2000 and 2017. This is especially true in relative terms since
the totals for all other racial categories rose (see Table 1). By including the unknown group with white
applicants, we illustrate that the overarching patterns we observe are not being driven by this unique group.
One may expect the unknown group to consist primarily of white and Asian American applicants--the only
two racial groups who would have an incentive to withhold their race. The composition of the group has
likely shifted over time, since the number of Asian American applicants has grown faster than the number of
white applicants. The patterns for whites alone would be starker than what our figure indicates. See Figure
B2 for additional detail.
   23
      For Asian Americans, the LA share of applicants increases, but the levels are small both at the beginning
(1.2%) and end (1.6%) of the period.

                                                      14
   A key takeaway from Figure 4 is that all racial groups appear to experience increases in
legacy and athlete admissions boosts. Within each racial category, the LA share of admits is
growing while the LA share of applicants is falling (with the exception of Asian Americans).
However, it is difficult to infer from these pictures whether a growing number of minority
students are benefiting from LA preferences. To address this, we provide in Table 1 the
raw numbers of LA and NLNA applicants and admits by race, aggregated into three-year
windows. The raw data indicate that an increasing number of minority students are in a
position to benefit from LA preferences. Between 2000­2002 and 2015­2017, the number of
African American, Hispanic, and Asian American LA applicants increased by 42%, 158%,
and 130%, respectively. The increase in the number of LA admits was more muted, ranging
from 35% for African Americans to 69% for Hispanics.
   While the raw numbers indicate that more minorities are in a position to benefit from
increasing LA admissions advantages, they tend to mask two important broader trends.
First, despite the recent growth in minority LA applications and admits, the corresponding
levels of white LA applicants and admits remain an order of magnitude larger. In the 2015­
2017 period, 68% of LA applications were from white applicants (78% if we also include
applicants who fail to report their race). As a result, when LA admissions advantages
increase, white applicants are likely to experience the largest gain. The second broader
trend is the huge growth in NLNA applications among minority groups. Between 2000­2002
and 2015­2017, the number of NLNA African American, Hispanic, and Asian American
applications increased by 274%, 214%, and 112%, respectively. The growth among these
groups outstripped growth for whites such that the white share of NLNA applications fell
from 43% to 40%.24 Thus, the increased advantages for LA applicants have worked to the
detriment of a growing share of minority NLNA applicants.
  24
     The white/unknown NLNA application share fell from 57% to 47% by the end of the period. To
calculate the numbers in the main text and this footnote, we also include "Other" and "Nat Am/Nat HI"
NLNA applicants in 2000­2002 and 2015­2017.




                                                 15
4.2     Compositional Effects of LA Access and Preferences

Between 2000 and 2017, the racial composition of the admitted class at Harvard has been
affected by two changes in the admission process related to legacy and athlete applicants.
First, the number and share of minority LA applications is growing. This implies a growing
share of minority admits, since Harvard employs preferences for LA applicants. Second,
LA admissions advantages have expanded over this time period. Since white applicants
continue to make up the majority of LA applicants, this expansion will still tend to favor
white applicants. In the counterfactuals below, we investigate how each of these channels
has affected the LA and racial composition of the admitted class, comparing in particular
the changes between 2000­2002 and 2015­2017.


4.2.1   Counterfactual 1: increases in minority admissions due to increases in LA
        shares

Our first counterfactual involves altering the pool of LA applicants. In 2000­2002, the
share of LA applicants that were African American, Hispanic, or Asian American was 4.9%,
2.2%, and 4.6% respectively. We match these shares in 2015­2017 by reducing the number
of African American, Hispanic, or Asian American LA applicants and shifting the excess
applicants to the NLNA applicant pool. As a result, we do not change the overall number
of minority applicants, we simply shift the relative quantities between the LA and NLNA
applicant pool.
   Let r indicate race, r  {a, b, h, w}; s indicate legacy/athlete status, s  {l, n}; and
t indicate the first three years of the data or the last three, t  {0, 1}. Denote Nrst and
Arst as the number of respective applicants and admits who have characteristics {r, s} and
applied in year t. Denote the strength of applicant i in the set {r, s, t}--that is, including
any admissions advantages from LA status--by rst + i . rst is the average strength of the
applicant with characteristics {r, s} in year t, and   i   represents deviations from the average.
Applicants are ordered according to their strength, with Harvard admitting students until
its capacity constraint binds.
   Assuming that    i   follows a logistic distribution, the average probability of admission for



                                                16
someone in the set {r, s, t}, Prst , can be expressed in logit form:

                                                 exp(rst )     Arst
                                    Prst =                   =                                      (2)
                                               1 + exp(rst )   Nrst

Since we observe the admit rates for each race, legacy/athlete status, and time period com-
bination, we can calculate rst for all r, s, and t.25
       We now outline a set of assumptions that allows us to recover how the shift in the legacy
applicant pool affected enrollment across racial groups. To do this, we first shift down the
number of legacy applicants that are of each race--with the exception of whites--such that
                                                                                           (1)
the share of legacy applicants in 2015­2017 is the same as in 2000­2002.26 Let Nwl1 = Nwl1 .
                      (1)
We then choose Nrl1 for all r = w such that:

                                               (1)
                                          Nrl1               Nrl0
                                                 (1)
                                                        =                                           (3)
                                           r   Nr l 1        r Nrl0


                                                               (1)                  (1)
The number of NLNA applicants of race r is then Nrn1 = Nrn1 + Nrl1 - Nrl1 .
       Next, we assume that the shifting of minority LA applicants to NLNA applicants does
not affect the average characteristics of either group. This assumption is likely to be violated:
we would expect minority LA applicants to be stronger than minority NLNA applicants as
LA applicants come from wealthier households (Arcidiacono, Kinsler, and Ransom, 2019).
Hence, shifting some of them to NLNA would raise the average characteristics of NLNAs,
leading us to overstate minority gains in admissions from changes in the racial composition of
legacies and athletes. However, given the small share of minority applicants who are legacies
or athletes, the effect is likely to be small.
       With fewer LA applicants, overall admission rates would need to be higher for the same
number of students to be admitted. Let (1) be the rise in the admissions index for all
applicants such that the total number of admits is the same as the status quo in period 1.
  25
     As an example, Table 1 indicates that there are 32,940 white NLNA applicants and 1,641 white NLNA
admits in 2015­2017. The observed admit probability for this group is 4.98%. This implies that wn1 =
-2.95.
  26
     We also hold fixed the number of LA applicants belonging to all other racial groups and the unknown
race group.




                                                        17
The counterfactual probability of admission for {r, s, t} is then:

                                          (1)      exp(rs1 + (1) )
                                      Prs1 =                                                               (4)
                                                 1 + exp(rs1 + (1) )

where (1) satisfies:
                                                  (1)   (1)
                                                Nrs1 Prs1 =                   Ars1                         (5)
                                      r     s                       r     s

       Once we solve for (1) , we can calculate the predicted number of admits for every race
and status combination:
                                                 (1)          (1)   (1)
                                                Ars1 = Nrs1 Prs1 .                                         (6)

                                                                                          (1)            (1)
We can also calculate the share of admits of race r that are legacy/athlete: Arl1 /                 s   Ars1 .
       The total number of admits and the share of admits that are LA for this counterfactual are
reported in the second row of Table 2, with the first row showing the status quo. The number
of white admits is significantly higher than the status quo, with all other groups lower,
showing that the rise in the share of legacy applicants that are minorities has contributed
to more minority admits. Unsurprisingly, the share of minority admits that are LA shrinks
relative to the status quo since there are fewer minority LA applicants. For whites, the LA
share of admits is relatively constant.


4.2.2      Counterfactual 2: decreases in minority admissions due to increasing ad-
           missions advantages for LA applicants

Weighed against these benefits is the increased admission tip for LA applicants, since LA
applicants are disproportionately white. In our second counterfactual, we examine how the
increased admissions advantage for LA applicants affected enrollments by race and LA status.
Namely, we change the admissions thresholds such that the following two conditions are met:

  (i) the overall admit rate ratio between LA and NLNA applicants corresponds to what it
         was in period 0, which is 4.15.27
  27
    The same number in period 1 (2015­2017) is 8.15. Implicit in this exercise is that a change in admissions
advantage is responsible for the change in the admit rate ratio. As discussed earlier, there do not appear to
be significant trends in SAT scores that would suggest a sharp break in the qualifications of the NLNA pool
as a whole.


                                                        18
 (ii) the total number of admits is the same as in the status quo in period 1.

   The counterfactual admissions probabilities involve changing the admissions threshold
differently for LA and NLNA applicants and are are given by:

                                                                           (2)
                                     (2)             exp(rs1 + s )
                                    Prs1       =                                   (2)
                                                                                          .          (7)
                                                   1 + exp(rs1 + s )

 (2)       (2)
n and l          then solve the admit rate ratio constraint

                                                   (2)
                                     r   Nrl1 Prl1             r   Nrn1
                                                                         (2)
                                                                                   = 4.15            (8)
                                         r Nrl1          r   Nrn1 Prn1

and the capacity constraint

                                                         (2)
                                               Nrs1 Prs1 =                          Ars1 .           (9)
                                    r      s                         r         s


                                                                                         (2)   (2)
We solve equations (8) and (9) for the two unknowns n and l . Note that, because
                                                                                                     (2)
the LA/NLNA admit rate ratio has increased substantially between the two periods, n
                         (2)
will be positive and l         will be negative. A lower admissions threshold for LA applicants
is consistent with the model we presented in section 2.
   The third row of Table 2 shows the results from this counterfactual. Relative to the
status quo, we see a 7% drop in the number of white admits, and an increase of 6%, 7%, and
7% in the African American, Hispanic, and Asian American number of admits, respectively.
Within race, the LA share of admits falls dramatically. For whites, the LA share falls by
38%, and for each minority group the LA share falls by at least 44%. The expansion of
admission advantages for LA applicants has therefore led to a large increase in not only the
number of the LA admits but also the number of white admits.


4.2.3   Counterfactual 3: net changes in minority admissions from the two chan-
        nels

In our final counterfactual, we shift both the minority share of LA applicants as well as the
LA/NLNA admit ratio to what it was in 2000­2002, combining the first two counterfactuals.

                                                         19
Namely, we set the number of applicants in each race and status combination to the level
                                          (3)              (1)
it was in the first counterfactual, Nrs1 = Nrs1 for all {r, s}. Next, we solve (8) and (9) by
               (3)                             (3)
substituting Nrl1 for Nrl1 . Defining Prs1 as

                                                                                 (3)
                                  (3)                 exp(rs1 + s )
                                 Prs1     =                                              (3)
                                                                                               ,   (10)
                                                1 + exp(rs1 + s )

our two equations are then:

                                         (3)     (3)                   (3)
                                 r   Nrl1 Prl1                   r   Nrn1
                                             (3)                     (3)       (3)
                                                                                         = 4.15    (11)
                                     r   Nrl1              r   Nrn1 Prn1

and the capacity constraint

                                                     (3)   (3)
                                               Nrs1 Prs1 =                                Ars1     (12)
                                 r       s                                 r         s


                     (3)       (3)
where we solve for n and l .
    The last row of Table 2 shows that making both adjustments results in higher minority
enrollments. That is, the gains from a higher presence of minority legacy applicants are more
than offset by the losses associated with higher admissions advantage for LA applicants. For
example, the number of African Americans admits would have been 6% higher in 2015­2017
if both LA preferences and the African American share of LA applicants were fixed at their
2000­2002 levels.



5     Conclusion
Admissions to elite colleges and universities have become increasingly competitive. At Har-
vard, admit rates are now less than 5%. Yet, some groups have been relatively immune from
these competitive forces. Despite representing an increasingly smaller share of the applicant
pool, the share of Harvard admits who are legacies or athletes has been remarkably stable
over time. Over the course of the 18 years we analyze, legacies and athletes moved from being
four times more likely to be admitted as their non-legacy, non-athlete counterparts to nine



                                                           20
times more likely to be admitted. Given the accompanying rise in applicant test scores and
the increase in legacy and athlete matriculation rates, the evidence strongly suggests that
the admissions advantages legacies and athletes have at Harvard are growing. This growth
can be explained by a model of admissions where the quality of the student body and the
number of legacies and athletes are complements in the university's objective function.
       Over the course of our time period, the share of LA applicants and admits who are
minorities increased. However, LA applicants and admits are still disproportionately white
compared to NLNA applicants and admits. So while the number of minority admits have
increased as a result of a higher representation among legacies and athletes, we show that
these increases are more than offset by the rise in advantages given to LA applicants.
       The increasing admissions advantage for legacies and athletes at Harvard is in part the
result of enormous growth in NLNA applications with no commensurate increase in available
seats. One approach to lessen these advantages would be to expand enrollment. A number
of economists have advocated for this, claiming that a reduction in applicant competition
would reduce tensions around legacy and athlete admissions.28 Thus far, Harvard and other
elite institutions have shown little willingness to expand. According to DeSilver (2019),
admissions at the most selective universities, have actually fallen between 2002 and 2017.29
As a result, the controversy over legacy and athlete admissions will likely continue unless
significant changes are made to admissions policies.




  28
     See Cowen (2018), Smith (2018) and Wermund (2018) for examples.
  29
     Recently, the U.S. News & World Report decided to eliminate a school's acceptance rate when developing
its Best Colleges rankings, reducing at least one incentive to keep admissions low. The rankings methodol-
ogy of U.S. News & World Report is described at https://www.usnews.com/education/best-colleges/
articles/how-us-news-calculated-the-rankings.

                                                    21
References
Arcidiacono, Peter, Josh Kinsler, and Tyler Ransom. 2019. "Legacy and Athlete Preferences
  at Harvard." Working paper, Duke University.

Belley, Philippe and Lance Lochner. 2007. "The Changing Role of Family Income and Ability
  in Determining Educational Achievement." Journal of Human Capital 1 (1):37­89.

Bound, John, Brad Hershbein, and Bridget Terry Long. 2009. "Playing the Admissions
  Game: Student Reactions to Increasing College Competition." Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives 23 (4):119­146.

Bowen, William G. and Sarah A. Levin. 2003. Reclaiming the Game: College Sports and
  Educational Values. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Caldera, Camille G. and Sahar M. Mohammadzadeh. 2019. "Record-Low 4.5 Percent of
  Harvard College Applicants Accepted to Class of 2023." The Harvard Crimson URL
  https://www.thecrimson.com/article/2019/3/29/2023-admit-numbers/. Accessed
  June 25, 2019.

Chappell,    Bill and Merrit Kennedy. 2019.            "U.S. Charges Dozens
 Of       Parents,   Coaches    In   Massive    College     Admissions Scan-
 dal."             NPR      URL    https://www.npr.org/2019/03/12/702539140/
 u-s-accuses-actresses-others-of-fraud-in-wide-college-admissions-scandal.
 Accessed March 23, 2019.

Cowen,    Tyler.  2017.       "Legacy   Students  Make    Harvard's      Finances
  Work."            Bloomberg   URL     https://www.bloombergquint.com/view/
  legacy-students-make-harvard-s-finances-work. Accessed April 26, 2019.

------. 2018.      "Let Harvard Be Harvard, Only Bigger."           Bloomberg
  URL                 https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2018-11-01/
  let-harvard-be-harvard-only-bigger. Accessed August 2, 2019.

Dale, Stacy Berg and Alan B. Krueger. 2014. "Estimating the Effects of College Character-
 istics over the Career Using Administrative Earnings Data." Journal of Human Resources
 42 (2):323­358.

Day 1 Trial Transcript. 2018.  In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. Presi-
  dent and Fellows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D.
  Mass).   URL https://github.com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/
  TrialTranscripts/20181015-Day-1.pdf.

Desai, Saahil. 2018.   "College Sports are Affirmative Action for Rich White Stu-
  dents." The Atlantic URL https://www.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2018/
  10/college-sports-benefits-white-students/573688/. Accessed June 25, 2019.




                                           22
DeSilver, Drew. 2019. "A Majority of U.S. Colleges Admit Most Students Who Apply."
  Report, Pew Research Center. URL https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/
  04/09/a-majority-of-u-s-colleges-admit-most-students-who-apply/.

Document 415-8. 2017. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fel-
 lows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL
 https://docs.justia.com/cases/federal/district-courts/massachusetts/madce/
 1:2014cv14176/165519/415/1.html. Plaintiff Expert Witness Opening Report.

Document 415-9. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fel-
 lows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL
 https://docs.justia.com/cases/federal/district-courts/massachusetts/madce/
 1:2014cv14176/165519/415/2.html. Plaintiff Expert Witness Rebuttal Report.

Espenshade, Thomas J., Chang Y. Chung, and Joan L. Walling. 2004. "Admission Prefer-
  ences for Minority Students, Athletes, and Legacies at Elite Universities." Social Science
  Quarterly 85 (5):1422­1446.

Finder, Alan and Karen W. Arenson. 2006. "Harvard Ends Early Admission." The New
  York Times URL https://www.nytimes.com/2006/09/12/education/12harvard.html.
  Accessed May 29, 2019.

Golden, Daniel. 2006. The Price of Admission: How America's Ruling Class Buys Its Way
 into Elite Colleges ­ and Who Gets Left Outside the Gates. New York: Crown Publishers.

Howell, Cameron and Sarah E. Turner. 2004. "Legacies in Black and White: The Racial
  Composition of the Legacy Pool." Research in Higher Education 45 (4):325­351.

Hoxby, Caroline M. 2009. "The Changing Selectivity of American Colleges." Journal of
  Economic Perspectives 23 (4):95­118.

Hurwitz, Michael. 2011. "The Impact of Legacy Status on Undergraduate Admissions at
 Elite Colleges and Universities." Economics of Education Review 30 (3):480­492.

Jacob, Brian, Brian McCall, and Kevin Stange. 2018. "College as Country Club: Do Col-
  leges Cater to Students' Preferences for Consumption?" Journal of Labor Economics
  36 (2):309­348.

Karabel, Jerome. 2005. The Chosen: The Hidden History of Admission and Exclusion at
 Harvard, Yale, and Princeton. New York: Houghton Mifflin.

Lamb, John D. 1993. "The Real Affirmative Action Babies: Legacy Preference at Harvard
  and Yale." Columbia Journal of Law and Social Problems 26 (3):491­521.

Lattimore, Ashton. 2018. "Ending legacy admissions is the right thing to do. But for
  black alums, it stings." The Washington Post URL https://www.washingtonpost.
  com/outlook/2018/08/06/aaa7db6e-968d-11e8-80e1-00e80e1fdf43_story.html?
  noredirect=on&utm_term=.8a353bcfa2c9. Accessed May 15, 2019.


                                            23
Lewin, Tamar. 2011. "Harvard and Princeton Restore Early Admission." The New York
  Times URL https://www.nytimes.com/2011/02/25/education/25admissions.html.
  Accessed May 29, 2019.

Meer, Jonathan and Harvey S. Rosen. 2009. "Altruism and the Child Cycle of Alumni
 Donations." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1 (1):258­286.

------. 2010. "Family Bonding with Universities." Research in Higher Education 51 (7):641­
  658.

Riehl, Evan. 2018. "Fairness in College Admission Exams: From Test Score Gaps to Earnings
  Inequality." Working paper, Cornell University.

Smith, Noah. 2018.      "Harvard Doing America's Best Students No Favors."
  Bloomberg      URL  https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2018-06-28/
  harvard-and-top-private-schools-should-increase-admissions-a-lot. Accessed
  June 25, 2019.

The Harvard Gazette. 2007.     "Harvard Announces Sweeping Middle-income Initia-
 tive." The Harvard Gazette URL https://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2007/12/
 harvard-announces-sweeping-middle-income-initiative/. Accessed May 29, 2019.

Trial Exhibit DX 042. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/D042.pdf. Demo-
  graphic Breakdown of Applicants, Admits, and Matriculants.

Trial Exhibit DX 728. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/D728.pdf. Share
  of applicants by race before and after changes to early admission policy.

Wermund, Benjamin. 2018.   "Should Harvard double its enrollment?"    Politico
 URL     https://www.politico.com/newsletters/morning-education/2018/06/19/
 should-harvard-double-its-enrollment-258181. Accessed June 26, 2019.

Zimmerman, Seth D. 2014. "The Returns to College Admission for Academically Marginal
  Students." Journal of Labor Economics 32 (4):711­754.

------. 2019. "Elite Colleges and Upward Mobility to Top Jobs and Top Incomes." American
  Economic Review 109 (1):1­147.




                                             24
Figures and Tables

                                           Figure 1: Growth in LA and NLNA Applications, Classes of 2000­2017



                                           1




                                         0.8
     Growth in Applications Since 2000




                                         0.6                                                   NLNA




                                         0.4




                                         0.2



                                                                                          Legacy and Athlete
                                           0




                                         -0.2
                                            2000   2002   2004   2006     2008     2010     2012       2014    2016
                                                                        Harvard Class



Note: Includes only domestic applicants. Growth is defined as the number of applications
in a given year minus the number of applications in the Class of 2000, all divided by the
number of applications in the Class of 2000.
Source: Authors' calculations from SFFA v. Harvard Trial Exhibit DX 042.




                                                                            25
                                               Figure 2: Trends in LA Composition and Admissions Rates

 (a) Share of Applicants and Admits who are LA                                                                                                          (b) Ratio of LA Admit Rates to NLNA Admit Rates

                       0.28                                                                                     0.08                                                                                                                     10
                                                                    Admits (Data & Linear Prediction)
                                                                    Applications (Data & Linear Prediction)
                       0.27                                                                                     0.075
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          9

                                                                                                                0.07




                                                                                                                                                                                            Ratio of LA Admit Rate to NLNLA Admit Rate
                       0.26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8
                                                                                                                0.065




                                                                                                                        LA Share of Applications
                       0.25
  LA Share of Admits




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7
                                                                                                                0.06
                       0.24
                                                                                                                0.055
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6                                   Linear Prediction
                       0.23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Data
                                                                                                                0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5
                       0.22
                                                                                                                0.045

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4
                       0.21                                                                                     0.04


                        0.2                                                                                     0.035                                                                                                                    3
                          2000   2002   2004   2006     2008       2010        2012         2014         2016                                                                                                                            2000   2002     2004          2006     2008        2010   2012    2014   2016
                                                      Harvard Class                                                                                                                                                                                                           Harvard Class




Note: Domestic applicants only.
Source: Authors' calculations from SFFA v. Harvard Trial Exhibit DX 042.




                          Figure 3: Trends in Matriculation by LA and NLNA, Domestic and International

 (a) Matriculation Rates by LA and NLNA Status                                                                                                           (b) Number of Matriculants by Domestic Status

                       0.95                                                                                                                                                                    1560                                                                                                                      200

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Domestic
                                                                                                                                                                                               1550                                                    Trend = -3.56
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SE = 0.71
                        0.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              180
                                                      Legacy and Athlete
                                                                                                                                                                                               1540


                                                                                                                                                                                               1530                                                                                                                            Number of International Matriculants
                                                                                                                                                          Number of Domestic Matriculants




                       0.85                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              160
  Matriculation Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                               1520


                        0.8                                                                                                                                                                    1510                                                                                                                      140


                                                                                                                                                                                               1500

                       0.75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              120
                                                                                                                                                                                               1490
                                                           NLNA

                                                                                                                                                                                               1480                                                    International
                        0.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Trend = 5.86
                                                                                                                                                                                               1470                                                    SE = 0.41


                       0.65                                                                                                                                                                    1460                                                                                                                      80
                          2000   2002   2004   2006     2008       2010        2012         2014         2016                                                                                     2000                                          2002     2004          2006     2008        2010   2012    2014   2016
                                                      Harvard Class                                                                                                                                                                                                           Harvard Class




Note: Panel (a) includes domestic applicants only.
Source: Authors' calculations from SFFA v. Harvard Trial Exhibit DX 042.




                                                                                                                                                   26
                                                                     Figure 4: Trends in LA Share of Applications and Admits by Race

                                                             (a) Asian American                                                                                                                           (b) African American

                                     0.14                                                                                     0.018                                                    0.2                                                                                   0.065
                                                                                  Admits (Data & Linear Prediction)                                                                                                              Admits (Data & Linear Prediction)
                                                                                  Applications (Data & Linear Prediction)                                                                                                        Applications (Data & Linear Prediction)
                                     0.13                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.06
                                                                                                                              0.017
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.055
                                     0.12
                                                                                                                              0.016
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.05
                                     0.11                                                                                                                                             0.16




                                                                                                                                      LA Share of Applications




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LA Share of Applications
                                                                                                                              0.015
                LA Share of Admits




                                                                                                                                                                 LA Share of Admits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.045
                                      0.1
                                                                                                                              0.014                                                   0.14                                                                                   0.04
                                     0.09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.035
                                                                                                                              0.013
                                     0.08                                                                                                                                             0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.03
                                                                                                                              0.012
                                     0.07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.025
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.1
                                     0.06                                                                                     0.011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.02
27




                                     0.05                                                                                     0.01                                                    0.08                                                                                   0.015
                                        2000   2002   2004    2006      2008     2010        2012         2014         2016                                                              2000   2002   2004   2006     2008     2010        2012         2014         2016
                                                                      Harvard Class                                                                                                                                  Harvard Class




                                                                (c) Hispanic                                                                                                                             (d) White or Unknown

                                     0.13                                                                                     0.028                                                   0.39                                                                                   0.11
                                                                                  Admits (Data & Linear Prediction)                                                                                                              Admits (Data & Linear Prediction)
                                                                                  Applications (Data & Linear Prediction)                                                                                                        Applications (Data & Linear Prediction)
                                     0.12                                                                                                                                             0.38
                                                                                                                              0.026
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.1
                                     0.11                                                                                                                                             0.37


                                      0.1                                                                                     0.024                                                   0.36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.09
                                                                                                                                      LA Share of Applications




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LA Share of Applications
                LA Share of Admits




                                                                                                                                                                 LA Share of Admits
                                     0.09                                                                                                                                             0.35
                                                                                                                              0.022

                                     0.08                                                                                                                                             0.34                                                                                   0.08

                                                                                                                              0.02
                                     0.07                                                                                                                                             0.33

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.07
                                     0.06                                                                                     0.018                                                   0.32


                                     0.05                                                                                                                                             0.31
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.06
                                                                                                                              0.016
                                     0.04                                                                                                                                              0.3


                                     0.03                                                                                     0.014                                                   0.29                                                                                   0.05
                                        2000   2002   2004    2006      2008     2010        2012         2014         2016                                                              2000   2002   2004   2006     2008     2010        2012         2014         2016
                                                                      Harvard Class                                                                                                                                  Harvard Class




     Note: Domestic applicants only.
     Source: Authors' calculations from SFFA v. Harvard Trial Exhibit DX 042.
                                       Table 1: Applicants and Admits by Race and Special Status

                                       Legacy and Athlete                                  Non-Legacy and Non-Athlete
                              African                   Asian                             African               Asian
      Classes       White    American      Hispanic    American     Unknown     White    American   Hispanic   American   Unknown
      Panel A: Applications
      2000­2002 1,952            150          66          139          683      17,764    2,728      3,323      10,179     5,901
      2003­2005 2,184            135          90          158          651      20,260    3,262      3,780      10,752     5,399
      2006­2008 2,367            165          93          171          436      23,445    3,601      4,674      12,600     3,123
      2009­2011 2,176            193         116          188          522      21,736     5,559     6,054      14,284     5,292
      2012­2014 2,150            187         130          259          500      27,108     8,506     8,556      17,775     6,068
      2015­2017 2,243            213         170          320          301      32,940    10,193     10,421     21,591     6,084
      Panel B: Admits
      2000­2002   886            59           23           75          328      1,756      515        507       1,007       687
      2003­2005 1,033            62           36          88           273      1,901      527        509        880        433
28




      2006­2008 1,055            85           38          64           164      2,043      518        498       1,018       208
      2009­2011   946            88           55           73          203      1,748      574        533       1,084       364
      2012­2014   912            82           53          104          215      1,783      605        566       1,128       407
      2015­2017   946            91           74          151          116      1,641      604        575       1,094       291
     Note: Domestic applicants only.
     Source: Authors' calculations from SFFA v. Harvard Trial Exhibit DX 042.
                                     Table 2: Compositional Effects of Increased LA Access and Preferences

                                                                                      African                               Asian
                                                                     White           American           Hispanic           American
                                                            Admits     LA Share   Admits   LA Share Admits   LA Share   Admits   LA Share
      Status Quo
      Expand LA Access & Admissions Advantage                2,587        0.366    695      0.131    649      0.114     1,245     0.121

      Counterfactuals
      1: Fix Minority LA Access                              2,651        0.363    688      0.090    626      0.045     1,199     0.054

      2: Fix LA Admissions Advantage                         2,412        0.227    738      0.072    696      0.062     1,334     0.068

      3: Fix Both                                            2,448        0.229    735      0.049    684      0.024     1,308     0.030
     Source: Authors' calculations from data reported in Trial Exhibit DX 042.
29
A      Proofs of Theorems
This appendix contains proofs for the two theorems included in the text.


A.1     Proof of Theorem 1

When the objective function of the university is


                  max Nl            xl (x)dx + Nn        xn (x)dx + h (Nl [1 - l (cl )])
                  cl ,cn       cl                   cn

                                         s.t. Nl (1 - l (cl )) + Nn (1 - n (cn )) = N


with h(·) > 0, h (·) > 0, h (·) < 0, the first-order conditions of the Lagrangian are




                              -Nl cl l (cl ) - h (·)Nl l (cl ) - Nl l (cl ) = 0

                                            -Nn cn n (cn ) - Nn n (cn ) = 0

                               N - Nl (1 - l (cl )) - Nn (1 - n (cn )) = 0


Using the first two equations it is straightforward to see that cn = cl + h (·), or that the
cutoff is lower for legacies.
    Using this result, we can write the final first-order condition as


                           N - Nl (1 - l (cl )) - Nn (1 - n (cl + h (·))) = 0.


We can take the derivative of both sides with respect to Nn , exploiting the fact that cl is an
implicit function of Nn , and recover

                    cl                 1 - n (cl + h (·))
                       =                                                   >0
                    Nn   Nl l (cl ) + Nn n (cl + h (·)) [-h (·)Nl l (cl )]

since h (·) < 0 and all other terms in the expression are positive.
    If the cutoff rises, the number of legacy admits will fall, so an increase in Nn will result
in a decrease in the number of legacy admits.

                                                     30
A.2        Proof of Theorem 2

When the objective function of the university is


                     max Nl            xl (x)dx + Nn           xn (x)dx h (Nl [1 - l (cl )])
                     cl ,cn       cl                      cn

                                           s.t. Nl (1 - l (cl )) + Nn (1 - n (cn )) = N


with h(·) > 0, h (·) > 0, h (·) < 0, the first-order conditions of the Lagrangian are




   -Nl cl l (cl )h(·) - h (·)(Nl l (cl )) Nl             xl (x)dx + Nn            xn (x)dx - Nl l (cl ) = 0
                                                    cl                       cn

                                                                        -Nn cn n (cn )h(·) - Nn n (cn ) = 0

                                                               N - Nl (1 - l (cl )) - Nn (1 - n (cn )) = 0


Using the first two equations, we can relate cl and cn according to,

                                        h (·) Nl   cl
                                                        xl (x)dx + Nn      cn
                                                                                xn (x)dx
                          cn - cl =                                                          .
                                                                h(·)

Combined with the capacity constraint, this give us two equations in two unknowns. We can
rewrite each equation as implicit functions f (·) and g (·), where Nn and Nl are exogenous
arguments and cn and cl are endogenous arguments:30


        f (cl (Nn , Nl ), cn (Nn , Nl ), Nn , Nl ) = (cl - cn )h(Nl (1 - l (cl )))

                                               + h (·) Nl              xl (x)dx + Nn         xn (x)dx   =0
                                                                  cl                    cn


and


          g (cl (Nn , Nl ), cn (Nn , Nl ), Nn , Nl ) = N - Nl (1 - l (cl )) - Nn (1 - n (cn )) = 0
 30
      Recall that N is assumed to be fixed.




                                                          31
    Using the Implicit Function Theorem, we can show that

                                           cl  f g - gcn fNn
                                              = cn N n
                                           Nn   fcl gcn - gcl fcn

where


fcn = -h (·)Nn cn n (cn ) - h(·)

gNn = -(1 - n (cn ))

gcn = Nn n (cn )

fNn = h (·)            xn (x)dx
                  cn

 fcl = h(·) - h (·)Nl l (cl ) Nl                 xl (x)dx + Nn            xn (x)dx - Nl l (cl )(h (·)(2cl - cn ))
                                            cl                       cn
 gcl = Nl l (cl )


    The denominator is:


 h(·) - h (·)Nl l (cl ) Nl             xl (x)dx + Nn            xn (x)dx - Nl l (cl )(h (·)(2cl - cn )) Nn n (cn )+
                                  cl                       cn

Nl l (cl ) [h (·)Nn cn n (cn ) + h(·)]


which can be rewritten as


                Nn n (cn )h(·) + Nl l (cl )h(·) + 2Nl l (cl )Nn n (cn )(h (·)(cn - cl ))-

                h (·)Nl l (cl )Nn n (cn ) Nl              xl (x)dx + Nn            xn (x)dx .
                                                     cl                       cn


    Since cn > cl , h(·) > 0, h (·) > 0, and h (·) < 0, all the terms in the expression are
positive, so the sign of denominator is positive.
    Now consider the numerator:


               [h (·)Nn cn n (cn ) + h(·)] [1 - n (cn )] - Nn n (cn )h (·)                  xn (x)dx
                                                                                       cn




                                                           32
which can be rewritten as:

                                                          cn
                                                               xn (x)dx
             h (·)Nn n (cn )(1 - n (cn )) cn -                            + h(·)(1 - (cn ))
                                                          1 - (cn )

The term inside the brackets is negative: the expected value of x conditional on being above
the cutoff has to be greater than the cutoff. h (·)Nn n (cn )(1 - n (cn )) and h(·)(1 - (cn ))
                           cl
are both positive. Thus,   Nn
                                 0 when


                                                          cn
                                                               xn (x)dx
                           h(·)  h (·)Nn n (cn )                          - cn .
                                                           1 - (cn )

   We have used the fact that the Implicit Function Theorem (applied to our first order
conditions) states that

                                                                -1            
                                cl
                                Nn
                                                   f cl f cn           fN n
                                        = -                                   .
                                cn
                                Nn
                                                   gcl gcn             gNn

Using the fact that that the negative inverse of the square matrix is
                                       -1                                               
                           f cl f cn                    1             -gcn       f cn
                    -                       =                                           ,
                           gcl gcn              fcl gcn - gcl fcn  gcl        -fcl

we have
                                       cl  f g - gcn fNn
                                          = cn N n            ,
                                       Nn   fcl gcn - gcl fcn
as we claimed earlier in the proof.




                                                     33
B     Supporting Figures and Tables

                               Figure B1: Trends in Average SAT Scores, Classes of 2000­2017



                             750

                                      Admits (Data & Linear Prediction)

                             740




                             730
         Average SAT score




                             720




                             710

                                      Applicants (Data & Linear Prediction)

                             700




                             690
                               2000     2002        2004       2006           2008   2010   2012   2014   2016
                                                                          Harvard Class



Note: Includes only domestic applicants.
Source: Authors' calculations from SFFA v. Harvard Trial Exhibit DX 042.




                                                                               34
        Figure B2: Trends in LA Share of Applications and Admits for Whites Only



                                    0.4                                                                                   0.11
                                                                              Admits (Data & Linear Prediction)
                                                                              Applications (Data & Linear Prediction)
                                   0.39                                                                                   0.105


                                   0.38                                                                                   0.1


                                   0.37                                                                                   0.095




                                                                                                                                  LA Share of Applications
              LA Share of Admits




                                   0.36                                                                                   0.09


                                   0.35                                                                                   0.085


                                   0.34                                                                                   0.08


                                   0.33                                                                                   0.075


                                   0.32                                                                                   0.07


                                   0.31                                                                                   0.065


                                    0.3                                                                                   0.06
                                      2000   2002   2004   2006     2008     2010        2012         2014         2016
                                                                  Harvard Class



Note: Domestic applicants only.
Source: Authors' calculations from SFFA v. Harvard Trial Exhibit DX 042.




                                                                     35
        Table B1: Domestic Applicants, Admits, and Matriculants by Class

                 Legacy and Athlete                  Non-Legacy and Non-Athletes
 Year   Applicants     Admits     Matriculants    Applicants     Admits    Matriculants
 2000        989         409           324           14,841       1,547       1,203
 2001       1,039        485           397           13,242       1,533       1,130
 2002       1,026        492           411           13,559       1,478       1,143
 2003       1,074        485           409           14,682       1,455       1,117
 2004       1,094        491           419           15,108       1,462       1,116
 2005       1,101        540           444           15,267       1,414       1,067
 2006       1,155        515           437           15,887       1,405       1,060
 2007       1,086        444           392           17,049       1,490       1,105
 2008       1,038        464           402           15,864       1,469       1,086
 2009       1,034        433           381           18,377       1,486       1,104
 2010       1,081        473           418           18,240       1,468       1,114
 2011       1,121        476           419           17,974       1,439       1,073
 2012       1,079        451           405           21,877       1,531       1,080
 2013       1,094        472           427           23,556       1,505       1,069
 2014       1,095        454           400           24,388       1,557       1,104
 2015       1,069        450           399           27,867       1,518       1,068
 2016       1,114        449           409           26,861       1,411       1,070
 2017       1,094        488           437           27,512       1,349       1,037
Note: Domestic applicants only.
Source: Authors' calculations from SFFA v. Harvard Trial Exhibit DX 042.




                                             36
                                              Figure B3: Application Trends at Harvard and Other Elites

                                           (a) Total Applications                                                                 (b) Application Growth
                                       4
                                  10
                             4                                                                                            1.8


                                                                                                                          1.6
                            3.5

                                                                                                                          1.4

                             3                 Harvard                                                                                      Other Elites (Average)
                                                                                                                          1.2


                                                                                            Growth Rate in Applications
   Number of Applications




                            2.5
                                                                                                                           1


                                                                                                                          0.8
                             2


                                                                                                                          0.6
                            1.5

                                                                                                                          0.4
                                               Other Elites (Average)
                             1
                                                                                                                          0.2                     Harvard


                            0.5                                                                                            0
                              2005           2010                        2015   2020                                       2005      2010                        2015   2020
                                                         Harvard Class                                                                         Harvard Class




Notes: Panel (a) lists, by year, the total number of applications submitted to Harvard, compared to the
total number of applications submitted to Other Elites divided by the number of Other Elite universities.
Panel (b) lists growth rates based on the numbers presented in Panel (a).
Other Elites include the following: Amherst College, Caltech, Carnegie Mellon, Columbia, Cornell, Dart-
mouth, Duke, Harvey Mudd, Johns Hopkins, MIT, Northwestern, Pomona College, Princeton, Rice, Stan-
ford, Swarthmore, Penn, Williams, and Yale. These were chosen because they are 4-year public and private
universities that have a 75th percentile math SAT score greater than or equal to 750 between the years of
2001 and 2017, and because they are not missing more than one year of SAT scores or application totals.

Source: Authors' calculations from SFFA v. Harvard Trial Exhibit DX 042 and US National Center for
Education Statistics' Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS).




                                                                                       37
                                             Figure B4: Application Trends at Harvard and Other Ivies

                                         (a) Total Applications                                                                (b) Application Growth
                                  10 4
                             4                                                                                          2


                                                                                                                       1.8

                            3.5
                                                                                                                       1.6


                                                                                                                       1.4
                             3                    Harvard
                                                                                         Growth Rate in Applications
   Number of Applications




                                                                                                                       1.2       Other Ivies (Average)


                            2.5                                                                                         1


                                                                                                                       0.8

                             2
                                                                                                                       0.6
                                             Other Ivies (Average)

                                                                                                                       0.4
                            1.5

                                                                                                                       0.2                        Harvard


                             1                                                                                          0
                             2005          2010                       2015   2020                                       2005        2010                        2015   2020
                                                      Harvard Class                                                                             Harvard Class




Notes: Panel (a) lists, by year, the total number of applications submitted to Harvard, compared to the
total number of applications submitted to other Ivy League institutions divided by the number of other Ivies.
Panel (b) lists growth rates based on the numbers presented in Panel (a).
Other Ivies include Columbia, Cornell, Dartmouth, Princeton, Penn, and Yale. Brown is excluded due to
incomplete data.

Source: Authors' calculations from SFFA v. Harvard Trial Exhibit DX 042 and US National Center for
Education Statistics' Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS).




                                                                                    38
