                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE TALL AND THE SHORT OF THE RETURNS TO HEIGHT

                                        Michael Baker
                                       Kirsten Cornelson

                                      Working Paper 26325
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26325


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                         September 2019, Revised December 2020




We thank Matthew Schwartzman for excellent research assistance, and Jonathan Beauchamp,
Dwayne Benjamin and Gary Solon for helpful discussions. Workshop participants at Buffalo,
McGill and the 2019 SOLE meetings and NBER Summer Institute provided helpful comments.
Baker gratefully acknowledges the research support of a Canada Research Chair at the University
of Toronto. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Michael Baker and Kirsten Cornelson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Tall and the Short of the Returns to Height
Michael Baker and Kirsten Cornelson
NBER Working Paper No. 26325
September 2019, Revised December 2020
JEL No. I3,J24

                                           ABSTRACT

We revisit the US evidence of the association of height with socioeconomic status. We document
non linear height profiles that are different for males and females. For males the profile is a spline
function with a single node at mean height. Below mean height there is a sharply positive slope
with height, while the function is roughly horizontal above the mean. For females the spline has
two nodes. There is positive slope below mean height and in the top 10 percent of heights, and
the profile is roughly horizontal between the mean and the 90th percentile. Remarkably, these
stylized profiles describe the association of height with socioeconomic outcomes ranging from
teenage cognitive scores to adult poverty, suggesting a common origin. We investigate some of
the implications of these findings for analyses of the contributions of cognitive and non cognitive
skills to the height profile in wages.


Michael Baker
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
baker@chass.utoronto.ca

Kirsten Cornelson
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
3060 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
kcornels@nd.edu
    1. Introduction

       Variation in social, health and economic outcomes by height is studied in the humanities,

medicine, public health and the social sciences. This research reports that taller people have

advantages ranging from higher wages and educational achievement through higher overall life

satisfaction, but also face higher probabilities of certain morbidities (e.g., Deaton and Arora

2009, Case and Paxson 2010). Possible explanations for the relationship of height with any of

these outcomes include genes, the environment and discrimination, and the relative roles of these

different factors remains an open question.

       In this paper we revisit the US evidence of the association of height with socioeconomic

(SES) status using the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS). This survey provides much

larger sample sizes than the data sources used in previous investigations, and this advantage

leads to our first contribution.1 We estimate single inch height profiles, and find distinct, non

linear profiles for US males and females which are common to a range of outcomes. For males,

the profile is roughly a spline function with a single node at mean height. Below mean height

SES varies positively with height, while above mean height the profile has little slope. For

females the profile is a spline with two nodes. SES varies positively with height below the mean

and in the top 10 percent of heights, while the profile is roughly horizontal between mean height

and the 90th percentile. Remarkably, these same stylized profiles describe the association of

height with SES outcomes ranging from teenage cognitive scores to adult poverty.

       Our second contribution is using these findings as an additional source of identification in

the horse race regressions used in research on the returns to height. Typically researchers regress



1
  Case and Paxson (2006) examine the relationship between height and occupational skills using
the NHIS. This study is discussed in footnote 12.
                                                                                                    2
some outcome, for example wages, on measures of height, and then add explanatory variables

that proxy for various hypotheses of the source of the outcome/height profile. The explanatory

variables leading to the greater attenuation in the estimates of the height profile variables are

awarded the greater causal relevance. Therefore, sorting among the causal claims of the various

hypotheses is an "empirical question".

       The fact that a common, non linear height profile characterizes so many outcomes across

the lifecycle provides some additional leverage for distinguishing among the competing

hypotheses. The logic is analogous to that for the regression kink design. To be specific, if the

outcome in the regression shares a common kink, or spline node, in its height profile with the

height profile of one of the explanatory variables, but not with the height profiles of the others,

we would expect the former explanatory variable to have greater empirical relevance, and the

empirical relevance to more likely reflect causal relevance.

       As application, we take this intuition to the research exploring how teenage measures of

cognitive and non cognitive skills account for the adult height profile in wages in the US. For

males, if we specify a linear height profile, we find that the account of cognitive skills is roughly

50 percent greater than the account of non cognitive skills. However, when we more

appropriately specify a non linear height profile, the account of cognitive skills grows to 3 to 6

times the account of non cognitive skills particularly for variation below mean height. For

females the inference is different in two interesting ways. First, while the relative role of

cognitive skills is again enhanced when a non linear height profile is specified, the account of

non cognitive skills is not as diminished to the extent as in the male case. Second, in comparison

to other height intervals, neither cognitive or non cognitive skills make significant inroads

accounting for the variation of wages over the tallest females.

                                                                                                      3
       Underlying these results, we show that the measures of teenage cognitive skills display

the same distinctive non linear height profiles we document for adult outcomes. In contrast, the

measures of non cognitive skills do not. Adding to the evidence in Case and Paxson (2008),

these results suggest that variation of these socioeconomic outcomes with height primarily

reflects some factor which manifests in the cognitive scores of children, rather than some later

life environmental influence.

       In the next section we review previous studies of the association of height with various

SES outcomes in the US. Section 3 provides a description of the data and our empirical

framework. In sections 4 and 5, we document the pervasiveness of the common, gender specific,

non linear height profiles in socioeconomic outcomes. In Section 6 we show how the variation

in these outcomes below mean height compares to their variation by race/ethnicity. In Section 7

we document the height profiles in teenage measures of cognitive and non cognitive skills and

compare them to the height profiles in adult outcomes. Section 8 contains an analysis of how the

adult height profile in wages is related to these measures of teenage cognitive and non cognitive

scores. In section 9 we compare our results to evidence of non linear height profiles in wages

and income from other countries. Section 10 contains discussion and conclusions.

   2. Previous US Evidence

       As noted by Case and Paxson (2008), the study of the relationship between height and

socioeconomic status in the US dates back more than a century (e.g., Gowin 1915). For

example, Komlos (1987) and Steckel (1992) present evidence from the 19th century.

       More recent research leans heavily on panel data sets such as the National Longitudinal

Survey of Youth (NLSY79). Two prominent recent papers using this type of data are Persico et

al. (2004) and Case and Paxson (2008). Persico et al. (2004) document a wage return of 2.5

                                                                                                    4
percent per inch in a sample of white males who work full time in the NLSY79. Case and

Paxson (2008) present comparable estimates for broader samples from the Panel Study of

Income Dynamics (PSID) of just under 2 percent per inch for males and 1.2 percent per inch for

females. Mankiw and Weinzierl (2010) also use data for white males in the NLSY79, obtaining

a result quite close to Persico et al. (2004).

        Case and Paxson (2008) also document a positive relationship between childhood (age 5-

6) height and childhood test scores among the children of the NLSY79. The estimated

associations are just over 5 percent of a standard deviation per inch in the full sample, and a little

more than half that using sibling differences, at both ages 3 and 5. They also report obtaining

similar results for males and females. Case and Paxson (2010) provide evidence of the

association of height with a wider array of SES and health outcomes based on NLSY79, PSID

and Health and Retirement Study data. Pursuing the source, they document the association,

within families, of mothers' behaviors through pregnancy and birth conditions with their

children's stature. Bleakley et al. (2014) investigate the relationship between height and

educational attainment for American males using an array of historical and more current data sets

(including the NLSY79). They report a range of estimates that decline over time. A centimeter

of height is associated with 0.08 more years of schooling among WW2 enlistees falling to just

under 0.04 years for more recent cohorts in the in the National Health and Nutrition Examination

Survey (NHANES) and the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS).

        While there remain unresolved debates in this literature,2 a consensus from the studies

reviewed is that height varies linearly with wages and childhood measures of skills, and the



2
 Notable here is the relative roles of cognitive and non cognitive skills in accounting for the
wage/height profile. See Persico et a. (2004) and Case and Paxson (2008).
                                                                                                     5
variation is fairly similar for females and males. The linearity of the variation reflects the

majority of the existing evidence, but it is primarily by assumption rather than evidence, most

likely a concession to the relatively small sample sizes of these surveys.

       Before preceding we also note that studies for other countries have documented non

linearity in the income/height relationship for males. We return to this research below as points

of agreement and contrast to the results we present.

   3. Data and Empirical Framework

       To examine the variation of various socioeconomic outcomes by height we use data from

the NHIS. This is a national, representative survey of the American population with a primary

focus on health outcomes. For our purposes it captures self reported height; highest level of

education; race/ethnicity; in some years 3-digit occupation; self reported health; and the poverty

status of the household. Much of our evidence is based on the 1990-1994 NHIS. These are

survey years that offer detailed occupational coding and match well with the 1991 edition of the

Dictionary of Occupational Titles and 1990 census, which we use in some of the occupational

analysis. It is also a period in which the response rate to the NHIS averaged near 95 percent

(Lucas et al. 2006, Moriarity and Dahlhamer 2012). We also obtain evidence from later years of

this survey (2010-2013) to examine stability in the height profiles over time. However, it is

important to note that response rates in the NHIS have fallen over time, dropping by more than

10 percentage points between the mid 1990s and 2010 (Czajka and Beyler 2016). Except where

noted, we select samples of adults aged 25-59. This is to be more certain that formal human

capital investments are complete and adult height has been obtained, and to avoid sample

selection issues in some of the outcomes due to retirement.



                                                                                                     6
       The NHIS surveys record self reported height. Doctor or interviewer recorded height

would be preferable because validation studies have revealed error in the self reports of this

variable. As explained below we also examine data from the NHANES to discover if the self

report of heights in the NHIS is materially affecting our results.

       We also use data from the NLSY79 to investigate the height profiles in teenage cognitive

and non cognitive skills and their contributions to the height profiles of adult wages. The

NLSY79 first surveyed a sample of 14-21 year olds in 1979, with follow-ups annually until 1994

and every two years thereafter. Each wave asks questions about completed education and

earnings. Because there is sample attrition over time, we use a relatively early wave ­ 1990 ­ for

our analysis. This is the earliest year in which all respondents are at least 25 years of age, which

helps ensure that we are measuring completed education. To maximize sample size, we follow

the approach Lang and Manove (2011) and use a 3 year average of wages from 1989, 1990 and

1991. This procedure allows us to include individuals who do not report wages in 1990. Self-

reported height is available in the 1981, 1982 and 1985 waves, and every survey year from 2006-

2014. We use the 1985 wave because it is the year closest to the time when our wage and

education variables are measured. The NLSY79 also contains each respondent's Armed Forces

Qualification Test (AFQT) score (recorded in 1981), as well as a wide variety of personality and

attitudinal measures.

       A canonical empirical model in the literature is a regression of some human

developmental or economic outcome y on a measure of height at a certain age, h, and control

variables X.

       ! =  + ! +  + !



                                                                                                       7
In many if not most applications the model is linear in all variables. Any estimated relationship

between the outcome and height is usually interpreted as proxying for an underlying relationship

between the outcome and some unobserved factor which is correlated with height. For example,

Case and Paxson (2008) discuss a model in which an endowment influences both height and

cognitive ability. Wages (the outcome) are related to cognitive ability. In this case, the

relationship between height and wages will reflect the association of cognitive ability and height

through the endowment. However, there are alternative interpretations in which, for example,

height is a proxy for an underlying relationship between the outcome and non cognitive skills

(e.g., Persico et al. 2004).

        In many applications empirically distinguishing among alternative models reduces to a

"horse race" regression (e.g., Case and Paxson 2010). How is the estimated coefficient on height

in the wage regression affected as direct measures of cognitive and non cognitive skills are added

as control variables (e.g., Persico et al. 2004, Case and Paxson 2008, Lundborg et al. 2014,

Schick and Steckel 2015)? How is the estimated coefficient on adult height affected as measures

of height at different ages are added to the regression (e.g., Persico et al. 2004, Case and Paxson

2008)? An important consideration in this approach is that all permutations of the entry of these

explanatory variables to the regression are considered.

        In some cases, additional identifying information comes from the assumed underlying

model of the relationship between height and economic outcomes. For example, the model in

Case and Paxson (2008) implies a testable relationship between cognitive ability and the age of

adolescent growth spurts.




                                                                                                      8
       Our base parametrization of the height profile, where sample sizes allow, is at the same

level of detail as the responses in the surveys. Specifically, we regress, by sex, various outcomes

on single inch height dummy variables and a minimal set of controls.

(1)    ! =  +  +  + !

where, for example, EDi is a measure of completed education, H is a vector of (single inch)

height dummy variables (the dummy for mean height is excluded), and X, which initially

includes age (single year), region, race/ethnicity (African American, Hispanic, "other"), foreign

birth and indicators for survey year (where necessary).

       For the analyses of surveys with smaller samples, and also as a means of summary, we

reparametrize the height dummy variables to capture larger ranges in height. We continue to

omit mean height and then add dummies to roughly divide heights on each side of the mean into

equal segments. As example, for the analysis of males in the NLSY79 the regression is

(2)    ! =  + " 68! + # 6869! + $ 7172! + % 72! +  + !

where the height dummy variables capture the intervals less than 68", 68"-69", 71"-72" and

greater than 72" and the omitted category is 70".

       As noted in the Introduction, we document the similarity of the height profiles that

characterize socioeconomic outcomes spanning the lifespans of males and females. We also

highlight these similarities as an additional source of identification sorting among alternative

accounts of the association of height with outcomes in the horse race framework. Our

interpretation of our findings leans on the fact that the outcomes examined share a similar height

profile with some of these accounts and not with others.




                                                                                                    9
    4. The Height Profile in Completed Education and Occupational Choice

       In table 1 we report summary statistics, by sex, for the self reported heights reported in

the NHIS data. Average height is 70" for males and 64" for females. For males, the interquartile

and 90/10 percentile ranges are +/- 2 and 4 inches from the mean. For females there is a similar

progression above mean height, but the 25th and 10th percentiles are one and three inches below

mean height, respectively.

       We begin the analysis with, perhaps, the most studied determinant of labor market

earnings--formal education. In figure 1 we graph the height profile (estimates of  ), with 95

percent confidence intervals,3 for years of completed education in the 1990-94 NHIS.          We

specify a full set of height dummy variables in the estimation, but report estimates for the height

ranges 63" though 76" for males and 59" though 70" for females in the figures.4 Note that the

markers for 70" (males) and 64" (females) are located at 0 and have no confidence interval

indicating the omitted category.

       The results for males in the first panel exhibit three distinct features. First, there is little

economically or statistically significant variation in completed education with height above mean

height. Second, and in contrast, the variation below mean height is both statistically and

economically significant. At one inch below the mean it is almost one half a year, and at the 10th

percentile of height (66") it is over one year. Third, there is a remarkable asymmetry directly

around mean height--the difference in completed education is much greater one inch below the


3
  We estimate robust standard errors.
4
  In both cases this omits about 4 percent of the distribution of heights. While the 1990-94 NHIS
include all heights reported, the 2010-13 NHIS only reports height between 63" and 76" for
males and 59" and 70" for females. Furthermore, other heights are not observed if the individual
reported a weight that was outside bottom coding and top coding for this variable. Adding
controls for weight (single pound) does not substantively change the height profiles of completed
education.
                                                                                                      10
mean than one inch above. It is clear in this figure that specifying a linear relationship between

height and completed education would completely miss the very different variation of education

with height above and below the mean.

       Figure 1 also presents the profile omitting African Americans and Hispanics from the

sample, to discover if variation in height and completed education levels across these groups is

confounding the inference. While the educational deficits at shorter heights are smaller making

this omission, the spline like profile with a node at mean height remains.

       Because it is not obvious how differences in completed years of education map into

degrees and diplomas, we have also estimated these profiles for significant milestones of

educational attainment (not reported).5 Each displays similar non linearity. For example, at a

height just one inch below the mean, the "no high school diploma" rate is almost one-third

higher than at average height, which was 11 percent (or 10 percent for non-Hispanic whites) in

1990-94 (see also figure B2 in appendix B). At two inches below mean height, the 4 year

college degree or higher rate is more than 18 percent lower than at mean height, while at two

inches above mean height it is roughly the same.

       We have considered how our inference might be confounded by a) the fact that we

observe self reported, rather than exam recorded, height in the NHIS, b) changes in average

height and educational attainment by birth cohort, and c) any relationship between height and

weight. In appendix B we compare the height profiles for the no high school diploma outcome6

in the NHIS and in the NHANES, which records both self reported height and examination

recorded height. While there is no doubt some error in the self report of height, it does not


5
  These results are available on request. The profiles for not completing a high school diploma
from the 2010-13 NHIS are reported in appendix B.
6
  Years of completed education are not available in the public use NHANES.
                                                                                                   11
appear to affect our inference for the height profiles of educational attainment.7 Estimates of

separate height profiles (not reported) for the 25-40 and 41-59 age intervals display similar

patterns, as do the height profiles from the 2010-13 NHIS (see appendix A). Thus the fact that

older cohorts are both shorter (the variation of average height by age is 0.59 inches in our

sample) and less educated is not driving our results. Finally, the height profile estimated

conditional on single pound weight dummy variables (not reported) is very similar to the one

reported in figure 1.

       In the second panel of figure 1 is the profile for females. It exhibits both similarities to,

and differences from, the male profile. There is significant variation in educational attainment

below, and asymmetry around, mean height, although the range is smaller than for males.8

What's new here is the positive variation in completed education within the upper 10 percent

heights. Again a linear specification of the height profile would miss the different associations

of height with education across the distribution. In profiles not shown, the estimates for no high

school diploma at heights 61" through 63" are more than twice, in absolute value, the estimates

at heights 65" through 67". At 3 inches below mean height, college attainment is lower by

almost 5 percentage points or 22 percent, while at 3 inches above the mean it is just over 1

percentage point higher.

       A potential limitation of the NHIS is that it does not record labor market earnings or

wages. There is a trade off, however, because its much larger sample size than US surveys that

record both height and wages permits the estimation of the granular height profiles in figure 1.



7
  Persico et al. (2004) come to a similar conclusion for their inference comparing self reported
and exam recorded heights in the NCDS.
8
  For females, conditioning on weight the differences by height are marginally larger and the
profile retains the same shape as in figure 1.
                                                                                                       12
We can, however, examine the height profile in occupational earnings, an important component

of total earnings. The occupational component of earnings will capture more of the permanent

part of labor market compensation relative to total earnings in which more transitory components

play a role. Also, previous research indicates that occupational choice is a primary mediator of

the height profile in earnings or wages (e.g., Case et al 2009, Lundborg et al. 2014).9

       The 1990-94 NHIS provides information on respondents' detailed (3 digit) occupation.10

We calculate average annual earnings at this occupational level by sex, using a similarly selected

sample from the 1990 US census. We next assign these averages to NHIS respondents based on

their reported occupations. We then estimate equation (1) using the log of these averages as the

dependent variable.

       The results are reported in figure 2.11 For both males and females the profiles are very

similar to those observed for completed education in figure 1. For males, it is effectively a spline

function, with a node at mean height and a positive slope below the mean but a zero slope above.

For females, it is a spline with two nodes, one at mean height and one at the 90th percentile. For

males this component of earnings varies by over 15 percent below mean height, while for

females the variation is less than 10 percent. For both males and females we also plot the

profiles when we add completed education as an additional control. Because of the similarity of

the height profiles in the two outcomes, the impact of the modification is as expected. Education


9
  Case et al. (2009) demonstrate that in a wage regression the estimated coefficient on height is
significantly attenuated when additional controls for educational attainment and occupational
fixed effects are added as control variables. Likewise, Lundborg et al. (2014) demonstrate that
for males occupational fixed effects attenuate the association between height and earnings at
shorter heights, indicating that very short people sort into lower paying occupations
10
   The 1990-1994 NHIS contains a detailed occupation variable with coding that corresponds to
the 1990 Census occupational classification.
11
   Excluding African Americans and Hispanics from the sample does not substantially change
the inference (estimates not shown). We cluster the standard errors by occupation.
                                                                                                   13
attenuates the male height profile below mean height where both education and occupational

earnings vary with height but has little impact above mean height where they do not. Similarly,

an impact of adding education is observed for the female height profile at heights below the

mean and in the upper 10 percentiles.

       The attenuation of the height profile in occupational earnings conditional on completed

education suggests we are observing some underlying variation of height with skills. We push

this hypothesis forward by ranking occupations by their underlying skill level.12 To do this we

merge Dictionary of Occupational Title (DOT) data (1991 edition) to our 1990-94 sample. We

construct the different routine and non routine task constructs as proposed by Autor et al. (2003).

We then standardize each task to have 0 mean and unit standard deviation and then assign the

task content of NHIS respondents' employment based on their reported 3-digit occupation.

These estimates of occupational task content then serve as a dependent variable in (1).13

       By these definitions, Autor and Price (2013) show that non routine analytical and

interpersonal skills are in the ascendency in the American labor market over the past four to five

decades, while manual and routine cognitive skills are in the decline. In figure 3 we report the

height profiles for Non Routine Interpersonal skills and Routine Cognitive skills, the skills that

saw the largest increase or decline over the period 1960 through 2010. For males, we see the

height profiles observed in figures 1 and 2. At a height of two inches below the mean (the 25th

percentile) the content of Non Routine Interpersonal skill is 10 percent of a standard deviation



12
   Case and Paxson (2006) investigate how height is related to occupational characteristics in the
NHIS using a linear specification of the height profile. They demonstrate that height is
positively correlated with selection into occupations which require greater use of cognitive skills
and negatively correlated with selection into occupation which require greater physical skills.
13
   Excluding African Americans and Hispanics from the sample produce does not substantially
change the inference (estimates not shown).
                                                                                                     14
lower, and the content of Routine Cognitive skill just over 5 percent of a standard deviation

higher, than at mean height. The estimates for those in the bottom quartile of height are

substantially larger. For females the profiles also mirror the results in figures 1 and 2, except the

variation in the upper 10 percent of heights is attenuated for Routine Cognitive skill.

        Some argue that taller people have an advantage in interpersonal skills so the profiles in

Non Routine Interpersonal skills might be expected. However, the profile for Non Routine

Analytic skill for males (not reported), the other task in ascendancy over the period, is similar to

that for Non Routine Interpersonal, but it spans a larger interval (for males over 30 percent of a

standard deviation) at shorter heights.14

     5. The Height Profile in Poverty and Self Reported Health

        Given the preceding evidence of common non linear profiles in important determinants of

labour market compensation, we might predict similar non linear profiles in other measures of

socioeconomic status. We examine two markers of socioeconomic wellbeing--measured

poverty and self reported health--to check this hypothesis.

        The height profiles for a measure of household poverty are reported in figure 4.15 For

males the profile mirrors the profiles in completed education and occupational choice. The

poverty rate at average height is 5 percent, as it is at most taller heights. In contrast, at lower

heights it rises in excess of 6 percentage points. For females we see the greater variation at




14
   The height profile for routine manual skills is flatter for both sexes.
15
   The measure of poverty is based family size, number of children under 18 years of age and
family income using poverty levels derived from the Current Population Survey from the same
year. Producing poverty rates from the NHIS comparable to those from other sources is not
straightforward (Czajka and Denmead 2008). Here we simply code persons as in poverty as per
the survey supplied indicator that the individual's household income is below the poverty line
                                                                                                      15
heights below the mean, but not so prominently the variation at the very tallest heights. The

poverty rate at average height for females is 8 percent.

       Because stature is sometimes interpreted as a proxy for physical nutrition and

development, the self reported measure of overall health from the NHIS is also of interest.

However, this outcome may also capture some part of labor market outcomes. Justification bias

raises the possibility that causality runs from poorer labour market outcomes through to poorer

reported health outcomes.

       The height profiles are reported in figure 5 for a 0/1 indicator that the respondent reports

either excellent or very good health. The height profile for males is the now familiar spline with

a node at mean height. The height profile for females shows greater resemblance to the male

profile for this outcome. It lacks a strong positive association between height and health at the

tallest heights. The profiles for self reported health from the 2010-13 NHIS, reported in figure

A2 of appendix A, are very similar.

   6. How Significant is the Variation in Socioeconomic Outcomes Below Mean Height?

       The preceding evidence is that a common, gender specific, profile describes the variation

of permanent and more transitory measures of economic status with height within the American

population. Is the resulting variation in status by height economically significant?

       We focus on the variation below mean height, as it is substantial for both males and

females, comparing it to corresponding inequality by race/ethnicity. We re-specify the controls

for height in our regression equation as dummy variables for (approximately) the bottom decile,

the 10th through the 30th percentiles, and the 30th through 50th percentiles of the height

distribution. In table 2 we report estimates of the dummy variables for the two shortest height



                                                                                                    16
categories and for dummy variables for African Americans and Hispanics from these

regressions.

       For both females and males, height in the bottom 12-13 percent of the distribution is a

marker of lower educational outcomes that is persistent over time and economically significant

in its magnitude. It is comparable in magnitude to the outcomes for African Americans. Height

in the next roughly 20 percentiles is again a persistent indicator of lower educational attainment,

but the estimates are roughly half of those for the bottom decile.

       The estimates for the employment rate for the bottom decile for males sit amidst the

estimates for African Americans and Hispanics, while for the shortest females the inference is

more period specific. For excellent or very good health, among males the estimate for the

shortest 12 percent of height is similar to those for African Americans and Hispanics, while for

females it is negative but about half as large.

   7. The Height Profiles in Cognitive and Non Cognitive Skills

       Much of the economic research on height has been devoted to the height profile in

earnings or wages. In attempting to account for this height profile, researchers have turned to

widely acknowledged ingredients of labor market success--cognitive and non cognitive skills.

The preceding evidence is primarily for precedents--education, occupational skills--and

antecedents--poverty--of labor market compensation. Inasmuch, we might expect cognitive

and non cognitive skills to have similar height profiles as these outcomes. In fact, we might

better distinguish their relevance, if these skills were discovered to differentially exhibit the

common, sex specific height profiles.

       We next document the non linearity in the height profiles of measures of cognitive and

non cognitive skills used in the US research. We use data from the NLSY79. The primary

                                                                                                    17
measure of cognitive skill in the NLSY79 is the AFQT. As measures of non cognitive skills we

follow research that has used the NLSY79 (i.e., Persico et al. 2004). These are variables

capturing participation in social activities during high school and the Rosenberg index of self-

esteem, which was measured when the respondents were young adults.16

       An overview of the inference is provided in figures 6 and 7. We plot estimates of the

single inch adult height profiles from (1) for these measures of cognitive and non cognitive

skills. The male height profile for AFQT percentiles (figure 6) strongly echoes the height profiles

for the socioeconomic outcomes in the NHIS. It is sharply non linear, asymmetric around the

mean and there is little to no return to height above the mean. Individuals in the bottom decile of

heights score almost 30 percentiles lower than men of mean height. For women the height profile

for AFQT scores displays a less distinct variation across mean height than observed in the NHIS

outcomes, but there is familiar variation below the mean and in the upper 10 percent of heights.

       In figure 7 are the height profiles for high school social activities from the NLCY79. The

profile for males is different than the profiles for the other outcomes. There is no sharp break at

mean height, and no monotonic decline in activity in the lower percentiles. In contrast, for

females there is systematically lower activity at the shorter heights.17


16
   Social participation, "activities", is measured as the number of organizations or other extra-
curricular activities the respondent participated in in high school. The measure ranges from 0 to 7
with a mean of 1.53 and 1.23 for females and males respectively, and a standard deviation of
1.59 and 1.36. Self-esteem is measured using the Rosenberg self-esteem scale, which is a
measure that runs from 0 to 40 with higher values indicating higher self-esteem. Self-esteem was
measured in 1987, when the respondents were 22-29 years old. The sample means are 22.41 and
22.77 for females and males respectively, with standard deviations of 4.15 and 3.99.
17
   We have also examined an array of other measures of non cognitive skills that were collected
at older ages (in 2014). These include: two personality traits related to emotional stability
(calm/emotionally stable and anxious/easily upset), two traits related to responsibility
(dependable/self-disciplined and disorganized/careless), and four traits related to social skills
(extraverted/enthusiastic, sympathetic/warm, reserved/quiet, and critical/quarrelsome.). Each is
measured using participants' self-assessed ratings of pairs of personality traits on a scale of 1 to
                                                                                                   18
        In table 3 we formalize this inference presenting estimates of (2) for these measures of

cognitive and non cognitive skills. For males, the estimates for AFQT are true to figure 6, with

deficits 5.5 and 13+ percentiles at the lower height intervals which are 19 and 44 percent of a

standard deviation, respectively. For the two non cognitive measures, there are also negative,

statistically significant estimates for the shortest height interval but these are smaller in context,

representing 16 percent of standard deviation for social activities and 20 percent of a standard

deviation for the Rosenberg measure of self esteem. For females, the differences in AFQT are

18 percent of a standard deviation for the shortest interval and 16 percent for the tallest. The

estimates for the non cognitive measures display more linear progression through the distribution

of heights, although figure 7 indicates that this is driven by the tails of the height distribution.

Also, there is no remarkable increase in the scores for the tallest height category. The

corresponding estimates from the sample of non Hispanic whites (not shown) are almost

identical to those for the full sample.

        Previous research using AFQT in the NLSY79 as a measure of cognitive skills have

acknowledged a number of limitations (e.g., Neal and Johnson 1996, Lang and Manove 2011).

One criticism is that rather than capturing underlying cognitive skills, AFQT may instead be a

proxy for completed education or socioeconomic advantage. In appendix C we investigate the

impact of environmental factors on the relationship between height and AFQT to help sharpen its

interpretation. There we show that neither controlling for family income or measures of school

quality significantly changes the non linear relationships between this measure of skills and

height for males or females.



7. The majority of the height profile estimates from (2) for these traits are economically and
statistically insignificant.
                                                                                                       19
        In appendix D we take a different tack, drawing on data from the UK National Child

Development Study (NCDS). The NCDS has figured prominently in past research on the

relationship between height and wages. Also, many studies have used data from both the US and

UK and demonstrated some common features of the height wage and height/test score

relationship in the two countries.18 An advantage of the NCDS is that it provides exam recorded

height and measures of cognitive and non cognitive skills from much earlier ages that the AFQT.

The analysis of these data (figure D1) reveals that the adult height profiles of age 7 math and

reading scores exhibit the distinctive male and female profiles we have documented for US

outcomes. Also, the adult height profiles in measures of age 7 non cognitive scores do not.

        This analysis shows that the adult height profiles in teenage cognitive skills foretell the

profiles found in the adult socioeconomic outcomes. They provide a graphic example of how the

distribution of adult outcomes can be set early in life, a theme that has dominated social science

research since the work of Barker (1990). In contrast, the profiles for teenage non cognitive

skills exhibit less similarity to the adult profiles. This suggests these cognitive skills may find

greater resonance in accounting for the height profiles in adult outcomes.

     8. Wages, Cognitive and Non Cognitive Skills


18
  For example, the wage returns to height in the UK are quite similar. Case and Paxson (2008)
report estimates of the wage return to an inch of height from the NCDS and the British Cohort
Study (BCS) ranging from 1 to 2.3 percent for males and from 1.5 to 1.9 percent for females.
Persico et al (2004) report estimates ranging for 2.2 to 2.7 percent per inch of adult height for
males in the NCDS, but also that this return is primarily for teenage rather than adult height
when both measures are entered in the estimating equation. Schick and Steckel (2015) report
estimates of 2.2 percent per inch for males and 1.9 percent per inch for females from the NCDS.
For skills, Schick and Steckel (2015) estimate that a roughly 2 inch increase in age 7 height is
associated with just over a 0.1 standard deviation increase in age 11 math and reading scores for
both girls and boys, controlling for an array of background factors. Case and Paxson (2008)
report comparable estimates from the NCDS as well as from the BCS (in which extended
controls make a larger difference). Again the estimates for boys and girls are very similar.

                                                                                                      20
       The preceding evidence that adult socioeconomic outcomes and childhood cognitive

scores share a common height profile, may provide leverage to distinguish the impact of

different accounts of the association of outcomes with height in the horse race regressions used

in the literature. To explore this hypothesis, as an example we re-examine the relationship

between height and wages in US.

       In table 4 are the results of regressing males' log wages on various specifications of the

height profile, alternatively adding controls for cognitive (AFQT) skills, non-cognitive (social

participation and self esteem) skills and their combination using the NLSY79. In the first panel

are the results for a linear height profile. The return to height in the first column is 1.8 percent

per inch, which is just a bit smaller than the estimates for American males in Persico et al. (2004)

and Case and Paxson (2008). The next columns reveal that, on their own, cognitive and non

cognitive skills can account for 44 percent and 28 percent of the estimated correlation of height

with wages, respectively. Together their account is 50 percent, and the marginal contribution of

cognitive skills conditional on non cognitive skills is much larger than the reverse.

       In the next two panels, are the estimates substituting the height profile according to (2).

In the first column is the familiar male non linear height profile, except that the point estimates

indicate a modest wage premium for the tallest males. In the full sample, adding cognitive skills

to the regression attenuates the estimates for the two height intervals below the mean by 57 to 69

percent. In contrast adding non cognitive skills accounts for 10 to 28 percent of these estimates.

Furthermore, conditional on cognitive skills, the measures of non cognitive skills have little

impact on the estimates for these heights, while conditional on non cognitive skills, cognitive

skills have a substantive impact, especially for height just below the mean. At heights above the

mean, these skills have much less traction. At the tallest heights non cognitive skills make a

                                                                                                       21
modest contribution, while these males are, if anything, over paid for their cognitive skills,

consistent with the relatively flat profile of AFQT scores at these heights (figure 6). Restricting

the sample to non Hispanic whites makes little difference to this inference.

        The corresponding results for females are presented in table 5. In the linear height

specification, the gross return to height is 2.1 percent per inch. Cognitive skills can account for

38 percent of this correlation, while non cognitive skills can account for 24 percent. Again

cognitive skills make the larger contribution conditional on non cognitive skills, than vice versa.

        Substituting the height profile according to (2), there is a statistically significant wage

deficit at the shortest heights and wage premium at the tallest heights. The estimates at heights

around the mean are both statistically insignificant, but the point estimates indicate a larger

return above than below mean height. At heights below the mean, adding cognitive skills to the

regression attenuates the estimates as much as 65 percent. The impact of adding non cognitive

skills is smaller, but not as dramatically different as it was for male heights below the mean. An

additional distinction of the female case is what little effect either measure of skills has for the

estimated wage return for taller females. While the measure of cognitive skill does appear to

have a larger effect, net of all the measures of skills the wage return to the tallest height remains

substantive and statistically significant.

        The message here for males is that conditional on a non linear specification of the height

profile in wages, measures of cognitive skills provide a much greater account of the association

of wages with height below mean height than measures of non cognitive skills. 19 This message

is missed specifying a linear specification of the height profile. It is important to note that the


19
  This conclusion is robust to specifying low order polynomials in the measures of cognitive and
non cognitive skills--the account of cognitive skills is marginally enhanced while the account of
non cognitive skills is unchanged.
                                                                                                       22
measures of non cognitive skills have statistically significant and substantive direct associations

with wages. However, adding them to the regression has relatively less impact on the estimates

of the height profile. Correspondingly, as demonstrated in figure 7 and table 3, their variation

with height displays less coherence with the height profiles in wages and the other outcomes

studied here, than the height profile in AFQT.

       For females, the inference is not so dependent on specifying a non linear versus linear

height profile, although the height profile in wages is clearly non linear. Relative to the male

case, the account of cognitive skills is more marginally enhanced moving to a non linear profile.

Where this difference in specification does make a difference is for taller females. Across an

array of outcomes the very tallest US females experience a positive return to their stature. We

are unaware of previous documentation of this finding. The results in table 5 indicate that

neither measures of cognitive of non cognitive skills make a substantive account of this

association. Again, this story is missed in the linear specification of the height profile.

   9. Other Evidence of Non-linearities in Height Profiles

       Many studies analyze both US and UK data and have documented similarities in the

wage and skill returns to height in these two countries (see footnote 18). While much of this

analysis has been conducted with a linear specification of the height profile, an important

exception is Schick and Steckel (2005), who plot the results of estimating a spline specification

for wages that divides NCDS males' heights into 5 intervals. The results indicate that the height

profile in males' wages plateaus at 72 inches of height. Related is the evidence of Heineck

(2009) of a quadratic relationship between wages and height in the British Household Panel

Survey. As noted above, in appendix D we document that in the NCDS, age 7 math and reading



                                                                                                    23
scores display similar height profiles to the height profiles for AFQT from the NLSY79, and the

NHIS SES outcomes, while the age 7 behavior scores do not.

       Lundborg et al. (2014) investigate the income returns to height for Swedish males using

administrative data on military enlistees. While the analysis is initially conducted using a linear

specification of the height profile, in the final section of the paper the analysis is extended to a

specification using single centimetre height dummy variables and piecewise linear models. The

unconditional estimates of the centimeter dummy variables specification reveal a profile with a

"slightly concave" shape, with greater slope below mean height.20 The authors also report the

changes in these returns to height, sequentially controlling for cognitive skills, then non

cognitive skills and finally handgrip strength.21 In the linear specification cognitive skills can

account for 23 percent of the returns while adding non cognitive skills can account for an

additional 10 percent. Because the model includes sibling fixed effects, the estimated absolute

contributions of these skills may be attenuated relative to an analysis across families. These

relative contributions remain roughly the same within the 7 centimeter height intervals when the

height profile is specified piecewise linear.22 Also of note is that handgrip strength can account

for an additional 8 to 15 percent of the returns to height conditional on the other skills, across

specifications and height.



20
   The income return to 7 centimeters (roughly 2 ¾ inches) of height from the piecewise linear
specification is 13.2 percent at the shortest heights, 7.2 percent at heights just below and
including median height, 4.1 percent at heights just above median height and a statistically
insignificant 1.9 percent at heights 189 centimeters (almost 6'2.5") and higher.
21
   Age 18 measures of cognitive skills, non cognitive skills and handgrip strength collected in the
enlistment process.
22
   For heights between 165 and 188 centimeters (roughly 5'5" to 6'2") the account of cognitive
skills ranges from 18 to 29 percent, while the contribution of estimate of non cognitive skills
ranges from 10 to 14 percent. The exception is the interval for heights above 188 centimeters in
which the skills measures incrementally add very little relative to the sibling fixed effects.
                                                                                                       24
       Relative to the inference here, there is no strongly enhanced role of cognitive skills once

the authors make allowance for a non linear profile.23 However, also in contrast to the evidence

here the age 18 measures of cognitive skills, non cognitive skills and hand grip strength for

Swedish males vary linearly with height throughout most of the height distribution (figure 2, p.

153). There is no obvious visual connection between the non linear variation of income with

height and the variation of one of these skills with height.

       Finally, Kim and Han (2017) investigate the returns to height for monthly earnings in

South Korea. They show (figure 1) that the unadjusted relationship between height and monthly

wages of Korean males plateaus at the mean height in their sample, very similar to the height

profiles for males documented here for the US. This finding is of particular interest because the

average height of Korean males, the point of the start of the plateau, at 67", is considerably less

than of the American males we analyze (70"). The profiles for females are roughly linear

throughout the height distributions in contrast to the evidence for American females. The authors

parameterize the height profile in 5 centimetre (roughly 2 inch) intervals and conclude that

conditioning on a variety of demographic and economic characteristics, the estimates for males

indicate that the increase of earnings with height exhibits "...leveling-off at approximately the

average height" (p. 16).24




23
   It is not possible to determine whether cognitive skill makes a much larger incremental
account to the income returns to height conditional on non cognitive skills, than vice versa, as is
the case here for the wage returns to height, because the authors add the skills to the regression in
a set order.
24
   See also Hubler (2009) for evidence of a non linear relationship between height and wages in
Germany. Our focus here is the evidence for developed countries. There is also a literature that
either implicitly (by graphing non parametric estimates of the height profile) or explicitly
examines the non linearity of the height profile of outcomes in less developed countries. See, for
example, Vogl (2014) and LaFave and Thomas (2017).
                                                                                                      25
   10. Discussion and Conclusions

       We present evidence of gender specific height profiles, which are common to a range of

socioeconomic outcomes in the US, ranging from teenage cognitive scores to adult poverty. For

males there is little to no "return" to height above mean height, but a substantial return below the

mean. As such, mean height is a dividing line between individuals who see a return to height

and those that don't. For females there is also a bend in the profile at mean height but not as

distinct as the one for males. Also, females in the top 10 percent of the height distribution see a

positive return the height. The presence of these profiles in outcomes ranging such a span of

ages provides graphic testimony to the important relationship between childhood and adult

outcomes.

       Connecting the profiles across ages reveals the relatively greater role cognitive skills play

in generating the height profiles in adult outcomes than non cognitive skills within the US

population. Case and Paxson (2008) have also made this argument based in part on evidence

that childhood cognitive skills vary with height and also can account for a substantive part of the

variation of wages with height. The evidence here sheds some light into the black box of these

horse race regressions, explicitly demonstrating how the height profile in adult outcomes echoes

the profiles in childhood cognitive skills.

       Additional questions are raised by the similarities between the height profiles for males in

the US and Korea, and the differences in the profiles for males in the US and Sweden. Previous

research documents the relationships between genes and pre natal/childhood environments with

realized height (e.g., Case and Paxson 2010 and the references therein). Differences in the

association of height with cognitive and non cognitive skills, health and labour market outcomes



                                                                                                  26
across developed countries suggest country specific factors mediate the consequences of the

genes/environment/height nexus for realized adult socioeconomic status.

       The differences in socioeconomic outcomes below mean height in the US rival the

differences by race/ethnicity. Understanding the sources of these differences is therefore an

important input to understanding inequality in American society. The systematic and persistent

association of SES with below average height, which we document in the first part of this paper,

will imply corresponding differences in the environments of children by parental stature.

Because height is strongly heritable and there is evidence of assortative mating on height (e.g.,

Stulp et al. 2017), the challenges of understanding the separate genetic and childhood

environmental legacies of parents are particularly acute in this application. However, the

evidence that the non linear differences by height emerge by the teenage years in the US (by

childhood in the UK), highlight the importance of this question.

       Limitations of these results include that the NHIS, which is one of the largest US surveys

that captures individuals' heights, provides but a selected sample of inputs and outcomes of

interest. To focus on the child development of females and males whose adult heights are below

the mean will require data sources with even larger sample size. While administrative data

sources from other countries can clearly provide additional sample size, their applicability to the

US case may be limited by some of the cross country differences in the height profiles of

different outcomes, such as cognitive and non cognitive skills, discussed above.




                                                                                                    27
References

Autor, David H., Levy, Frank. and Richard J. Murnane, (2003) "The Skill Content of Recent
        Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4)
        1279-1333.

Autor, David H. and Brendan Price, (2013) "The Changing Task Composition of the US Labor Market:
        An Update of Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003)" mimeo MIT.

Barker, David J. (1990) "The Fetal and Infant Origins of Adult Disease." BMJ , 301(6761): 1111.

Bleakley, C. Hoyt, Costa, Dora L. and Adriana Lleras-Muney (2014) "Health, Education, and Income in
       the United States, 1820-2000." In Leah Platt Boustan, Carola Frydman, and Robert A. Margo,
       Eds., Human Capital and History: The American Record. University of Chicago Press.

Case, Anne and Christina Paxson, (2006) "Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and Labor Market
       Outcomes" NBER Working Paper No. 12466.

Case, Anne and Christina Paxson, (2008) "Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and Labor Market
       Outcomes" Journal of Political Economy 116(3) 499-532.

Case, Anne and Christina Paxson, (2010) "Causes and Consequences of Early Life Health", Demography,
       47(Supplement) S65-S85.

Case, Anne, Paxson, Christina, and Mahnaz Islam, (2009), "Making sense of the labor market height
       premium: evidence from the British household panel survey", Economics Letters 102, 174­176.

Czajka, John L. and Gabrielle Denmead, (2008). "Income Data for Policy Analysis: A Comparative
        Assessment of Eight Surveys" Mathematica Policy Research Inc.

Czajka, John L. and Amy Beyler (2016) "Declining response rates in Federal Surveys: Trends and
        Implications" Mathematica Policy Research, Washington DC.

Deaton, Angus S., and Raksha Arora, (2009). "Life at the top: the benefits of height" Economics and
        Human Biology 7 (2): 133-136.

Gowin, Enoch B. The Executive and His Control of Men. New York: Macmillan; 1915

Heineck, Guido (2009) "Too tall to be smart? The relationship between height and cognitive abilities"
       Economics Letters 105(1) 78­80.

Hubler, Olaf, (2009) "The nonlinear link between height and wages in Germany, 1985­ 2004" Economics
        and Human Biology 7 191­199.

Kim, Tae Hyun, and Euna Han, (2017) "Height premium for job performance" Economics and Human
       Biology 26 13-20.

Komlos, John (1987) "The Height and Weight of West Point Cadets: Dietary Change in Antebellum
      America" The Journal of Economic History, 47(4) 897-927.
                                                                                                        28
LaFave, Daniel and Duncan Thomas (2017) "Height and cognition at work: Labor market productivity in
       a low income setting" Economics and Human Biology 25 52-64.

Lang, Kevin and Michael Manove (2011) "Education and Labor Market Discrimination" American
       Economic Review 101(4) 1467-96.

Lucas, Jacqueline W., Barr-Anderson, Daheia J. and Raynard S. Kington (2006) "Health status of non-
        Hispanic U.S.-born and foreign-born black and white persons: United States, 1992­95." National
        Center for Health Statistics. Vital Health Statistics 10(226). 2005.

Lundborg, Petter, Nystedt, Paul and Dan-Olof Rooth (2014) "Height and Earnings: The Role of
      Cognitive and Noncognitive Skills" Journal of Human Resources, 49(1) 141-166

Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Matthew Weinzierl (2010) "The Optimal Taxation of Height: A Case Study of
      Utilitarian Income Redistribution." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2(1) 155-76.

Merrill, Ray M. and John S. Richardson (2009) "Validity of self-reported height, weight, and body mass
         index: findings from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey", 2001-2006.
         Preventing Chronic Disease 6(4).

Moriarity, Chris and James Dahlhamer (2012) "Adjustment for Unit Nonresponse in the National Health
        Interview Survey." Paper presented at the 2012 Joint Statistical Meetings, Session 671, San
        Diego, CA, USA.

Neal, Derek. and William R. Johnson (1996) "The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White Wage
       Differences", Journal of Political Economy 104(5) 869-895.

Persico, Nicola, Postlewaite, Andrew and Dan Silverman (2004) "The Effect of Adolescent Experience
        on Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height" Journal of Political Economy, 112(5) 1019-
        1053.

Sahyoun, Nadine R., Maynard, L Michelle, Zhang, X.L. and Mary K. Serdula (2008), "Factors Associated
       with Errors in Self-reported height and Weight in Older Adults", The Journal of Nutrition, Health
       and Aging, 12(2), 108-115.

Schick, Andreas and Richard H. Steckel, (2015) "Height, Human Capital and Earnings: The
        Contributions of Cognitive and Noncognitive Ability", Journal of Human Capital 9(1), 94-115

Steckel, Richard H. "Stature and Living Standards in the United States," in Robert E. Gallman and John J.
        Wallis, eds., American economic growth and standards of living before the Civil War. Chicago:
        University of Chicago Press, 1992, pp. 265-308.

Stulp Gert, Simons Mere J.P., Grasman Sara, and Thomas V. Pollet (2017) "Assortative mating for
       human height: A meta-analysis" American Journal of Human Biology 29(1) e22917

Vogl, Tom S. (2014) "Height, skills, and labor market outcomes in Mexico", Journal of Development
       Economics, 107 84-96.


                                                                                                       29
Figure 1: Males' and Females' Years of Educational Attainment by Height, NHIS

                                  Males Aged 25-59 Years of Education 1990-94 NHIS
  .5
  0
  -.5
  -1
  -1.5
  -2
  -2.5




                       63   64     65     66    67     68    69   70    71    72    73     74    75   76
                                                             Height
                                        Full Sample         Exclude Blacks and Hispanics




                                 Females Aged 25-59 Years of Education 1990-94 NHIS
  .8
  .6
  .4
  .2
  0
  -1 -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2




                       59    60      61        62     63    64     65    66    67        68     69    70
                                                             Height
                                        Full Sample         Exclude Blacks and Hispanics



Notes: Authors calculations from 1990-94 NHIS. The reported parameters are estimates of single
inch height dummy variables from a regression of the indicated outcome on height, age (single
year), region, race/ethnicity (as applicable) foreign birth and indicators for survey year. Mean
height (70" males, 64" females) is the omitted category. Robust 95 percent confidence intervals.

                                                                                                           30
Figure 2: Males' and Females' Average Occupational Earnings by Height, NHIS and
Census

                             Males Aged 25-59 Occupational Earnings 1990-94 NHIS/1990 Census
   .05
   0
   -.05
   -.1
   -.15
   -.2
   -.25




                             63   64   65    66        67    68   69   70    71    72    73        74    75   76
                                                                   Height
                                              Base Specification            Add Education




                            Females Aged 25-59 Occupational Earnings 1990-94 NHIS/1990 Census
  .02 .04 .06
  0
  -.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02




                             59   60    61        62        63    64   65     66    67        68        69    70
                                                                  Height
                                              Base Specification            Add Education



Notes: Authors calculations from 1990-94 NHIS and 1990 Census. The reported parameters are
estimates of single inch height dummy variables from a regression of the indicated outcome on
height, age (single year), region, race/ethnicity foreign birth and indicators for survey year. Mean
height (70" males, 64" females) is the omitted category. Robust 95 percent confidence intervals.
                                                                                                                   31
Figure 3: Males' and Females' Occupational Skills by Height, NHIS and DOT

                                Males Aged 25-59 Occupational Skills 1990-94 NHIS/1991 DOT
  .3
  .2
  .1
  0
  -.1
  -.2
  -.3
  -.4
  -.5




                           63    64    65    66    67    68   69    70   71    72    73    74    75   76
                                                              Height
                                        Non Routine Interpersonal        Routine Cognitive




                            Females Aged 25-59 Occupational Skills 1990-94 NHIS/1991 DOT
  .15
  .1
  .05
  0
  -.25 -.2 -.15 -.1 -.05




                           59     60    61        62    63    64    65    66    67        68    69    70
                                                              Height
                                        Non Routine Interpersonal        Routine Cognitive



Notes: Authors calculations from 1990-94 NHIS and 1991 DOT. The reported parameters are
estimates of single inch height dummy variables from a regression of the indicated outcome on
height, age (single year), region, race/ethnicity, foreign birth and indicators for survey year.
Mean height (70" males, 64" females) is the omitted category. Robust 95 percent confidence
intervals.
                                                                                                           32
Figure 4: Males' and Females' Household Poverty by Height, NHIS

                                                     Males Aged 25-59 Poverty 1990-94 NHIS
   .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12 .14 .16
   -.02 0




                                    63   64    65     66    67     68    69   70    71    72    73     74    75   76
                                                                         Height
                                                    Full Sample         Exclude Blacks and Hispanics




                                                    Females Aged 25-59 Poverty 1990-94 NHIS
   .08
   .06
   .04
   .02
   0
   -.02
   -.04




                                    59    60    61         62     63    64     65    66    67        68     69    70
                                                                         Height
                                                    Full Sample         Exclude Blacks and Hispanics



Notes: Authors calculations from 1990-94 NHIS. The reported parameters are estimates of
single inch height dummy variables from a regression of the indicated outcome on height, age
(single year), region, race/ethnicity (as applicable), foreign birth and indicators for survey year.
Mean height (70" males, 64" females) is the omitted category. Robust 95 percent confidence
intervals.
                                                                                                                       33
Figure 5: Males' and Females' Self Reported Health by Height, NHIS

                                                      Males Aged 25-59 Excellent or Very Good Health 1990-94 NHIS
   .05
   0
   -.05
   -.1
   -.15
   -.2




                                                 63    64     65     66        67    68    69    70   71    72    73        74    75   76
                                                                                            Height
                                                                   Full Sample            Exclude Blacks and Hispanics




                                                  Females Aged 25-59 Excellent or Very Good Health 1990-94 NHIS
   -.16-.14-.12 -.1 -.08-.06-.04-.02 0 .02 .04




                                                 59      60    61         62        63    64     65    66    67        68        69    70
                                                                                           Height
                                                                   Full Sample            Exclude Blacks and Hispanics



Notes: Authors calculations from 1990-94 NHIS. The reported parameters are estimates of
single inch height dummy variables from a regression of the indicated outcome on height, age
(single year), region, race/ethnicity (as applicable), foreign birth and indicators for survey year.
Mean height (70" males, 64" females) is the omitted category. Robust 95 percent confidence
intervals.
                                                                                                                                            34
Figure 6: Males' and Females' AFQT scores by Height, NLSY79


                                    Males AFQT NLSY
  10
  0
  -10
  -20
  -30
  -40




        63   64   65     66        67    68    69 70      71    72    73     74    75    76
                                                Height

                       Full Sample            Exclude Blacks and Hispanics




                                   Females AFQT NLSY
  20
  10
  0
  -10
  -20




        59   60    61         62        63    64    65     66    67    68         69    70
                                               Height

                       Full Sample            Exclude Blacks and Hispanics




Notes: Authors calculations from the NLSY79. The reported parameters are estimates of single
inch height dummy variables from a regression of the indicated outcome on height age (single
year), age (single year), region, and race/ethnicity (as applicable). Mean height (70" males, 64"
females) is the omitted category. Robust 95 percent confidence intervals.
                                                                                                35
Figure 7: Males' and Females' High School Activities by Height, NLSY79


                                    Males Activities NLSY
  1
  .5
  0
  -.5
  -1




        63   64    65     66        67    68    69 70      71    72    73        74    75   76
                                                 Height

                        Full Sample            Exclude Blacks and Hispanics




                               Females Activities NLSY
  1
  .5
  0
  -.5
  -1




        59    60    61         62        63    64    65     66    67        68        69    70
                                                Height

                        Full Sample            Exclude Blacks and Hispanics



Notes: Authors calculations from the NLSY79. The reported parameters are estimates of single
inch height dummy variables from a regression of the indicated outcome on height age (single
year), age (single year), region, and race/ethnicity (as applicable). Mean height (70" males, 64"
females) is the omitted category. Robust 95 percent confidence intervals.
                                                                                                 36
Table 1: Summaries of Heights in the NHIS and NLSY79 Samples

                                     Females                           Males

        NHIS               1990-94               2010-13    1990-94               2010-13

        Mean                64.50"                64.40      70.09"                69.97

    Std.Deviation            2.78                 2.55        3.06                 2.82

 InterquartileRange        63"-66"               63"-66"     68"-72"              68"-72"

    90/10range             61"-68"               61"-68"     66"-74"              66"-74"

          N                138,221               39,631      124,552              33,333

       NLSY79                        Females                           Males

        Mean                          64.49''                          70.40''
                                                                          
    Std.Deviation                      2.69                             2.90
                                                                          
 InterquartileRange                  63''-66''                        68''-72''
                                                                           
    90/10range                       61''-68''                        67''-74''
                                                                           
          N                           5,181                            4,941
                                                                           

Notes: Authors calculations from the 1990-94 and 2010-13 NHIS and the NLSY79.




                                                                                            37
Table 2: Socio-economic Outcomes by Height, and for African Americans and Hispanics,
NHIS

                   %of        NoHighSchool                College              Employment                  Health
                   POP
 Males                     1990-94     2010-13     1990-94     2010-13     1990-94     2010-13     1990-94      2010-13
  Height66"        12       0.153       0.103        -0.134      -0.138      -0.046      -0.041      -0.107      -0.105
                           (0.004)     (0.007)      (0.004)     (0.008)     (0.003)     (0.008)     (0.004)     (0.009)
  66"<Height       17-      0.055       0.035        -0.069      -0.067      -0.017      -0.038      -0.051      -0.052
     68"           18      (0.003)     (0.005)      (0.003)     (0.008)     (0.002)     (0.007)     (0.003)     (0.008)
    African        11-      0.079       0.030        -0.133      -0.122      -0.105      -0.123      -0.133      -0.103
   Americans       12      (0.004)     (0.006)      (0.004)     (0.008)     (0.003)     (0.008)     (0.004)     (0.008)
   Hispanics       10-      0.238       0.200        -0.182      -0.241      -0.028      -0.017      -0.086      -0.092
                   15      (0.005)     (0.007)      (0.004)     (0.009)     (0.003)     (0.008)     (0.005)     (0.009)
 Females                                                                                                            
  Height61"        13       0.080       0.061        -0.076      -0.098      -0.046      -0.029      -0.068      -0.069
                           (0.003)     (0.006)      (0.003)     (0.008)     (0.004)     (0.008)     (0.004)     (0.008)
  61"<Height       23-      0.039       0.020        -0.042      -0.052      -0.030      -0.021      -0.031      -0.047
     63"           24      (0.002)     (0.004)      (0.003)     (0.007)     (0.003)     (0.006)     (0.003)     (0.007)
    African        13-      0.091       0.065        -0.095      -0.156      -0.041      -0.051      -0.178      -0.146
   Americans       14      (0.003)     (0.005)      (0.003)     (0.007)     (0.004)     (0.007)     (0.004)     (0.007)
   Hispanics       10-      0.264       0.181        -0.134      -0.230      -0.119      -0.058      -0.140      -0.121
                   14      (0.005)     (0.006)      (0.004)     (0.008)     (0.005)     (0.008)     (0.005)     (0.008)


Notes: Authors calculations from the 1990-94 and 2010-13 NHIS. This table shows the estimates of dummy
variables for the indicated height and ethnic/race groups from a regression of the indicated dependent variable on
these dummy variables, height, age (single year), region, foreign birth and indicators for survey year. The
regressions for males also include an additional dummy variable for height equal to 69". Regressions are weighted
using sampling weights. Robust standard errors in parentheses. All estimates statistically significant at the 1 percent
level.




                                                                                                                       38
Table 3: The Association of Height and Cognitive skills or Non-cognitive Skills, NLSY79

 NLSY79
                                         AFQT                     Social Activities                Rosenberg
 Males
            <68"                       -13.311**                      -0.219*                       -0.809**
                                         (1.846)                      (0.092)                        (0.277)
           68"-69"                      -5.541**                       -0.032                        -0.207
                                         (1.745)                      (0.092)                        (0.265)
           71"-72"                        -0.819                        0.104                        -0.089
                                         (1.605)                      (0.087)                        (0.246)
            >72"                          -0.882                        0.107                         0.077
                                         (1.681)                      (0.092)                        (0.254)
              N                          4,641                         4,641                         4,513
 Females
            <62"                        -5.087**                      -0.354*                       -0.320
                                         (1.609)                      (0.101)                       (0.273)
           62"-63"                        -1.609                       -0.103                       -0.018
                                         (1.426)                      (0.092)                       (0.239)
           65"-66"                         2.153                       -0.059                        0.318
                                         (1.400)                      (0.092)                       (0.231)
            >66"                         4.341**                        0.145                        0.331
                                         (1.442)                      (0.094)                       (0.237)
              N                          4,952                         4,952                         4,833

Notes: Authors calculations from the NLSY79. This table shows estimates on dummy variables for the indicated
height intervals (mean height excluded), from regressions of the indicated variables on height and controls for age,
region and race/ethnicity (as applicable). Non-cognitive skills are high school social activities and the Rosenberg
self esteem index. Regressions are weighted using sampling weights. Robust standard errors in parentheses. , * and
** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.




                                                                                                                 39
Table 4: The relationship between Height and Log Wages with and without Controls for Cognitive and/or Non-cognitive
Skills, Males NLSY79

 FullSample(N=4,249)                                                                                      
       Height                  0.018**                 0.010**               0.013**                 0.009**
                               (0.003)                 (0.003)               (0.003)                 (0.003)
        AFQT                                          0.0054**                                      0.0042**
                                                      (0.0003)                                      (0.0004)
   SchoolActivities                                                          0.065**                 0.031**
                                                                             (0.007)                  0.008)
      Rosenberg                                                              0.019**                 0.012**
                                                                             (0.002)                 (0.002)
 FullSample(N=4,249)                                                                                      
        <68"                  -0.109**                  -0.034               -0.078*                  -0.033
                               (0.033)                 (0.031)               (0.032)                 (0.031)
       68"-69"                 -0.053                   -0.023               -0.048                   -0.027
                               (0.031)                 (0.029)               (0.030)                 (0.029)
       71"-72"                  -0.005                  -0.002                -0.008                  -0.001
                               (0.029)                 (0.027)               (0.028)                 (0.027)
         >72"                   0.039                   0.045                 0.031                   0.040
                               (0.031)                 (0.030)               (0.030)                 (0.029)
        AFQT                                          0.0055**                                      0.0042**
                                                      (0.0003)                                      (0.0004)
   SchoolActivities                                                          0.066**                 0.031**
                                                                             (0.007)                 (0.008)
      Rosenberg                                                              0.019**                 0.012**
                                                                             (0.002)                 (0.002)
 NonHispanicWhites(N=2,450)                                                                               
        <68"               -0.114**                     -0.033               -0.078*                  -0.032
                            (0.042)                    (0.040)               (0.040)                 (0.039)
      68"-69"               -0.066*                     -0.036               -0.060*                  -0.040
                            (0.036)                    (0.035)               (0.036)                 (0.035)
      71"-72"                -0.008                     -0.001                -0.008                  -0.000
                            (0.033)                    (0.032)               (0.033)                 (0.032)
        >72"                 0.037                      0.046                 0.028                   0.040
                            (0.036)                    (0.034)               (0.035)                 (0.034)
       AFQT                                           0.0055**                                      0.0041**
                                                      (0.0004)                                      (0.0004)
   SchoolActivities                                                          0.068**                 0.032**
                                                                             (0.008)                 (0.009)
      Rosenberg                                                              0.017**                 0.012**
                                                                             (0.003)                 (0.003)

Notes: Authors calculations from the NLSY79. This table shows the estimates on height or dummy variables for the
indicated height intervals (mean height excluded), from regressions of log wages on height, controls for age (single
month) and region, and skills as indicated. Regressions are weighted using sampling weights. Cognitive skills are
AFQT percentile scores. Non-cognitive skills are high school social activities and the Rosenberg self esteem index.
Regressions are weighted using sampling weights. Robust standard errors in parentheses. , * and ** indicate
statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.




                                                                                                                  40
Table 5: The relationship between Height and Log Wages with and without Controls for Cognitive and/or Non-cognitive
Skills, Females NLSY79

 FullSample(N=4,217)                                                                                      
       Height                  0.021**                 0.013**               0.016**                 0.012**
                               (0.003)                 (0.003)               (0.003)                 (0.003)
        AFQT                                          0.0080**                                      0.0065**
                                                      (0.0004)                                      (0.0004)
   SchoolActivities                                                          0.072**                 0.031**
                                                                             (0.007)                 (0.007)
      Rosenberg                                                              0.020**                 0.012**
                                                                             (0.003)                 (0.003)
 FullSample(N=4,217)                                                                                      
        <62"                   -0.059                   -0.022                -0.027                  -0.015
                               (0.036)                 (0.034)               (0.035)                 (0.034)
       62"-63"                  -0.029                  -0.015                -0.019                  -0.013
                               (0.034)                 (0.032)               (0.033)                 (0.032)
       65"-66"                  0.054                   0.041                 0.054                   0.043
                               (0.034)                 (0.032)               (0.032)                 (0.032)
         >66"                  0.098**                 0.070*                0.085**                 0.069*
                               (0.033)                 (0.031)               (0.032)                 (0.031)
        AFQT                                          0.0081**                                      0.0065**
                                                      (0.0004)                                      (0.0004)
   SchoolActivities                                                          0.073**                 0.031**
                                                                             (0.007)                 (0.007)
      Rosenberg                                                              0.020**                 0.012**
                                                                             (0.003)                 (0.003)
 NonHispanicWhites(N=2,486)                                                                               
        <62"                 -0.074                     -0.026                -0.035                  0.017
                            (0.046)                    (0.043)               (0.045)                 (0.043)
      62"-63"                -0.020                     -0.005                -0.011                  -0.003
                            (0.041)                    (0.038)               (0.039)                 (0.038)
      65"-66"                0.058                      0.048                 0.060                   0.050
                            (0.039)                    (0.038)               (0.039)                 (0.038)
        >66"                0.110**                    0.086*                0.097**                 0.084*
                            (0.038)                    (0.036)               (0.038)                 (0.036)
       AFQT                                           0.0078**                                      0.0063**
                                                      (0.0004)                                      (0.0004)
   SchoolActivities                                                          0.075**                 0.034**
                                                                             (0.008)                 (0.008)
      Rosenberg                                                              0.019**                 0.011**
                                                                             (0.003)                 (0.003)

Notes: Authors calculations from the NLSY79. This table shows the estimates on height or dummy variables for the
indicated height intervals (mean height excluded), from regressions of log wages on height, controls for age (single
month) and region, and skills as indicated. Regressions are weighted using sampling weights. Cognitive skills are
AFQT percentile scores. Non-cognitive skills are high school social activities and the Rosenberg self esteem index.
Regressions are weighted using sampling weights. Robust standard errors in parentheses. , * and ** indicate
statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.




                                                                                                                  41
Appendix A: Results from the 2010-13 NHIS

Figure A1: Males' and Females' Years of Educational Attainment by Height, NHIS

                                         Males Aged 25-59 Years of Education 2010-13 NHIS
  .5
  0
  -.5
  -1
  -1.5
  -2
  -2.5
  -3




                              63   64     65     66     67    68    69     70   71    72    73    74    75   76
                                                                    Height
                                                      Full Sample        Non Hispanic Whites




                                        Females Aged 25-59 Years of Education 2010-13 NHIS
  .2 .4 .6 .8
  -1.2 -1 -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0




                              59    60      61        62     63     64     65    66    67        68    69    70
                                                                    Height
                                                      Full Sample        Non Hispanic Whites




Notes: Authors calculations from 2010-13 NHIS. The reported parameters are estimates of single
inch height dummy variables from a regression of the indicated outcome on height, age (single
year), region, race/ethnicity (as applicable) foreign birth and indicators for survey year. Mean
height (70' males, 64" females) is the omitted category. Robust 95 percent confidence intervals.

                                                                                                                  42
Figure A2: Males and Females Self Reported Health by Height, NHIS

              Males Aged 25-59 Excellent or Very Good Health 2010-13 NHIS
  .05
  0
  -.05
  -.1
  -.15
  -.2
  -.25




         63    64    65    66        67    68   69     70   71    72    73        74    75    76
                                                 Height
                                Full Sample          Non Hispanic Whites




          Females Aged 25-59 Excellent or Very Good Health 2010-13 NHIS
  .1
  .05
  0
  -.05
  -.1
  -.15
  -.2




         59     60    61        62        63    64     65    66    67        68        69    70
                                                Height
                            Full Sample              Non Hispanic Whites



Notes: Authors calculations from 2010-13 NHIS. The reported parameters are estimates of single
inch height dummy variables from a regression of the indicated outcome on height, age (single
year), region, race/ethnicity (as applicable) foreign birth and indicators for survey year. Mean
height (70' males, 64" females) is the omitted category. Robust 95 percent confidence intervals.


                                                                                                   43
Appendix B: A Comparison of Self Reported and Exam Recorded Health in the NHANES

        We use data from the 1999/2000 through 2013/2014 waves of the NHANES to

investigate the potential implication of using self reported height in our NHIS analysis. We draw

data from the "Demographic", "Body Measures" and "Weight History" files in each wave, and

again select the sample of respondents between the ages of 25 and 59.           NHANES is a much

smaller survey of health outcomes, which includes both examination and survey components.

Because height is captured in both components, the NHANES offers evidence of the error in self

reported height, and has been used for this purpose in the past (e.g., Sahyoun et al. 2008, Merrill

and Richardson 2009). That said, the NHANES has a complex sampling design and therefore

depends significantly on weights to generate population levels estimates25, and has a lower

response rate than other health surveys (Czajka and Beyler 2016). Also, differences in the

survey response reports of medical conditions in the NHANES have been shown to differ from

those in other health surveys (Czajka and Beyler 2016).

        Our primary concern is that the non linear height profiles we have uncovered are a result

of errors in self reported height. In figure B1 we report height profiles, for males and females, of

the proportion of respondents reporting less than a high school education, using alternatively

examination recorded and self reported heights. As a point of comparison in figure B2 we

report the corresponding profiles form the 1990-94 NHIS. Note that the comparison of the NHIS

and NHANES figures is complicated by the wide span of survey cohorts we need to include from

the NHANES data to generate sufficient sample sizes.




25
  For example, Hispanics and African American make up roughly one quarter each of the unweighted sample aged
25-59.
                                                                                                           44
       The NHANES source figure for males displays a similar non linear profile as in the NHIS

data, regardless of the measure of height used. In terms of levels, the profile using self reported

height lies above the exam recorded height profile, more often than not, especially at some of the

shorter heights and the heights just above mean height.

       For females the profile using either measure of height is more linear than for males, as it

is the NHIS. If anything the profile using examination height displays more non linearity at

shorter heights, but more generally both profiles tell a similar story




                                                                                                  45
Figure B1: Males and Females Proportion with No High School by Height, NHANES



                         Males Exam Recorded versus Self Reported Height NHANES
   .25
   .2
   .15
   .1
   .05
   0
   -.15 -.1 -.05




                   63     64    65    66        67    68   69   70      71    72    73        74    75   76
                                                            Height
                                                 Examination         Self Report




                        Females Exam Recorded versus Self Reported Height NHANES
  .2
  .15
  .1
  .05
  0
  -.05
  -.1




                   59      60    61        62        63    64   65       66    67        68        69    70
                                                           Height
                                                Examination          Self Report



Notes: Authors calculations from the 1999/00 through 2013/14 NHANES. The reported
parameters are estimates of height dummy variables from a regression of the indicated outcome
on height, age (single year), race/ethnicity and indicators for survey year. Mean height (70'
males, 64" females) is the omitted category. Robust 95 percent confidence intervals.
                                                                                                              46
Figure B2: Males and Females Proportion with No High School by Height, NHIS

                                             Males No High School 2010-13 NHIS
  .35
  .3
  .25
  .2
  .15
  .1
  .05
  0
  -.05




                           63   64    65    66        67    68   69     70   71    72    73        74    75   76
                                                                  Height
                                                 Full Sample          Non Hispanic Whites




                                            Females No High School 2010-13 NHIS
  .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12
  -.06 -.04 -.02 0




                           59    60    61        62        63    64     65    66    67        68        69    70
                                                                 Height
                                              Full Sample             Non Hispanic Whites




Notes: Authors calculations from 2010-13 NHIS. The reported parameters are estimates of single
inch height dummy variables from a regression of the indicated outcome on height, age (single
year), region, race/ethnicity (as applicable) foreign birth and indicators for survey year. Mean
height (70' males, 64" females) is the omitted category. Robust 95 percent confidence intervals.

                                                                                                                   47
Appendix C: Does Parental Income or School Quality Mediate the AFQT/Height
Relationship in the NLSY79?

           To investigate the impact of family environmental factors on the adult height/AFQT

profile we estimate (2) with AFQT as the dependent variable, with and without controls for 1979

family income, using the NLSY79 data. To help ensure that family income is capturing

childhood inputs, we restrict the sample to respondents who were living in their parents' homes

in 1979. The baseline estimates for this sample, with no control for parental income, are

presented in columns (1) and (3) of table C1. The non-linear relationship between height and

AFQT for males displays less of a less plateau at mean height, perhaps due to the select sample.

Controlling for parental income, the estimates change very little for either sex. This evidence

suggests that parental income plays a limited role in the relationship between height and AFQT

scores in this sample.

           Next we test whether school quality mediates the height/AFQT profile. In table C2 we

present a corresponding set of regression estimates, this time conditioning on measures of the

fraction of students who are disadvantaged; the fraction of students in different racial groups;

dropout and attendance rates; enrollment; the number of teachers and counsellors; the number of

books in the library; the fraction of teachers with graduate degrees; the fraction of teachers who

left the school in the previous year; and starting teacher salaries.26 Once again the addition of

these controls has a limited effect on the estimates of the height profile for AFQT.




26
     The school quality measures are from the "background" section of the NLSY79 school transcript survey.
                                                                                                             48
Table C1: The Association of Adult Height and AFQT controlling for parents' income

                                     Males                                                     Females
       <68"               -9.587*             -8.603*              <62"              -6.160              -6.371
                          (4.046)             (4.046)                                (3.679)             (3.632)
      68"-69"              -5.562              -4.371             62"-63"             -3.613              -3.959
                          (4.029)             (3.980)                                (3.166)             (3.130)
      71"-72"               4.139               3.933             65"-66"             -1.404              -1.657
                          (3.781)             (3.744)                                (3.266)             (3.220)
       >72"                -0.261              -0.792              >66"                4.378               3.714
                          (3.988)             (3.900)                                (3.145)             (3.112)
 Parents' income                              0.001**                                                     0.000*
                                              (0.000)                                                    (0.000)
         N                 1,139                1,139                                 1,085                1,085

Notes: Authors calculations from the NLSY79. This table shows estimates on dummy variables for the indicated
height intervals (mean height excluded), from regressions of AFQT on height, controls for age, region and
race/ethnicity, and family (1979) income as indicated. Regressions are weighted using sampling weights. The
sample is restricted to individuals who were living in their parents' home in 1979. Regressions are weighted using
sampling weights. Robust standard errors in parentheses. , * and ** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and
1 percent levels respectively.



Table C2: The Association of Adult Height and AFQT controlling for school characteristics

                                       Males                                                   Females
        <68"               -12.736**           -11.772**            <62"              -2.496              -1.817
                             (2.794)             (2.794)                             (2.645)             (2.621)
       68"-69"              -5.522*             -5.880*            62"-63"            -0.162               0.219
                             (2.603)             (2.570)                             (2.117)             (2.057)
       71"-72"               -0.868              -0.271            65"-66"           3.860               3.700
                             (2.388)             (2.370)                             (2.113)             (2.038)
        >72"                 -0.231              -0.351             >66"             5.740**             5.765**
                             (2.535)             (2.535)                             (2.193)             (2.109)
       School                                       X                                                        X
    characteristics
          N                  2,049                2,049                               2,165               2,165

Notes: Authors calculations from the NLSY79. This table shows estimates on dummy variables for the indicated
height intervals (mean height excluded), from regressions of AFQT on height, controls for age, region and
race/ethnicity, and school characteristics as indicated. Regressions are weighted using sampling weights. Robust
standard errors in parentheses. , * and ** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels
respectively.




                                                                                                                    49
Appendix D: The Adult Height Profile in Age 7 Math, Reading and Behavior Scores in the
NCDS

         Previous studies have argued that the AFQT scores available in the NLSY79 may be

better measures of socio economic advantage or completed education than of underlying

cognitive skills. To cleanly address this issue, we use data from the NCDS. The NCDS has

figured prominently in past research on the relationship between height and wages, and in

addition offers cognitive and non cognitive scores from much earlier ages. We examine

standardized math and reading scores from age 7 to measure cognitive skills,27 and a

standardized teacher reported index of behavior, the Bristol Social Adjustment Guide,28 also for

this age as a measure of non cognitive skills

         The adult height profiles of the standardized math and reading scores following (1) from

the NCDS are reported in figure D1.29 For males we observe the non linearity at mean height

(here 69") observed in the US AFQT scores, especially for reading scores. For females, while

the non linearity at mean height is attenuated relative to the evidence for the US, there is

evidence of higher scores at the tallest heights.

         In figure D2 are the adult height profiles for the age 7 standardized behavior scores. Here

a higher score indicates lower skills. For males there is little systematic pattern in the height

profile indicating higher or lower skills relative to mean height. For females there is perhaps a




27
   The tests are the Southgate Reading Test and the Problem Arithmetic Test. See
http://doc.ukdataservice.ac.uk/doc/5805/mrdoc/pdf/CognitiveAssessmentVariables.pdf accessed September 10,
2019.
28
   This Guide canvases children's behaviors, including withdrawal, depression, anxiety, hostility towards adults,
restlessness, and nervousness. We use the survey provided total score for all "syndromes".
29
   We restrict the sample to "Euro-Caucasians" who are paid employees, and also, following the literature (Persico et
al 2003, Schick and Steckel 2015), to full time workers. For males this latter restriction makes little difference as
few within this ethnic group work part time.
                                                                                                                      50
gentle gradient indicating better behaviour at taller heights, and significantly better behavior

among the top 1 percent of heights.

       This inference is formalized in table D1 where we estimate the height profiles for these

measures of skills following (2). For the cognitive scores the estimate for the shortest height

group is in excess of one quarter of a standard deviation for males and just under one fifth a

standard deviation for females. For males there is also a difference in the reading score in excess

of 10 percent of a standard deviation at heights just below the mean. For females the estimate

for the tallest interval is 10 to 15 percent of a standard deviation. For both genders the height

profile for the behavior score displays little resemblance to the profiles in the NHIS or the AFQT

profiles from the NLSY. There is a marginally significant difference of 10 percent of a standard

deviation in the shortest height interval for males.




                                                                                                    51
Table D1: The Relationship between Adult Height and Age 7 Cognitive skills or Non-
cognitive Skills, NCDS

                                            Math                       Reading                       Behavior
 Males                                                                                                     
            <67"                         -0.253**                      -0.290**                       0.109
                                          (0.060)                       (0.061)                       (0.058)
           67"-68"                         -0.034                       -0.118*                         0.035
                                          (0.049)                       (0.046)                       (0.047)
           70"-71"                          0.022                        -0.007                         0.028
                                          (0.046)                       (0.042)                       (0.044)
            >71"                          0.089*                          0.057                         0.060
                                          (0.047)                       (0.043)                       (0.046)
              N                             4,136                         4,153                         4,134
 Females                                                                                                   
            <62"                         -0.182**                      -0.199**                         0.010
                                          (0.057)                       (0.054)                       (0.057)
           62"-63"                         -0.060                        -0.077                        -0.023
                                          (0.051)                       (0.048)                       (0.051)
           65"-66"                          0.064                         0.018                        -0.054
                                          (0.049)                       (0.045)                       (0.049)
            >66"                          0.155**                        0.100*                        -0.020
                                          (0.054)                       (0.048)                       (0.054)
              N                             4,320                         4,331                         4,325

Notes: Authors calculations from the NCDS. This table shows the results from regressions of the indicated variables
on dummy variables for the indicated height intervals (mean height excluded), along with controls for age, region
and race/ethnicity (as applicable). The measure of non-cognitive skills--behavior score--is based on the Bristol
Social Adjustment Guide. , * and ** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.




                                                                                                                   52
Figure D1: Males' and Females' Age 7 Cognitive Scores by (Adult) Height, NCDS

                             Age 7 Reading and Math Scores by Adult Height NCDS
  .8
  .6
  .4
  .2
  0
  -1 -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2




                       63   64    65    66    67    68     69     70    71    72    73    74    75   76
                                                    Male Adult Height
                                                        Reading        Math




                             Age 7 Reading and Math Scores by Adult Height NCDS
  .6
  .4
  .2
  0
  -.2
  -.4
  -.6




                       59    60    61        62    63      64     65     66    67        68    69    70
                                                   Female Adult Height
                                                        Reading        Math



Notes: Authors calculations from the NCDS. The reported parameters are estimates of single
inch height dummy variables from a regression of the indicated outcome on height, age at which
the indicated test was taken (months), region. Mean height (69" males, 64" females) is the
omitted category. Robust 95 percent confidence intervals.

                                                                                                          53
Figure D2: Males' and Females' Age 7 Behavior Scores by (Adult) Height, NCDS

                            Age 7 Behavior Scores by Adult Height NCDS
  .7
  .6
  .5
  .4
  .3
  .2
  .1
  0
  -.3 -.2 -.1




                63   64    65    66        67    68   69   70   71    72    73        74    75    76
                                                 Male Adult Height




                            Age 7 Behavior Scores by Adult Height NCDS
  .2
  .1
  0
  -.1
  -.2
  -.3
  -.4
  -.5




                59    60    61        62        63    64   65   66     67        68        69    70
                                                Female Adult Height


Notes: Authors calculations from the NCDS. The reported parameters are estimates of single
inch height dummy variables from a regression of the indicated outcome on height, age at which
the indicated test was taken (months), region. Mean height (69" males, 64" females) is the
omitted category. Robust 95 percent confidence intervals.

                                                                                                       54
