                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   TRADE LIBERALIZATION AND LABOR MARKET ADJUSTMENT IN BOTSWANA

                                   Margaret S. McMillan
                                      Brian McCaig

                                     Working Paper 26326
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26326


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2019




We thank Colleen Spencer and Iñigo Verduzco-Gallo for their research assistance and
Anna Majalentle and her staff at the Central Statistical Office of Botswana for assistance
with understanding the data. We thank the World Bank for financial assistance. We would
like to thank Jeff Chan, Bilge Erten, Azim Essaji, Keith Jefferis, Bob Rijkers, and Happy
Siphambe for helpful conversations and Sara Hartley for proofreading. All errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Margaret S. McMillan and Brian McCaig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Adjustment in Botswana
Margaret S. McMillan and Brian McCaig
NBER Working Paper No. 26326
September 2019
JEL No. F1,F6,F63

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the effects of domestic trade liberalization on labor markets in Botswana. South Africa
is the dominant member of the Southern Africa Customs Union. As such, when South Africa
liberalized trade in the 1990s, this induced large and plausibly exogenous tariff reductions for the
other customs union members, including Botswana. Using labor force surveys from Botswana
spanning a decade, we find that trade liberalization did not affect the relative size of industries in
terms of employment. However, trade liberalization had effects within industries. We find an
increase in the prevalence of working in an informal firm and self-employment, but mixed
evidence of effects on unemployment. Hours worked decreased in response to trade
liberalization, partially driven by the movement of workers to informal firms. Despite large
increases in aggregate income, trade liberalization is associated with a reduction in monthly
income, but the results are imprecise. Our results also suggest that a positive export demand
shock, the 2000 African Growth and Opportunities Act, is associated with a reduction in
employment in informal firms in the clothing industry.


Margaret S. McMillan
Tufts University
Department of Economics
114a Braker Hall
Medford, MA 02155
and International Food Policy Research Institute
and also NBER
margaret.mcmillan@tufts.edu

Brian McCaig
Department of Economics,
Wilfrid Laurier University
75 University Avenue West
Waterloo, ON, N2L 3C5 Canada
bmccaig@wlu.ca
1       Introduction
To fully realize the gains from trade, workers must reallocate across industries and across
firms within industries. However, reallocation is costly for workers (Dix-Carneiro, 2014;
Artuc et al., 2015). Evidence from various developing countries suggests that reallocation
across sectors in response to trade liberalization is uncommon.1 More recently, evidence from
developing countries has emerged about additional margins of labor market adjustments,
such as between formal and informal firms, into non-traded sectors, and out of the workforce.2
These studies suggest that earlier attempts to look for the reallocation of workers across
industries in response to trade liberalization in developing countries may have been missing
additional margins of adjustment.3
    Very little evidence, however, exists on labor market adjustments to changes in trade
policy in Sub-Saharan African countries, with the exception of South Africa (Erten et al.,
2019). This is largely due to the lack of high quality data. Credible causal estimates of labor
market adjustments to trade policy require representative and comparable data before and
after a significant change in trade policy along with a viable identification strategy. These
ingredients are generally missing within Sub-Saharan Africa.4 In this paper, we overcome
these problems by using repeated nationally representative labor force data from Botswana
that spans a period of large trade liberalization.
    Botswana is a member of the Southern Africa Customs Union (SACU). SACU's external
trade policy has historically been determined by South Africa (Southern Africa Customs
Union, 2017). Thus, Botswana experienced a large and externally imposed trade liberal-
ization when South Africa embarked upon dramatic reductions in tariffs beginning in the
middle of the 1990s. The tariffs faced by Botswana have been plausibly exogenous to events
    1
      See Revenga (1997) and Feliciano (2001) for Mexico, Attanasio et al. (2004) for Colombia, Currie and
Harrison (1997) for Morocco, and Topalova (2010) for India.
    2
      See Menezes-Filho and Muendler (2011) and Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2019) for responses to Brazil's
domestic trade liberalization in the late 1980s and early 1990s and McCaig and Pavcnik (2018) for within
industry adjustment to new export opportunities in Vietnam.
    3
      A related literature uses the region or local labor market as the unit of analysis and examines labor
market adjustment to changes in trade policy in developing countries. See Topalova (2010), McCaig (2011),
Kovak (2013), Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2019) and Erten et al. (2019)
    4
      Artuc et al. (2015) estimate that labor mobility costs are higher in Sub-Saharan African countries than
in other developing regions.



                                                     1
within the country, making it an unusual case in which to study the causal effects of trade
liberalization.
   Botswana has been politically stable for many decades. It has experienced rapid growth
and structural change since independence (McCaig et al., 2017). We focus on the period
of 1995/96 through 2005/06 due to the availability of nationally representative labor force
survey data at the beginning and end of this period. There are no other labor force surveys.
During this period, real PPP adjusted GDP per capita grew by 3.4% per annum.5 This
period of rapid growth was accompanied by a large increase in the size of the working age
population, from 743 to 923 thousand individuals, stubbornly high levels of unemployment,
and a significant increase in the rate of employment in informal firms within the manufac-
turing sector. However, there have been no studies exploring whether the large SACU trade
liberalization influenced labor markets in Botswana during this period.
   Our research exploits both the exogeneity of the tariff reductions as well as the large
variation in tariff cuts across industries to estimate the effects of trade policy on the labor
market in Botswana. From a theoretical standpoint, the impact of the tariff reductions on
industry employment, informality, and unemployment is ambiguous. Tariff reductions by
South Africa are expected to lower the price of imports and increase the demand for imports
in both South Africa and Botswana. From Botswana's perspective, the increase in imports
from third parties has benefits and costs.6 Cheaper intermediate inputs are likely to raise
labor productivity, providing a boon to both the traded and non-traded goods sectors. In
addition, to the extent that businesses in the exportables sector were competing for scarce
resources with the highly protected importables sector, the reduction in import tariffs could
boost the production of exportables. At the same time, cheaper imports may also displace
workers and shut down businesses, potentially affecting productivity, employment, and the
diversity of goods produced in Botswana. Finally, because South Africa has been, and still
is, the primary destination for most of Botswana's non-mineral exports, opening up to trade
is likely to erode Botswana's market share in South Africa, possibly reducing the number
of products Botswana exports to South Africa. The net effect of these competing forces
   5
    Based on output-side real GDP in PPP and population estimates from Penn World Tables 8.0.
   6
    Of course, cheaper imports also benefit consumers but because we are using labor force survey data, a
complete welfare analysis is beyond the scope of this paper.


                                                   2
will determine the impact of trade liberalization on industry employment, unemployment,
informality, hours worked, and income in Botswana.
    We use nationally representative labor force data from the 1995/96 and 2005/06 labor
force surveys. These data cover urban and rural areas, the formal and informal sectors, and
all industries. In this period, Botswana experienced an increase in the prevalence of informal
work in aggregate and within manufacturing, the most exposed sector to the SACU trade
liberalization.7 Informality stood at 27% of the manufacturing sector in 1995/96 and rose
to 31% by 2005/06. Additionally, the labor force surveys contain questions regarding the
previous industry of employment for the unemployed, allowing us to examine the impacts of
tariff cuts on unemployment. Unemployment is very high in Botswana, around 20% during
this period. We match workers to SACU tariff cuts by industry to study the reallocation of
workers across and within industries.
    Between 1995/96 and 2005/06, SACU tariffs fell considerably. The average tariff within
manufacturing fell from 25.0 to 11.7 percentage points. Importantly, the size of the tariff cuts
varied across industries, a feature we exploit for our identification strategy. Clothing expe-
rienced the largest tariff reduction, almost 60 percentage points, whereas industries such as
office, accounting, and computing machinery and printing and publishing experienced negli-
gible tariff cuts. The variation in tariff cuts across industries allows us to compare differential
changes in labor market outcomes across industries in relation to trade liberalization.
    We find that SACU trade liberalization was associated with little to no net movement of
workers across industries. This is consistent with a large number of studies examining the
impacts of domestic trade liberalization on industry employment in developing countries.8
These studies generally find negligible changes in the allocation of industry employment
within the formal sector or overall.
    We find mixed evidence of impacts on unemployment. We use two definitions of unem-
ployment. Narrow unemployment includes individuals that are available to work and sought
work. Broad unemployment further includes individuals that were available to work but did
not seek work. The labor force surveys ask unemployed individuals about the industry they
   7
    See section 3.1 for a description of our definition of working in an informal firm in Botswana.
   8
    See, for example,Currie and Harrison (1997); Revenga (1997); Feliciano (2001); Attanasio et al. (2004);
Topalova (2010); Dix-Carneiro (2014) and surveys by Goldberg and Pavcnik (2007); Harrison et al. (2011).


                                                    3
were most recently affiliated with, allowing us to match the previous industry of employment
with the industry tariff cuts. Our results suggest a decrease in unemployment within manu-
facturing and an increase in unemployment once mining industries are added to the analysis.
Although the implied magnitudes are large, the estimates are not statistically different from
0. Among workers, we find that SACU liberalization was associated with an increase in the
prevalence of working in an informal firm and in self-employment. Furthermore, workers
experienced a reduction in hours worked, partially caused by the movement of workers into
informal firms, and a decrease in income, although it is imprecisely estimated.
    Within developing countries, labor force or household survey data that tracks the previous
industry of employment is rare. Thus, most of the literature focusing on trade impacts
on unemployment (or non-employment, which also includes not participating in the labor
market) focuses on regional exposure to trade liberalization as unemployment cannot be
directly linked to a specific industry.9 Studying India's trade liberalization in the 1990s,
Hasan et al. (2012) are able to link the previous industry of employment to industry trade
exposure. They report no increase in unemployment in Indian industries in response to
domestic trade liberalization in the 1990s. The difference in industry-level unemployment
responses between India and Botswana may be due to differences in overall labor market
policies and institutions. In general, unemployment is much higher in Botswana, around 20
percent, than in India, suggesting that this is a more common labor market outcome and
thus possibly a more likely labor market adjustment mechanism to trade liberalization.
    Our definition of informal employment, which is based on the registration status and size
of the business, differs from that used in most of the trade and informality literature. That
literature has predominantly focused on workers in formally registered firms and defined in-
formal based on failure to comply with labor legislation.10 This approach has the drawback
of implicitly ignoring workers in informal firms. Our definition more closely resembles that
of McCaig and Pavcnik (2018) which defines informal employment based on the registration
    9
      Gaddis and Pieters (2017) and Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2019) report that Brazil's domestic trade lib-
eralization was associated with a rise in non-employment (i.e., a rise in unemployment or non-participation).
Erten et al. (2019) report similar evidence for South Africa.
   10
      For example, in work on Brazil's trade liberalization, Goldberg and Pavcnik (2003), Bosch et al. (2012),
Menezes-Filho and Muendler (2011), Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2019) focus on whether a worker within a
formal firm has a signed work card, while Paz (2014) defines informal workers for whom payroll tax is not
paid. Goldberg and Pavcnik (2003) rely on an indicator for the payment of social security taxes in Colombia.


                                                      4
status of a business in Vietnam. They find a decrease in informal employment within indus-
tries in response to changes in trade policy, but unlike our study, the trade policy changes
are a reduction in tariffs in a foreign market (i.e., reduced exporting costs). Hence, our study
complements the existing trade and informality literature by considering a definition of infor-
mality that is based on the status of the firm (i.e., does not focus only on workers in formally
registered firms) in the context of domestic trade liberalization. This definition of informal
employment is appealing due to the direct link to the high prevalence of informal firms in
developing countries such as Botswana. Growing evidence suggests that there are large dif-
ferences in productivity between informal and formal firms (La Porta and Shleifer (2008,
2014), Nataraj (2011), McCaig and Pavcnik (2018), Ulyssea (2018)). Hence, the SACU in-
duced movement of workers away from formal firms to informal firms in Botswana may have
lowered aggregate labor productivity, particularly within manufacturing as it was subject to
the largest tariff reductions. Our results are robust to focusing on self-employment, which
is strongly positively correlated with working in an informal firm.
   In some ways Botswana's labor market resembles that of South Africa. Understanding
these characteristics is useful for anticipating the margins of adjustment to trade liberaliza-
tion in Botswana (Erten et al., 2019). Unemployment is stubbornly high at around 20% and
has been for decades. When we include discouraged workers, the unemployment rate rises
to almost 30%. The reasons for high unemployment are varied but a combination of rela-
tively high reservation wages, an underdeveloped private sector and generous social safety
nets certainly contribute (World Bank, 2015). These relatively high levels of unemployment
have stimulated entry into the informal sector (Siphambe, 2004). In 2005 roughly 18% of
the non-agricultural labor force was employed in the informal sector. The rate of informality
in Botswana is somewhat higher than it is in South Africa but significantly lower than it is
in middle income Latin American countries where urban rates of informality reach as high
as 70% (Maloney, 2004). By contrast, unemployment in Botswana is considerably higher
than it is in middle income countries in Latin America but somewhat lower than in South
Africa. Thus, apart from sectoral reallocations, we expect adjustment to trade liberalization
in Botswana to potentially impact both unemployment and informality.
   The remainder of this paper is organizes as follows. In section 2, we describe SACU trade


                                               5
liberalization. In section 3, we introduce the labor force surveys and present descriptive
evidence on Botswana's labor markets. In section 4, we explore the causal effects of the
trade liberalization on industry employment size, unemployment, informality, hours worked,
and monthly income. Section 5 concludes.



2     Trade liberalization in the Southern Africa Customs
      Union
Botswana has been a member of the Southern Africa Customs Union (SACU) since 1910 and
SACU's external trade policy has been dominated by South Africa (Southern Africa Customs
Union, 2017). Prior to the end of apartheid in 1994, South Africa pursued a vigorous policy
of import substitution (Edwards, 2005). In 1994, the process of trade liberalization gained
momentum due to South Africa's commitment to the GATT Uruguay Round. Between 1995
and 2006, import tariffs on all traded goods fell significantly. Levels of initial tariffs varied
widely across industries, reaching over 90% in clothing. Subsequent liberalization saw the
largest tariff cuts in the industries that had the highest initial tariffs.
    Tariffs on trade with non-SACU members have been typically set by South Africa, with
little or no input from Botswana. Thus, we use South Africa's tariff structure to determine
the level of trade protection for Botswana. We measure trade protection using tariffs (includ-
ing ad valorem equivalents) plus surcharges for South Africa. Our data on trade protection,
provided by Lawrence Edwards, spans the period 1990 to 2008 and is described in detail
in Edwards (2005). This dataset comprises tariff rates (including ad valorem equivalents)
and surcharges at the 8-digit HS level. To construct the industry tariffs that correspond
to the industry classification in the labor force surveys, we construct a weighted average
tariff within industries based on concordances available through the World Integrated Trade
Solution (WITS).
    The tariff declines experienced by Botswana are advantageous for causal analysis for a
number of reasons. First, the tariff reductions were large as the mean tariff within manufac-
turing fell from 25.0 percent in 1995 to 11.7 percent in 2005. Second, the tariff reductions



                                                6
varied significantly across industries. Figure 1 shows the change in industry tariff between
1995 and 2005 versus the level in 1995 across manufacturing and mining. Tariff reductions
ranged from 0 to almost 60 percentage points and there is a strong negative relationship
between the initial tariff level and the change. Third, the tariff changes are plausibly ex-
ogenous to Botswana. Botswana has been a member of the Southern Africa Customs Union
since 1910. However, according to SACU's website, Botswana did not have a role in setting
external tariffs as South Africa retained the sole decision-making power over customs and
excise policies and set the common external tariffs to benefit South African manufacturers
following an import substitution strategy. Botswana continued to lack formal influence in
setting common external tariffs until the 2002 SACU Agreement, which established an in-
dependent Secretariat and headquarters in Namibia. Hence, the level of tariffs prior to the
end of Apartheid and the liberalization ushered in by South Africa are not likely to have
been influenced by economic conditions within Botswana. In section 4.1 we use regression
analysis to explore whether the tariff reductions are related to initial industry conditions in
Botswana.



3        Labor force surveys and aggregate trends

3.1      Labor force survey data

We rely on two labor force surveys conducted in 1995/96 and 2005/06. The labor force
surveys were conducted by the Central Statistics Office of Botswana. These surveys aim
to be a source of nationally representative information on the size, structure, and main
characteristics of the labor force. They include information on employment in both formal
and informal firms, as well as detailed categories of work status for both workers and those
not working. Data for these surveys was collected throughout the 12 months of the duration
of the survey. Both the 1995/96 and 2005/06 surveys asked virtually the same questions,
with the 2005/06 survey adding some questions on child employment, so data from both
surveys is comparable.11
    11
     The 2005/06 LFS sample included persons 7 years old and above while the 1995/96 only included
persons 12 years old and above. Nevertheless, both surveys can be easily compared by controlling for age.


                                                   7
   There are two main definitions of employment in the labor force surveys, each with its
own time frame. The surveys ask about the main type of work the person has been doing
in the past 12 months (usual employment) and the type of work the person did in the past
7 days (current employment). We focus on current employment during the past 7 days due
to the more detailed questions asked about the current job as opposed to the usual job.
Furthermore, we focus on employment outside of agriculture due to comparability issues
introduced by seasonal agricultural work when using the past 7 days employment.
   If the respondent worked during the past 7 days or was temporarily absent, she was asked
about the occupation, industry, whether the work was paid or self-employment, and a series
of questions to determine if the organization the individual worked for is formal or informal.12
We follow the conventional definition of an informal sector business in Botswana. An informal
business is identified by multiple characteristics, including "non registration of a company
with the Registrar of Companies or legal professionals; informal accounts or none; 5 or
less paid employees; expenditure not easily distinguishable from household ones; enterprise
often temporary or mobile or in owner's home" (Central Statistics Office, 2009). Under
this definition, all workers in central and local government, parastatals, non-government
organizations, private households, and private firms with more than 10 workers are defined
as working in formal organizations. Workers in private firms with 10 or fewer workers are
classified by the enumerator as either being in a formal or informal business based on four
questions: location (permanent; on a footpath, street or open space; market; in someone's
home; or no fixed location), how many workers are paid versus unpaid within the firm,
whether the firm is a registered company or is registered with a professional organization,
and whether the firm keeps a complete set of accounts. This leaves some discretion for the
enumerator as a firm may not keep complete accounts, but could be a registered company
or the firm could not be registered but keeps complete accounts and most of its (10 or fewer
workers) are paid employees.
   For individuals that did not work or were not temporarily absent during the past 7 days,
they were asked whether they were available for work during the past 7 days. We exclude
  12
    Both labor force surveys report industry of work using the Botswana Standard Industrial Classification
(BSIC), which is adapted from the International Standard Industrial Classification, revision 3.



                                                    8
non-working individuals that reported being unavailable to work since the questionnaires
did not ask these individuals about their previous industry of work and hence we have no
industry tariff to match with these individuals. Among individuals that were available to
work, but did not, we create two definitions of unemployment. The first definition, narrow
unemployment, is based on being available to work and trying to find work in the past 30
days. Our second definition, broad unemployment, includes individuals that were available
to work, but did not report trying to find work during the past 30 days. Among individuals
that were available to work, but did not seek work, the most commonly reported reason was
that they thought there was no work available. We focus on unemployed individuals that
had previously worked and report the industry of their most recent job.
   Table A1 in Appendix A provides summary statistics for employed individuals. We have
977 and 631 workers in manufacturing, 1,614 and 935 workers in mining and manufacturing,
and excluding workers in agriculture, we have 8,895 and 6,587 observations in 1995/96 and
2005/06 respectively. Table A2 provides summary statistics for unemployed individuals based
on the industry of their most recent job. Within manufacturing, unemployed individuals are
younger, on average, than employed individuals. They are also more likely to be female.
   We report industry summary statistics in Table A3. We have 5 industries within mining
and quarrying and 27 industries in manufacturing for a total of 32 traded industries. The
table reports the share of economy-wide employment within each traded industry and for
non-traded industries aggregated together. Within traded industries, the largest are clothing,
diamond mining, and copper or nickel mining. The share of workers in traded industries fell
between 1995/96 and 2005/06.
   The timing of the initial labor force survey is after SACU trade liberalization had already
started in 1994 (Cassim et al. (2004), Edwards (2005)). As such, any adjustment that had
already taken place by the time of the 1995/96 LFS will be missed in our estimates. We
thus view our estimates as a lower bound of the effect by the time of the 2005/06 LFS as we
match the 1995 and 2005 tariffs to the 1995/96 and 2005/06 LFSs by industry.
   It would be ideal to have an additional labour force survey or population census prior to
SACU liberalization as a way to check whether pre-existing trends within Botswana's labor
markets are correlated with subsequent industry tariff reductions. Unfortunately, such data


                                              9
is not available. There is no labour force survey prior to the 1995/96 LFS. Additionally, the
1991 population census used more aggregated industry codes, leaving only 11 manufacturing
industries, and the 1981 population census grouped all manufacturing industries together.
Hence, data availability is a constraint, as is common in most sub-Saharan countries (Center
for Global Development, 2014).


3.2    Changes in employment, unemployment, and informality

We begin by examining the reported activity of working age individuals. Table 1 shows the
number and share of individuals according to whether they were working; seeking work; not
available to work; or available to work, but did not look for a job during the past 30 days.
The estimates are based on the individual's activity during the past 7 days, according to
the 1995/96 and 2005/06 labor force surveys, respectively. We focus on individuals between
the ages of 15 and 60 inclusive. Over the sample period, the labor force participation rate
increased by 8.5 percentage points as the number of working age individuals increased by
24 percent and the number of individuals not in the labor force remained roughly constant.
Among labor force participants, the share of those actively seeking work fell from 22 percent
to 19 percent. However, the share of the working age population who reported that they were
available to work but did not work during the past 30 days (discouraged workers) increased
from 10.9 to 13.9 percent. If we count both those actively seeking work and discouraged
workers, the share of the working age population that is unemployed is very high in both
periods at 23.3 and 26.0 percent, respectively.
   HIV prevalence is extremely high in Botswana. Using Botswana's AIDS survey and
correcting for selection bias, Levinsohn and McCrary (2010) estimate prevalence rates to be
around 17 percent. According to UNAIDS, the prevalence among working age individuals is
much higher, at close to 40 percent. Contrary to our expectations, illness does not seem to be
a major determinant of labor force participation. The share of the population reporting that
they were not in the labor force due to illness increased only marginally from 3 percent in
1995/96 to 3.4 percent in 2005/06. This may be a testament to the government's aggressive
campaign to treat individuals who are HIV positive. With our data, it is impossible to tell.
However, given the importance of HIV in Botswana, in our econometric work we control for

                                             10
the individual characteristics that Levinsohn and McCrary found to be important correlates
of HIV status: age, location (urban or rural), and education.
   Next, in Table 2 we examine the distribution of workers across sectors. The estimates
are based primarily on the current job of the individual, but for agriculture we also report
estimates based on the usual job over the past 12 months because of the seasonality of
agricultural employment (recall that the surveys were conducted across 12 months). Addi-
tionally, for the workers usually working in agriculture, we report the number of seasonal and
non-seasonal workers. An agricultural worker is defined as seasonal if the worker reported
working less than 52 weeks and reported working on their own/family lands/cattlepost (here-
after referred to as own lands) for their usual job. In contrast, a non-seasonal agricultural
worker reported working all 52 weeks in the sector. The distinction between the individ-
ual's usual and current job is crucially important in agriculture. It is immediately obvious
that the two definitions yield very different trends in estimates of the number of workers in
agriculture. The number of current workers in agriculture grew by 182 percent, while the
number of usual agricultural workers grew by only 19 percent. The most likely explanation
for these differences has to do with the timing of interviews. More households were surveyed
during the lean season in 1995/96 than in 2005/06. As a result, in section 4 we focus our
empirical analysis on non-agricultural workers.
   Outside of agriculture, as reported in Panel A, there were some important changes in the
distribution of workers across sectors. The share of workers in public administration and con-
struction fell appreciably, while the number of workers in wholesale and retail trade, hotels,
restaurants, etc.; and finance, insurance, real estate, and business services increased. The
remaining sectors experienced only marginal changes in their shares of the non-agricultural
workforce. In the context of the SACU tariff cuts, it is interesting to note that the share of
workers in manufacturing fell, but only by 0.6 percentage points, and the share of workers
in mining fell by 1.4 percentage points or 27 percent.
   In Table 3, we return to the issue of unemployment and labor force participation by
various segments of the working age population. We report these rates for males and fe-
males, urban and rural workers, by age (30 or younger and older than 30), and by education
levels. We find significant differences across groups. For example, males are less likely to be


                                              11
unemployed and more likely to be in the labor force than females in either year, although
both genders significantly increased their labor force participation rates between 1995/96
and 2005/06. Urban individuals have a higher rate of narrow unemployment than rural
individuals and the gap has grown to 5.4 percentage points by 2005/06. Urban individu-
als are also more likely to be participating in the labor force, although the gap has shrunk
considerably over time. There is not much difference in either unemployment or labor force
participation rates across individuals with primary or secondary education. However, hav-
ing some education, as compared to no formal education, is an important determinant of
employment status. Lastly, older workers have a higher rate of labor force participation and
lower rates of both narrow and broad unemployment than younger workers.
   An additional concern about the SACU tariff cuts, aside from displacement and unem-
ployment, is the movement of workers into informal firms. The labor force surveys define
informality according to a series of questions related to the ownership sector (e.g., govern-
ment, parastatal, NGO, or private), the number of workers in the business, the location of
the business, whether the business is registered, and whether the business keeps a complete
set of accounts. The enumerator evaluated whether the worker's place of work was formal or
informal based on these questions.13 Note that the questions about location, business regis-
tration, and accounts were only asked for workers in businesses with 10 or fewer workers in
the private sector. Consequently, for all workers that were not asked the detailed questions
related to formality, we classify them as formally employed as they either worked in large
private firms or in sectors more likely to be formal (e.g., government, parastatal, or NGOs).
This definition of informality is thus based on the status of the business, not on whether the
business confirms to existing labor legislation. Furthermore, the definition of an informal
business, based on a combination of ownership type, employment size, registration status,
and account keeping, is consistent with those from other countries. For example, La Porta
and Shleifer (2008, 2014) define a business as informal based on its registration status. In
Vietnam, an informal firm is one that is not registered with the central government as an
enterprise under Vietnam's Enterprise Law. Vietnamese domestic private businesses are not
required to register with the government if they have less than 10 workers and do not operate
  13
       See questions 24 through 30 in the 1995/96 LFS and questions 34 through 39 in the 2005/06 LFS.


                                                    12
in more than one location (McCaig and Pavcnik (2018)). And in India, manufacturing firms
are legally required to register with the government if they have 10 or more workers and use
electricity or if they have 20 or more workers, but don't use electricity (Nataraj (2011)).14
     We use this employer-based definition of informality to report on the incidence of informal
work by major sector in Table 4. Overall, the percentage of work in informal firms has
increased by 4.8 percentage points or 36 percent, a very significant increase. Importantly,
the incidence of informality in the manufacturing sector increased by 4.3 percentage points,
which is slightly below the overall increase, but may be partially related to the SACU tariff
cuts. We explore this possibility in Section 4.3. Many sectors experienced an increase in
the share of workers in informal firms. In fact, the only sector to experience a decrease was
community, social, household, and personal services.
     In summary, the share of individuals working increased between 1995/96 and 2005/06,
however the share of discouraged workers also increased. At an aggregate level, employment
in manufacturing fell slightly, by 0.6 percentage points, but the share of informal workers in
manufacturing increased significantly, by 4.3 percentage points from 27 percent in 1995/96.
In section 4, we explore whether these changes are related to SACU tariffs reductions.



4        SACU trade liberalization and labor market adjust-
         ment in Botswana

4.1      Endogeneity of SACU tariff cuts

Before estimating the impacts of SACU trade liberalization on labor markets in Botswana, we
address possible concerns about the endogeneity of the tariff reductions. As shown in Figure
1, the size of the tariff reductions were closely related to the initial tariff level. Furthermore,
as previously discussed, Botswana had no ability to influence the size of the tariff reductions
due to South Africa dominating trade policy within SACU. Nonetheless, it is still possible
that the size of the tariff reductions may vary with conditions across industries in Botswana.
    14
      Note that this definition of informality differs from many papers in the trade and informality literature
that focus on workers in formal firms and define informal employment as failure to comply with labor
legislation (see Goldberg and Pavcnik (2003), Paz (2014), and Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2019) among others).


                                                      13
To explore this possibility, we estimate the following equation:


                                    ln(1 + tariffj ) =  + Xj + uj                                            (1)

    where ln(1 + tariffj ) is the change in ln tariff in industry j and Xj is a vector of initial
conditions in industry j. We calculate the following initial conditions from the 1995/96 labor
force survey: the share of workers within the industry that work in informal firms, the share
of young workers (30 years and less), the share of urban workers, the share of highly educated
workers (completed at least junior secondary), and the industry's share of total employment.
    We report the results in Table 5 for manufacturing and traded (mining and manufac-
turing together), and for both sets of industries, but omitting clothing. We find that some
of the initial conditions have a statistically significant relationship with the tariff reduc-
tions. Specifically, industries with a higher share of workers in informal firms and industries
with a greater share of individuals attached to it (either currently working or most recently
employed in the industry) experienced greater tariff reductions. Although the coefficient
is not statistically different from 0, industries with a greater share of attached individuals
that were unemployed also experienced larger tariff decreases. The employment share is a
particularly strong predictor of the size of the tariff cut within manufacturing. The finding
that initial conditions are correlated with subsequent tariff cuts is common in the literature.
For example, Goldberg and Pavcnik (2005) find that the initial share of skilled workers is
correlated with subsequent tariff reductions in Columbia. Topalova and Khandelwal (2011)
find that the initial share of nonproduction workers is correlated with the size of industry
tariff reductions in India.15
    In our context, the results are significantly weaker when clothing is excluded from the
analysis, as shown in columns 3 and 4. Clothing is a very important industry in this analysis
for two reasons. First, it is a very large industry in terms of employment, representing 25
percent of manufacturing employment and 15 percent of mining and manufacturing employ-
   15
     Although many papers do not report results for testing whether change in trade policy or trade flows are
correlated with initial conditions, it is very common in the literature to include initial conditions as controls
in subsequent regression analysis due to concerns about correlations with initial conditions. Examples of
papers that include initial conditions as controls include Topalova (2010), McCaig (2011), Autor et al. (2013),
and Costa et al. (2016).



                                                       14
ment in 1995/96. Second, it is the industry that experienced the largest tariff reduction
(Figure 1). These two features make it a very influential observation.
   Furthermore, clothing is an important industry for a second reason. The 2000 U.S.
African Growth and Opportunities Act (AGOA) led to duty free U.S. imports from numerous
Sub-Saharan African countries, including Botswana.16 Botswana's clothing exports to the
U.S. rose by almost 700 percent between 2000 and 2005, from 8.9 to 61.7 million USD.17
Hence, in our labor market analysis we will check the robustness of our results controlling
for the influence of AGOA on the clothing industry.


4.2     SACU trade liberalization and industry employment

Traditional trade theory predicts that workers should reallocate across industries in response
to changes in tariffs. In particular, the industries that received the largest tariff cuts should
contract. We begin our formal analysis of the labor market consequences of SACUs trade
liberalization by looking for evidence of worker reallocation across industries in response to
tariff changes. We estimate the following regression model:


                       sjt = ln(1 + tariffjt ) + D2005 Xj 1995 + j + t + ujt                          (2)


where j indexes industries, t indexes time (i.e., 1995/96 and 2005/06), sjt is the share of the
workforce working in industry j at time t, tariffjt is the SACU tariff in industry j at time t,
D2005 Xj 1995 is a dummy for 2005 interacted with a vector of initial industry conditions, t is a
time fixed effect, and j is an industry fixed effect. The vector of initial industry conditions is
the same as in Table 5 and includes the share of workers within the industry in informal firms,
the share of individuals affiliated with the industry that are male, 30 and younger, urban,
have finished junior secondary, are (broad) unemployed, and the share of individuals affiliated
with the industry. We are interested in the coefficient on tariff. Our identifying variation is
changes in tariffs over time within an industry. Thus, we are identifying whether industries
that experienced larger tariff cuts either grew or shrunk in comparison to industries that
  16
     See Frazer and Van Biesebroeck (2010) and Rotunno et al. (2013) for analysis of the causal effects of
AGOA on trade flows.
  17
     Authors' calculation based on data from UNComtrade.


                                                   15
received smaller tariff cuts, conditional on initial industry conditions. Conventional trade
theory predicts that the industries that experienced the largest tariff cuts should experience
a reduction in the share of workers and thus that the coefficient on tariff,  , should be
positive.
   We estimate equation (2) for manufacturing, traded, and for all industries (excluding
agriculture). For non-traded industries, we assign a tariff of 0 in both 1995/96 and 2005/06.
With the inclusion of industry fixed effects, this implies that identification for non-traded
industries is based on no change in the tariff.
   Table 6, Panel A presents the results from estimating equation (2). For manufacturing,
the coefficient is negative, suggesting an increase in employment shares in response to SACU
liberalization, but the implied magnitude is very small and the coefficient is not statistically
different from 0. In column 2, the coefficient is also negative, suggesting an increase in em-
ployment share in response to the SACU tariff reductions, but again the implied magnitude
is very small and the coefficient is not statistically different from 0. Lastly, in column 3 for all
industries (excluding agriculture), the coefficient is positive and statistically different from
0, suggesting that employment in traded industries shrunk relative to non-traded industries
in response to SACU liberalization.
   In Panels B and C of Table 6 we explore how sensitive our results are to the clothing
industry. In Panel B we add an AGOA indicator variable as an additional control variable.
This variable is 1 for the clothing industry in 2005/06 and 0 for all other observations. In
Panel C we remove the clothing industry from the analysis. Recall that the clothing industry
is the largest manufacturing industry in terms of employment, accounting for 25 percent
of manufacturing workers in 1995/96. Additionally, as previously discussed, the clothing
industry was subject to other large trade policy changes during this time period, specifically
the African Growth and Opportunities Act. Given the size of the clothing industry and the
clothing-specific effect of AGOA, it makes sense to explore how sensitive our results are to
the inclusion of clothing. In both Panels B and C, the coefficients are smaller in magnitude
than in Panel A for manufacturing and mining. For all industries, the estimates in Panels
B and C are very similar to that in Panel A, again suggesting a relative expansion of the
non-tradable sector in response to SACU tariff cuts. Lastly, note that the AGOA indicator


                                                16
is positive in columns 1 and 2, suggesting an expansion in the relative size of the clothing
industry, as one would expect from AGOA.
    In summary, there is little evidence of a systematic reallocation of workers across traded
industries in response to the SACU tariff cuts, but some evidence of relocation to non-
traded industries.18 These results are consistent with a lack of reallocation across industries
in response to domestic trade liberalization in developing countries surveyed by Goldberg
and Pavcnik (2007) and more recently found by Topalova (2010) in the case of India's trade
liberalization in the early 1990s, Dix-Carneiro (2014) for Brazil's trade liberalization in the
late 1980s and early 1990s, and McCaig and Pavcnik (2018) in Vietnam in the early 2000s
in response to reductions in a trading partner's tariffs (i.e., export market liberalization).


4.3     SACU trade liberalization and workers

Although the tariff changes do not appear to have substantially affected the distribution
of workers across industries, it may be the case that there have been important within-
industry changes. For example, workers could have become unemployed, moved to informal
firms, changed hours worked, or experienced changes in pay. We explore whether there
is evidence of changes in worker outcomes in response to the SACU tariff cuts using the
following regression model:


                  Yijt = ln(1 + tariffjt ) + Zijt + D2005 Xj 1995 + j + t + uijt                           (3)

where j indexes industries, t indexes time (i.e., 1995/96 and 2005/06), Yijt is an outcome
variable for worker or individual i, tarif fjt is the SACU tariff in industry j at time t,
Zijt is a vector of individual characteristics (age, male indicator, urban indicator, finished
primary, finished junior secondary, finished senior secondary), D2005 Xj 1995 is a dummy for
2005 interacted with a vector of initial industry conditions (the same as used previously in
Tables 5 and 6), j is an industry fixed effect, and t is a time fixed effect.
    We are interested in the coefficient on tariffs. Our identifying variation is changes in
  18
     We get very similar results if we use the share of individuals affiliated with an industry, which includes
both workers and unemployed individuals, as the dependent variable. These are available from the authors
on request.


                                                      17
tariffs over time within an industry, conditional on controlling for observable individual
characteristics and initial industry conditions. Controlling for initial industry conditions is
important in this context due to their correlation with SACU tariff reductions. Failing to
directly control for them would then imply that the SACU tariff cuts are partially picking
up any effects related to initial differences in industry size and composition.
   Unemployment We begin by examining two definitions of unemployment. The first is
based on workers that were available to work and sought work. The second is broader and
includes individuals that were available for work but did not seek employment. In both cases,
our sample includes individuals that are actively working and individuals that are defined
as unemployed according to the respective definition. For individuals that are currently
working, their industry is that in which they are currently working, but for unemployed
individuals, their industry is that in which they most recently worked.
   In Table 7, we report regression results from estimating (3) for manufacturing, traded
(mining and manufacturing), and all industries (excluding agriculture). As before, we explore
the sensitivity of our results to the clothing industry. Within manufacturing, column 1, we
consistently find a small, statistically insignificant effect on unemployment. Adding mining to
the sample (column 2) causes the estimate to become negative and to increase in magnitude,
but it remains statistically insignificant in all three panels. Using the estimate from Panel A,
the magnitude of the coefficient for the manufacturing and mining sample is relatively large
and suggests that the average reduction in manufacturing tariffs, -0.107, is associated with a
1.6 percentage point increase in the likelihood of narrow unemployment, but the coefficient
is estimated imprecisely, limiting our ability to draw firm conclusions. For all industries
(column 3), the coefficient is also negative, but is smaller in magnitude.
   In Table 8, we report results for estimating equation (3) with an expanded definition of
unemployment. We include unemployed individuals that sought work as well as unemployed
individuals that did not seek work (i.e., discouraged). Across all specifications, the effects are
noticeably larger than in Table 7, but are typically not statistically different from 0, especially
once we control for the effects of AGOA (Panel B) or remove clothing (Panel C). As in Table
7, the results within manufacturing suggest a reduction in unemployment in association with
SACU tariff reductions. Using the estimate from Panel B, the magnitude of the coefficient for


                                                18
manufacturing suggests a 2.4 percentage point decrease in unemployment, broadly defined,
due to the mean tariff cut (-0.107), although the estimate is imprecisely estimated and not
statistically different from 0. The results in columns 2 and 3 are qualitatively similar to
those for narrow unemployment.19
   In summary, our results examining the effects of SACU liberalization on unemployment
are suggestive of a decrease in unemployment within manufacturing and an increase in unem-
ployment in traded industries. However, in both cases the results are imprecisely estimated
and not generally statistically different from 0. Our results of a possible increase in unem-
ployment are consistent with those reported for Brazil. Menezes-Filho and Muendler (2011),
Gaddis and Pieters (2017), and Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2019) report that Brazil's domestic
trade liberalization was associated with a rise in non-formal employment (i.e., a rise in infor-
mal employment, unemployment, or non-participation). In South Africa, Erten et al. (2019)
find evidence of an increase in unemployment in local labor markets in response to SACU
trade liberalization. However, our results differ from Hasan et al. (2012) who report no
increase in unemployment in India in response to domestic trade liberalization in the 1990s.
The difference between contexts likely has to do with overall labor market policies and insti-
tutions. Botswana, South Africa, and Brazil have much higher rates of unemployment than
India. For example, Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2019) report mean non-employment (unem-
ployed plus not participating in the labor force) rates of 36 to 40 percent across Brazilian
regions and Erten et al. (2019) report broad unemployment rates of 23 percent for South
Africa, while Hasan et al. (2012) report unemployment rates between 4.1 and 5.6 percent
across Indian states. Botswana's unemployment and non-employment rates are more similar
in magnitude to those in Brazil and South Africa, suggesting that unemployment is, more
generally, a common outcome and thus more likely to be an adjustment margin in response
to domestic trade liberalization.
   Work in informal firms and self-employment We next explore margins of adjust-
ment among workers. Recent work has highlighted the role of trade in the reallocation of
  19
     In Tables A4 and A5, we provide disaggregated results for our two definitions of unemployment based
on individual characteristics. We estimate the same model as in Panel C of Tables 7 and 8 respectively. In
most of these comparisons, cautious interpretation should be given to the differences among workers due to
the large standard errors.



                                                   19
workers between informal and formal firms (McCaig and Pavcnik (2018) and Dix-Carneiro
and Kovak (2019)). In Table 9, Panel A, we report the estimation of equation (3) using an
indicator for working in an informal firm as the dependent variable. We find evidence of
an increase in the prevalence of work in informal firms within manufacturing in response to
the tariff reductions. The implied magnitude is large, a 7.8 percentage point increase in the
prevalence of working in an informal firm in response to the average tariff reduction within
manufacturing. However, the result is imprecisely estimated and not statistically different
from 0. In columns 2 and 3 of Panel A, the estimate is very close to 0.
    In Panel B, we add an indicator for AGOA. We find that AGOA is associated with a
reduction in informality within clothing. Controlling for this influence leads to an increase
in the magnitude of the coefficient on SACU tariffs relative to Panel A. The coefficient for
manufacturing suggests a 8.0 percentage point increase in the prevalence of working for an
informal firm in response to the mean tariff reduction within manufacturing (-0.107). The
inclusion of mining in column 2 leads to a smaller effect but it is still statistically different
from 0. Lastly, in column 3, the effect is again smaller than within manufacturing, but
is statistically different from 0. The smaller effects in mining and non-traded industries is
likely due to the lack of informal businesses in mining and the lower overall prevalence of
such work in some large non-traded industries, such as public administration (Table 4).
    We check the sensitivity of our results to removing clothing from the specification and
report the results in Panel C of Table 9. The estimated coefficients are very similar to those
in Panel B, both in magnitude and statistical significance.20
    The estimates of an increase in informality due to SACU tariff reductions are consistent
with evidence from Colombia and Brazil where domestic trade liberalization was associated
with an increase in informality (Goldberg and Pavcnik (2003), Bosch et al. (2012), Paz
(2014), and Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2019)).21 However, those studies primarily focus on a
   20
      In Table A6, we estimate equation (3) for various subsamples of workers. We report specifications that
include initial industry characteristics interacted with time fixed effects and we exclude clothing.
   21
      Goldberg and Pavcnik (2003) find an increase in informality within industries in Colombia due to trade
liberalization, but only prior to a major labor market reform. However, in Brazil, they find no effect on
informality within industries. This is in contrast to Bosch et al. (2012) that do find an increase in informality
within industries in Brazil. Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2019) construct regional measures of informality and
exposure to trade liberalization in Brazil. Paz (2014) also studies Brazil's trade liberalization, but defines
informality based on the payment of payroll taxes as compared to having a signed work card as in the other



                                                       20
definition of informality that is based on employment conditions for workers within formal
firms and focus only on workers in formal firms. Our definition of informality is based on
the registration and size of the business and more closely aligns with the definition used
by McCaig and Pavcnik (2018). They find a reduction in informal employment in response
to new export opportunities. The difference in effects of changes in trade policy are likely
due to the positive nature of the export demand shock studied by McCaig and Pavcnik
(2018) as compared to domestic trade liberalization in Botswana. This is consistent with a
recent survey by Goldberg and Pavcnik (2016) that highlights how the nature of trade policy
changes matters.
    Since the definition of an informal firm varies across countries, we provide a robustness
check based on self-employment. In particular, we focus on the distinction between paid
employment and self-employment. Information on whether a worker is self-employed or
working in wage employment is more widely available in household and labor force surveys in
developing countries and McCaig and Pavcnik (2018) show that employment in an informal
business is highly correlated with self-employment in Vietnam. We find that working in
an informal business is highly positively correlated with self-employment in Botswana as
well. The correlations are 0.82, 0.84, and 0.73 in manufacturing, traded, and all industries,
respectively. Thus, using an indicator for self-employment is both a useful check on the
sensitivity of our results to the particular definition of an informal firm in Botswana and
facilitates comparisons with other low- and middle-income countries.
    In Table 10, we report results from estimating equation 3 using an indicator for self-
employment as the dependent variable. The specifications mimic those in Table 9. Within
manufacturing, we consistently find that the SACU tariff cuts are associated with an increase
in the prevalence of self-employment within an industry. The estimates are larger than those
reported in Table 9 in terms of magnitude. The results in Panel C suggest an increase
in self-employment of 11.7 percentage points within an industry that experienced the mean
tariff reduction in manufacturing as compared to no reduction. The effects are largest within
manufacturing. Self-employment within mining is unobserved in our data, which is likely
why the magnitude is lower once mining industries are added to the regression.
Brazil studies.


                                             21
   We can further disaggregate self-employment into self-employment with employees, with-
out employees, and as an unpaid family helper. These results are reported in Tables A7
through A9 in Appendix A. We find that more than half of the increase in self-employment
due to SACU trade liberalization occurred within unpaid family help. The combination of
self-employment with employees and unpaid family help accounts for over three quarters
of the SACU induced increase in self-employment. These results are remarkably consistent
with the informality results, suggesting that the particular definition of an informal business
in Botswana is not driving the results.
   Hours worked The analysis thus far has focused on extensive margins of adjustment:
changes in unemployment and changes in the type of job (working for an informal business
and self-employment). In this subsection we explore whether hours worked were affected by
SACU trade liberalization.
   In Table 11 we report estimates of equation (3) with ln of actual hours worked during
the past week as the dependent variable. The results for manufacturing consistently suggest
a decrease in weekly hours worked. The estimate in Panel A suggests a decease in weekly
hours of 8.7 percent in response to the mean tariff reduction within manufacturing. The same
pattern emerges once mining is included, particularly once clothing is controlled for. Once
non-traded industries are added to the analysis (column 3), the estimate is much smaller.
   The reduction in weekly hours worked is partially driven by the shift of workers into
informal firms as workers in informal firms work fewer hours on average. For example,
within manufacturing in 1995/96, the mean number of weekly hours was 35.9 and 43.6 hours
in informal and formal businesses, respectively. This is confirmed in Table 12 which repeats
the previous specifications, adding an indicator for working in an informal firm as a control
variable. The coefficient on informal is consistently negative, suggesting a decrease in hours
of between 17 and 21 percent across the various specifications. Moreover, the coefficient on
tariffs falls by about 0.2 ln points when the informal control is added relative to Table 11.
This suggests the shift of workers into informal firms is partly responsible for the decrease
in weekly hours in response to the SACU tariff cuts.
   Monthly income Lastly, we report results using ln monthly gross income from paid
employment as the dependent variable. This includes both cash and the value of in kind


                                              22
payments. We present the results in Table 13. The specifications follow the same pattern
as in previous tables. The results for manufacturing suggest a decrease in monthly income,
although the coefficient is not very precisely estimated and is not statistically different from 0.
Nonetheless, the suggested magnitude of the effect remains large. For example, the coefficient
on tariffs in panel A for manufacturing suggests a reduction in monthly income of 9 percent
in response to the mean tariff reduction. However, when we add workers in mining to the
sample, the coefficient switches sign. Recall that mining industries, on average, experienced
very small tariff reductions (Table A3, Figure 1). Hence, the change in the coefficient from
column 1 to 2 implies that workers in mining experienced slower wage growth than workers
in manufacturing industries that experienced small tariff reductions.



5     Conclusion
We study the impact of trade liberalization on workers in Botswana. A unique feature of
Botswana's trade liberalization is that it was driven by South Africa's control of the external
trade policy of the Southern Africa Customs Union. This provides an excellent context for
exploring causal effects since it decreases the likelihood that tariff reductions were influenced
by factors within Botswana.
    The evidence presented in this paper indicates that SACU's trade liberalization had little
impact on the allocation of employment across industries in Botswana. This is consistent
with existing trade and labor market adjustment studies that generally find little or no
changes in industry size in developing countries in response to domestic trade liberalization.
    We find mixed evidence that the SACU tariff reductions impacted the prevalence of
unemployment within industries. The results suggest a decrease in unemployment within
manufacturing, but an increase once mining industries are added to the analysis. However,
although the implied increase in unemployment is large, the results are imprecisely estimated
and not statistically significant. The prevalence of working in an informal business increased
within manufacturing due to SACU liberalization, as did the prevalence of self-employment.
We further find that weekly hours decreased and that this is driven in part by the increase
in work in informal businesses, as these workers report working fewer hours on average.


                                                23
Lastly, we find evidence of a decrease in monthly income in manufacturing due to SACU
liberalization, but despite large coefficients, the results are imprecise and not statistically
different from 0.
   The lack of statistically significant results is commonly the outcome of large standard
errors, not of estimates that are quantitatively close to 0. This highlights the need for either
larger labor force surveys in terms of sample sizes or more frequent labor force surveys to
help derive more definitive results. This echoes concerns about the lack of data for a large
number of Sub-Saharan African countries.
   The reallocation of workers out of formal firms and into informal firms and unemployment
may have important consequences for labor productivity, particularly within manufacturing,
the most impacted sector. A growing literature documents that informal firms are typically
much less productive than formal firms. Thus, the movement of workers away from formal
firms to informal firms is likely associated with a decrease in aggregate labor productivity.
   The results on unemployment, working in an informal business, and self-employment add
to the more recent literature on labor market adjustment to trade in developing countries.
In particular, there is scant evidence on the effects of trade liberalization on unemployment
within industries in developing countries due to the lack of data in household or labor force
surveys on the previous industry of employment (Goldberg and Pavcnik (2007), Hasan et al.
(2012)). Additionally, this is one of the first papers to study the impact of trade liberalization
on labor markets in Sub-Saharan Africa, with Erten et al. (2019) being the notable exception.



References
Artuc, E., Lederman, D. and Porto, G. (2015) A mapping of mobility costs in the developing
  world, Journal of International Economics, 95, 28­41.

Attanasio, O., Goldberg, P. K. and Pavcnik, N. (2004) Trade reforms and wage inequality
  in Colombia, Journal of Development Economics, 74, 331­366.

Autor, D. H., Dorn, D. and Hanson, G. (2013) The China syndrome: Local labor market




                                               24
  effects of import competition in the United States, American Economic Review, 103,
  2121­2168.

Bosch, M., Go~
             ni-Pacchioni, E. and Maloney, W. (2012) Trade liberalization, labor reforms
  and formal-informal employment dynamics, Labour Economics, 19, 633­67.

Cassim, R., Onyango, D. and Van Seventer, D. E. (2004) The state of trade policy in South
  Africa, Trade and Industrial Policy Strategies (TIPS).

Center for Global Development (2014) Delivering on the data revolution in Sub-Saharan
  Africa: Final report of the data for African development working group, Center for Global
  Development, Washington, DC.

Central Statistics Office (2009) 2007 Informal Sector Survey Report, Central Statistics Office
  of Botswana, Gaborone, Botswana.

Costa, F., Garred, J. and Pessoa, J. P. (2016) Winners and losers from a commodities-for-
  manufactures trade boom, Journal of International Economics, 102, 50­69.

Currie, J. and Harrison, A. (1997) Sharing the costs: The impact of trade reform on capital
  and labor in Morocco, Journal of Labour Economics, 15, S44­71.

Dix-Carneiro, R. (2014) Trade liberalization and labor market dynamics, Econometrica, 82,
  825­885.

Dix-Carneiro, R. and Kovak, B. K. (2019) Margins of labor market adjustment to trade,
  Journal of International Economics, 117, 125­142.

Edwards, L. (2005) Has South Africa liberalised its trade?, South African Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 73, 754­775.

Erten, B., Leight, J. and Tregenna, F. (2019) Trade liberalization and local labor market
  adjustment in South Africa, Journal of International Economics, 118, 448­467.

Feliciano, Z. M. (2001) Workers and trade liberalization: The impact of trade reforms in
  Mexico on wages and employment, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 55, 95­115.


                                             25
Frazer, G. and Van Biesebroeck, J. (2010) Trade growth under the African Growth and
  Opportunities Act, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92, 128­490.

Gaddis, I. and Pieters, J. (2017) The gendered labor market impacts of trade liberalization,
  The Journal of Human Resources, 52, 457­490.

Goldberg, P. K. and Pavcnik, N. (2003) The response of the informal sector to trade liber-
  alization, Journal of Development Economics, 72, 463­496.

Goldberg, P. K. and Pavcnik, N. (2005) Trade, wages, and the political economy of trade pro-
  tection: Evidence from the Colombian trade reforms, Journal of International Economics,
  66, 75­105.

Goldberg, P. K. and Pavcnik, N. (2007) Distributional effects of globalization in developing
  countries, Journal of Economic Literature, 45, 39­82.

Goldberg, P. K. and Pavcnik, N. (2016) The effects of trade policy, in Handbook of Com-
  mercial Policy, Elsevier, vol. 1, pp. 161­206.

Harrison, A., McLaren, J. and McMillan, M. (2011) Recent perspectives on trade and in-
  equality, Annual Review of Economics, 3, 261­289.

Hasan, R., Mitra, D., Ranjan, P. and Ahsan, R. N. (2012) Trade liberalization and un-
  employment: Theory and evidence from India, Journal of Development Economics, 97,
  269­280.

Kovak, B. (2013) Regional effects of trade reform: What is the correct measure of liberal-
  ization?, American Economic Review, 103, 1960­76.

La Porta, R. and Shleifer, A. (2008) The unofficial economy and economic development,
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2008, 275­363.

La Porta, R. and Shleifer, A. (2014) Informality and development, Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 28, 109­26.

Levinsohn, J. and McCrary, J. (2010) The prevalence of HIV in Botswana.


                                             26
Maloney, W. F. (2004) Informality revisited, World Development, 32, 1159­1178.

McCaig, B. (2011) Exporting out of poverty: Provincial poverty in Vietnam and U.S. market
  access, Journal of International Economics, 85, 102­113.

McCaig, B., McMillan, M., I ñ igo Verduzco-Gallo, I. and Jefferis, K. (2017) Stuck in the
  middle? Structural change and productivity growth in Botswana, in Structural change,
  fundamentals, and growth: A framework and case studies (Eds.) M. McMillan, D. Rodrik
  and C. P. Sepulveda, International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, D.C.

McCaig, B. and Pavcnik, N. (2018) Export markets and labor allocation in a low-income
  country, American Economic Review, 108, 1899­1941.

Menezes-Filho, N. A. and Muendler, M.-A. (2011) Labor reallocation in response to trade
  reform, NBER Working Paper 17372.

Nataraj, S. (2011) The impact of trade liberalization on productivity: Evidence from India's
  formal and informal manufacturing sectors, Journal of International Economics, 85, 292­
  301.

Paz, L. S. (2014) The impacts of trade liberalization on informal labor markets: A theoretical
  and empirical evaluation of the Brazilian case, Journal of International Economics, 92,
  330­348.

Revenga, A. (1997) Employment and wages effects of trade liberalization: The case of Mex-
  ican manufacturing, Journal of Labor Economics, 15, S20­43.

Rotunno, L., V´
              ezina, P.-L. and Wang, Z. (2013) The rise and fall of (Chinese) African apparel
  exports, Journal of Development Economics, 105, 152­163.

Siphambe, H. K. (2004) Botswana's economy and labour market: Are there any lessons for
  SADC regional integration?, Development Southern Africa, 21, 353­364.

Southern     Africa   Customs    Union    (2017)   About     SACU:     History    of   SACU,
  http://www.sacu.int/show.php?id=394, Last accessed on 2019-07-26.


                                             27
Topalova, P. (2010) Factor immobility and regional impacts of trade liberalization: Evidence
  on poverty from India, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2, 1­41.

Topalova, P. and Khandelwal, A. (2011) Trade liberalization and firm productivity: The
  case of India, Review of Economics and Statistics, 93, 995­1009.

Ulyssea, G. (2018) Firms, informality, and development: Theory and evidence from Brazil,
  American Economic Review, 108, 2015­47.

World Bank (2015) Botswana: Systematic Country Diagnostic, World Bank Group, Wash-
  ington, D.C.




                                            28
Figure 1: Change in industry tariff versus initial tariff




                           29
                      Table 1: Economic activity of the working age population

                                                               Number of                  Percentage of
                                                               individuals                 individuals
                                                            1995/96 2005/06             1995/96 2005/06
        Total                                                743,403      920,646         100           100
        In labour force:                                     415,251      592,993         55.9          64.4
         Working                                             323,034      481,409         43.5          52.3
         Actively seeking work                                92,217      111,584         12.4          12.1
        Not in labour force:                                 328,152      327,653         44.1          35.6
         Not available to work                               247,073      199,610         33.2          21.7
           Attending school                                  109,821      109,904         14.8          11.9
           Engaged in household duties                       101,658       38,915         13.7           4.2
           Too old                                              876         1,798          0.1           0.2
           Sick                                               22,570       31,523          3.0           3.4
           Disabled                                            5,826        4,101          0.8           0.4
           Other                                              6,322        13,368          0.9           1.5
         Available but did not look for work                  81,079      128,043         10.9          13.9
           Thought no work available                          41,409       61,101          5.6           6.6
           Awaiting reply for earlier inquiries               6,089         9,037          0.8           1.0
           Waiting to start arranged job                      2,598        3,142           0.3           0.3
           Occupied with household duties                     25,989       37,331          3.5           4.1
           Other                                              4,994        17,432          0.7           1.9

Note: The sample is restricted to individuals aged 15 to 60. The numbers reported are population estimates based on using
sampling weights. The estimates are based on the individual's activity during the past 7 days.




                                                          30
                          Table 2: Distribution of workers across major sectors

                                                             Number of workers Percentage of workers
                                                             1995/96 2005/06 1995/96      2005/06
    Panel A: Non-agriculture
    Public Administration                                     99,526        114,850          35.6            31.8
    Foreign missions and international
    organizations                                              224            895            0.1              0.2
    Mining and quarrying                                      15,028         14,289          5.4              4.0
    Manufacturing                                             27,899         34,076          10.0             9.4
    Electricity, gas, and water supply                        2,794          4,132           1.0              1.1
    Construction                                              38,759         26,473          13.9             7.3
    Wholesale and retail trade, hotels,
    restaurants, etc.                                         51,973         85,416          18.6            23.7
    Transport, storage, and communication                     7,644          15,904          2.7              4.4
    Finance, insurance, real estate, and
    business services                                         11,379         30,333           4.1             8.4
    Community, social, household, and
    personal services                                         24,572         34,349          8.8              9.5
    Total                                                    279,798        360,718         100.0            100.0
    Panel B: Agriculture
    Current                                                   42,760        120,691
    Usual                                                    120,926        143,746
      Non seasonal                                           28,862          44,086
      Seasonal                                               92,064          99,660

Source: Authors' calculations using 1995/96 and 2005/06 LFS data.
Notes: The sample is restricted to individuals aged 15 to 60. The estimates reported are population estimates based on using
sampling weights. The estimates are based on the individual's activity during the past 7 days. The number of agricultural
workers is based on the individual's usual job and only includes individuals who reported doing some work on their own
land/farm/cattlepost as usual job. The total number of workers in 1995/96 differs from Table 4 (on labor force) since there
were 476 individuals with undefined industry. Non-seasonal agricultural workers are those who reported working all 52-weeks
of the year and reported the sector as their usual sector of employment. Seasonal agricultural workers are those who reported
not working all 52-weeks of the year and reported the sector as their usual sector of employment.




                                                            31
                      Table 3: Unemployment and labor force participation rates
                                   Narrow Unemployment            Broad Unemployment      Labor Force
                                         Rate (%)                       Rate (%)     Participation Rate (%)
                                   1995/96    2005/06             1995/96    2005/06 1995/96      2005/06
 All                                  22.2           18.8            29.4           28.8          55.9            64.4
 Males                                20.1           16.6            25.9           23.1          62.9            71.9
 Females                              24.5           21.0            33.0           33.7          49.7            58.3
 Urban                                22.8           21.0            24.9           28.0          64.5            65.5
 Rural                                21.4           15.6            34.8           30.0          47.3            62.9
 Less than primary                    20.4           15.2            31.4           29.4          53.8            63.2
 Finished primary                     29.0           19.0            34.0           29.4          50.7            58.5
 Finished junior secondary            11.6           22.3            15.7           32.6          62.8            61.3
 Finished senior secondary            17.8           19.4            20.0           24.3          77.6            77.3
 Older than 30                        15.0           11.3            23.5           21.7          68.0            75.6
 30 years old or younger              29.9           27.5            34.8           35.5          47.0            55.1

Source: Authors' calculations using 1995/96 and 2005/06 LFS data.
Notes: The sample is restricted to individuals aged 15 to 60. The numbers reported are population estimates based on using
sampling weights. The estimates are based on the individual's activity during the past 7 days. The narrow unemployment rate
is defined as the ratio of the number of individuals seeking work relative to the sum of the number of workers and individuals
seeking work. The broad unemployment rate is defined as the ratio of the number of individuals available to work relative to
the sum of the number of workers and individuals available to work.




                                                             32
                  Table 4: Percentage of workers in informal firms by major sector

                                                                               Percentage of informal workers
                                                                               1995/96 2005/06      Change
   Public Administration                                                           0.1           0.7             0.5
   Foreign missions and international organizations                                0.0           0.0             0.0
   Mining and quarrying                                                            0.0           0.0             0.0
   Manufacturing                                                                  27.0          31.3             4.3
   Electricity, gas, and water supply                                              0.0           0.0             0.0
   Construction                                                                   17.5          26.5             9.1
   Wholesale and retail trade, hotels, restaurants, etc.                          32.4          41.6             9.3
   Transport, storage, and communication                                          27.0          36.0             9.0
   Finance, insurance, real estate, and business services                          3.7           6.4             2.7
   Community, social, household, and personal services                            12.7           9.2            -3.5
   Total                                                                          13.2          18.0             4.8

Source: Authors' calculations using 1995/96 and 2005/06 LFS data.
Notes: Sample is persons aged 15 to 60. Informal workers are all those workers in the private sector, employed at firms with
less than ten employees and defined as informal in the survey by question 30 in the 1995/96 LFS and question 39 in the 2005/06
LFS. Sample excludes agricultural workers.The numbers reported are population estimates based on using sampling weights.
The estimates are based on the individual's activity during the past 7 days.




                                                             33
                       Table 5: SACU tariff cuts and initial industry conditions

                                                                                 Manuf.,            Traded,
                                      Manuf.   Traded                           no clothing       no clothing
                                         (1)      (2)                                (3)               (4)
          Share informal              -0.103* -0.176**                            -0.146*          -0.211***
                                      (0.058)  (0.072)                            (0.074)           (0.071)
          Share male                    0.068    0.045                              0.039            -0.015
                                      (0.067)  (0.074)                            (0.080)           (0.080)
          Share 30 or younger          -0.057   -0.072                             -0.029            -0.034
                                      (0.074)  (0.063)                            (0.081)           (0.064)
          Share urban                  -0.049   -0.112                             -0.071            -0.136
                                      (0.092)  (0.095)                            (0.096)           (0.097)
          Share highly educated        -0.110   -0.080                             -0.078            -0.046
                                      (0.195)  (0.189)                            (0.196)           (0.192)
          Share attached to industry -0.735*** -0.537                              -0.222             0.097
                                      (0.214)  (0.477)                            (0.279)           (0.288)
          Share (broad) unemployed     -0.136   -0.126                             -0.143            -0.121
                                      (0.112)  (0.088)                            (0.106)           (0.082)
          Observations                    27      32                                 26                31
            2
          R                             0.515    0.375                              0.299             0.273
          F                             9.652    4.084                              6.242             3.927
          Prob F                                    0.000          0.004            0.001             0.006

The dependent variable is the change in ln(1+tariff). Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                            34
                              Table 6: SACU tariffs and industry employment

                                                                      Mining and
                                       Manufacturing                 Manufacturing                   All
                                              (1)                        (2)                         (3)
             Panel A: Baseline         specification
             Industry Tariff                -0.015                -0.024                          0.021**
                                           (0.059)               (0.026)                          (0.009)
             Observations                      54                   64                              192
             R2                              0.964                0.976                            0.969
             Panel B: Baseline         specification, plus AGOA indicator
             Industry Tariff                -0.001                -0.002                          0.021**
                                           (0.058)               (0.031)                          (0.009)
             AGOA indicator                0.086*                 0.034*                           0.000
                                           (0.049)               (0.017)                          (0.003)
             Observations                      54                   64                              192
             R2                              0.970                0.978                            0.969
             Panel C: Baseline         specification, omitting clothing industry
             Industry Tariff                -0.001                -0.002                          0.021**
                                           (0.057)               (0.031)                          (0.009)
             Observations                      52                   62                              190
             R2                              0.925                0.968                            0.968

The dependent variable is the share of workers within an industry in a given year. Standard errors are reported in parentheses
and clustered by industry. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The sample is restricted to workers aged 15 to 60. The employment
shares are calculated relative to total employment within each year in the indicated industries in each column. All regressions
have industry and year fixed effects and initial industry conditions (see Table 5) interacted with a 2005 indicator. The industry
tariff is ln(1+tariff+surcharges).




                                                              35
                             Table 7: SACU tariffs and narrow unemployment

                                                                      Mining and
                                       Manufacturing                 Manufacturing                    All
                                              (1)                        (2)                          (3)
            Panel A: Baseline          specification
            Industry tariff                  0.069                -0.148                          -0.099**
                                           (0.385)               (0.173)                           (0.047)
            Observations                     1917                  2934                             18167
            R2                              0.046                 0.086                             0.088
            Panel B: Baseline          specification, plus AGOA indicator
            Industry tariff                  0.050                -0.267                            -0.094
                                           (0.353)               (0.243)                           (0.150)
            AGOA indicator                  -0.144                -0.077                             0.003
                                           (0.169)               (0.111)                           (0.055)
            Observations                     1917                  2934                             18167
            R2                              0.047                 0.086                             0.088
            Panel C: Baseline          specification, omitting clothing industry
            Industry tariff                  0.072                -0.267                            -0.094
                                           (0.358)               (0.244)                           (0.150)
            Observations                     1417                  2434                             17667
            R2                              0.050                 0.096                             0.090

The dependent variable is an indicator for being available to work and seeking as work as opposed to working. Standard
errors are reported in parentheses and clustered by industry. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The sample is restricted to
individuals aged 15 to 60 that were either working or available to work and sought work. All regressions include individual
characteristics (age, gender, urban indicator, and indicators for finishing primary, junior secondary, and senior secondary),
initial industry characteristics (see Table 5) interacted with a 2005 indicator, and industry and year fixed effects. The industry
tariff is ln(1+tariff+surcharges).




                                                               36
                              Table 8: SACU tariffs and broad unemployment

                                                                    Mining and
                                     Manufacturing                 Manufacturing                     All
                                            (1)                        (2)                           (3)
           Panel A: Baseline         specification
           Industry tariff                 0.241                -0.171                          -0.211***
                                         (0.463)               (0.227)                           (0.076)
           Observations                    2105                  3185                             20336
           R2                             0.058                 0.112                             0.123
           Panel B: Baseline         specification, plus AGOA indicator
           Industry tariff                 0.228                -0.296                             -0.147
                                         (0.431)               (0.306)                            (0.244)
           AGOA indicator                 -0.162                -0.082                              0.030
                                         (0.169)               (0.134)                            (0.089)
           Observations                    2105                  3185                              20336
           R2                             0.059                 0.112                              0.123
           Panel C: Baseline         specification, omitting clothing industry
           Industry tariff                 0.221                -0.304                             -0.148
                                         (0.419)               (0.303)                            (0.244)
           Observations                    1546                  2626                              19777
           R2                             0.061                 0.123                              0.125

The dependent variable is an indicator for being available to work as opposed to working. Standard errors are reported in
parentheses and clustered by industry. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The sample is restricted to individuals aged 15 to 60
that were either working or available to work. All regressions include individual characteristics (age, gender, urban indicator,
and indicators for finishing primary, junior secondary, and senior secondary), initial industry characteristics (see Table 5)
interacted with a 2005 indicator, and industry and year fixed effects. The industry tariff is ln(1+tariff+surcharges).




                                                              37
                             Table 9: SACU tariffs and work in informal firms

                                                                   Mining and
                                     Manufacturing                Manufacturing                     All
                                            (1)                       (2)                           (3)
           Panel A: Baseline         specification
           Industry tariff                -0.726                 0.020                            0.053
                                         (0.444)                (0.182)                          (0.177)
           Observations                    1608                  2549                             15417
           R2                              0.330                 0.389                            0.476
           Panel B: Baseline         specification, plus AGOA indicator
           Industry tariff               -0.743*               -0.530**                         -0.506**
                                         (0.394)                (0.244)                          (0.223)
           AGOA indicator                -0.257*              -0.357***                        -0.269***
                                         (0.140)                (0.096)                          (0.080)
           Observations                    1608                  2549                             15417
           R2                              0.331                 0.391                            0.477
           Panel C: Baseline         specification, omitting clothing industry
           Industry tariff               -0.686*               -0.540**                         -0.511**
                                         (0.397)                (0.250)                          (0.222)
           Observations                    1210                  2151                             15019
           R2                              0.388                 0.455                            0.493

The dependent variable is an indicator variable for working in an informal firm. Standard errors are reported in parentheses
and clustered by industry. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The sample is restricted to workers aged 15 to 60. All regressions
include individual characteristics (age, gender, urban indicator, and indicators for finishing primary, junior secondary, and
senior secondary), initial industry characteristics (see Table 5) interacted with a 2005 indicator, and industry and year fixed
effects. The industry tariff is ln(1+tariff+surcharges).




                                                             38
                                Table 10: SACU tariffs and self employment

                                                                   Mining and
                                     Manufacturing                Manufacturing                     All
                                            (1)                       (2)                           (3)
           Panel A: Baseline         specification
           Industry tariff               -1.176*                 -0.089                           0.013
                                         (0.617)                (0.240)                          (0.163)
           Observations                    1608                   2549                            15417
           R2                             0.355                  0.410                            0.474
           Panel B: Baseline         specification, plus AGOA indicator
           Industry tariff               -1.186*               -0.664**                         -0.485**
                                         (0.583)                (0.259)                          (0.222)
           AGOA indicator                 -0.153              -0.372***                        -0.240***
                                         (0.128)                (0.081)                          (0.076)
           Observations                    1608                   2549                            15417
           R2                             0.356                  0.412                            0.475
           Panel C: Baseline         specification, omitting clothing industry
           Industry tariff               -1.092*               -0.665**                         -0.491**
                                         (0.580)                (0.273)                          (0.221)
           Observations                    1210                   2151                            15019
           R2                             0.403                  0.471                            0.489

The dependent variable is an indicator variable for being self-employed. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and
clustered by industry. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The sample is restricted to workers aged 15 to 60. All regressions
include individual characteristics (age, gender, urban indicator, and indicators for finishing primary, junior secondary, and
senior secondary), initial industry characteristics (see Table 5) interacted with a 2005 indicator, and industry and year fixed
effects. The industry tariff is ln(1+tariff+surcharges).




                                                             39
                                  Table 11: SACU tariffs and weekly hours

                                                                Mining and
                                            Manufacturing Manufacturing                        All
                                                    (1)              (2)                       (3)
                  Panel A: Baseline         specification
                  Industry tariff                0.812*            0.156                     -0.045
                                                (0.427)           (0.188)                   (0.063)
                  Observations                     1507             2413                     14680
                  R2                              0.039            0.061                      0.107
                  Panel B: Baseline         specification, AGOA indicator
                  Industry tariff               0.833**           0.463**                    0.063
                                                (0.383)           (0.222)                   (0.121)
                  AGOA Indicator                0.208**           0.199**                    0.053
                                                (0.080)           (0.078)                   (0.038)
                  Observations                     1507             2413                     14680
                  R2                              0.039            0.062                     0.107
                  Panel C: Baseline         specification, omitting clothing
                  Industry tariff               0.822**           0.457**                    0.065
                                                (0.389)           (0.221)                   (0.121)
                  Observations                     1142             2048                     14315
                  R2                              0.045            0.068                     0.109

The dependent variable is ln of actual hours worked during the past 7 days. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and
clustered by industry. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The sample is restricted to workers aged 15 to 60. All regressions
include individual characteristics (age, gender, urban indicator, and indicators for finishing primary, junior secondary, and
senior secondary), initial industry characteristics (see Table 5) interacted with a 2005 indicator, and industry and year fixed
effects. The industry tariff is ln(1+tariff+surcharges).




                                                             40
              Table 12: SACU tariffs and weekly hours controlling for informal work

                                                              Mining and
                                          Manufacturing Manufacturing          All
                                                  (1)              (2)         (3)
                Panel A: Baseline         specification
                Industry tariff                0.638*             0.155      -0.046
                                               (0.370)           (0.160)    (0.060)
                Informal                     -0.214***         -0.219***   -0.211***
                                               (0.067)           (0.064)    (0.047)
                Observations                     1507             2413       14680
                R2                              0.068             0.089       0.120
                Panel B: Baseline         specification, AGOA indicator
                Industry tariff                0.653*            0.340*      -0.052
                                               (0.343)           (0.194)    (0.134)
                AGOA Indicator                0.150**             0.120      -0.003
                                               (0.066)           (0.072)    (0.044)
                Informal                     -0.214***         -0.218***   -0.211***
                                               (0.067)           (0.065)    (0.047)
                Observations                     1507             2413       14680
                R2                              0.069             0.089       0.120
                Panel C: Baseline         specification, omitting clothing
                Industry tariff                0.689*            0.359*      -0.046
                                               (0.361)           (0.199)    (0.133)
                Informal                      -0.169**          -0.173**   -0.203***
                                               (0.076)           (0.073)    (0.050)
                Observations                     1142             2048       14315
                R2                              0.062             0.084       0.121

The dependent variable is ln of actual hours worked during the past 7 days. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and
clustered by industry. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The sample is restricted to workers aged 15 to 60. All regressions
include individual characteristics (age, gender, urban indicator, and indicators for finishing primary, junior secondary, and
senior secondary), initial industry characteristics (see Table 5) interacted with a 2005 indicator, and industry and year fixed
effects. The industry tariff is ln(1+tariff+surcharges).




                                                             41
                                Table 13: SACU tariffs and ln monthly income

                                                                        Mining and
                                        Manufacturing                  Manufacturing                    All
                                               (1)                         (2)                          (3)
             Panel A: Baseline          specification
             Industry tariff                  0.861                -0.232                             -0.031
                                            (1.239)               (0.586)                            (0.246)
             Observations                     1128                  2056                              12889
             R2                              0.581                 0.693                              0.685
             Panel B: Baseline          specification, plus AGOA indicator
             Industry tariff                  0.828                -0.655                             -0.720
                                            (1.305)               (0.800)                            (0.599)
             AGOA indicator                  -0.418                -0.260                             -0.320
                                            (0.335)               (0.298)                            (0.208)
             Observations                     1128                  2056                              12889
             R2                              0.581                 0.693                              0.685
             Panel C: Baseline          specification, omitting clothing industry
             Industry tariff                  0.833                -0.659                             -0.722
                                            (1.317)               (0.809)                            (0.601)
             Observations                      842                  1770                              12603
             R2                              0.585                 0.679                              0.685

The dependent variable is the ln of monthly income from paid employment, including both cash and in kind payments. Standard
errors are reported in parentheses and clustered by industry. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The sample is restricted to
workers aged 15 to 60 in paid employment. All regressions include individual characteristics (age, gender, urban indicator, and
indicators for finishing primary, junior secondary, and senior secondary), initial industry characteristics (see Table 5) interacted
with a 2005 indicator, and industry and year fixed effects. The industry tariff is ln(1+tariff+surcharges). Income is the sum of
paid employment in their primary or secondary job.




                                                                42
6      Appendix

                                 Table A1: Summary statistics for workers
                                                   Manufacturing               Traded                      All
                                                 1995/95 2005/06          1995/96 2005/06           1995/96 2005/06
 Age                                               33.9         33.4         35.1         35.3         34.1         34.6
 Male                                             0.419        0.460        0.591        0.597        0.498        0.487
 Did not complete primary                         0.340        0.197        0.325        0.210        0.333        0.176
 Completed primary                                0.472        0.358        0.405        0.335        0.361        0.292
 Completed junior secondary                       0.107        0.231        0.129        0.202        0.146        0.203
 Completed senior secondary                       0.081        0.214        0.141        0.253        0.161        0.328
 Urban                                            0.643        0.734        0.762        0.793        0.541        0.755
 Weekly hours worked                               41.6        42.9          42.9         44.0         41.9         46.0
 Informal                                         0.261        0.292        0.158        0.197        0.119        0.174
 Paid employment                                  0.744        0.680        0.845        0.784        0.889        0.811
 Self-employment with employees                   0.040        0.063        0.024        0.043        0.025        0.047
 Self-employment without employees                0.201        0.200        0.121        0.135        0.077        0.108
 Unpaid family helper                             0.015        0.057        0.009        0.039        0.008        0.033
 Number of observations                            977          631         1614          935         8895         6542

The sample is workers aged 15 to 60 outside of agriculture. The reported information is for the individual's primary job with
the exception of income, which is the sum of paid employment in their primary or secondary job.




                                                            43
                       Table A2: Summary statistics for unemployed individuals

                                             Manufacturing                  Traded                        All
                                           1995/96 2005/06             1995/96 2005/06             1995/96 2005/06
 Age                                         30.0           31.5          33.1          33.8          29.3          29.7
 Male                                       0.317          0.378         0.465         0.469         0.385         0.361
 Did not complete primary                   0.270          0.172         0.392         0.241         0.369         0.239
 Completed primary                          0.579          0.475         0.482         0.425         0.479         0.301
 Completed junior secondary                 0.112          0.176         0.094         0.160         0.060         0.238
 Completed senior secondary                 0.039          0.176         0.032         0.173         0.092         0.222
 Urban                                      0.595          0.718         0.541         0.697         0.456         0.618
 Did not seek work                          0.328          0.433         0.351         0.446         0.434         0.514
 Number of observations                      259            238           342           294          3748          3708

The sample is unemployed individuals aged 15 to 60 outside of agriculture. Includes individuals who did not work despite being
available to work, regardless of whether they sought work.




                                                             44
                                    Table A3: Industry summary statistics
                                        Tariff      Employment Share (narrow) Share (broad)             Share           Share
                                   percentage point    share   unemployment unemployment              informal     self-employed
                                   1995     2005    1995 2005 1995     2005   1995    2005          1995 2005      1995 2005
 Coal Mining                         0.0     0.0      0.1    0.1    0.0     19.1    0.0     27.9    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0
 Copper or Nickel Mining             8.0     0.0      2.1    1.6    4.2      7.6     5.5    12.9    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0
 Diamond Mining                      0.0     0.0      2.5    1.6     5.3     3.6    10.0     9.9    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0
 Soda Ash and Salt Mining           26.0     2.7      0.2    0.1    14.0     6.3    14.0     6.3    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0
 Gold Mining                         1.8     0.9      0.5    0.5    44.5    30.1    56.0    45.0     0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0
 Meat and Meat Products             15.3      8.3     1.3    0.5     7.6    15.2    14.0    19.2     2.1    0.0     9.1    0.0
 Dairy Products                     45.8     20.0     0.2    0.1     6.8     6.5    15.0     6.5    0.0    0.0     6.1    8.5
 Grain Mill Products                 9.8     7.5      0.6    0.5     3.7    15.1    14.1    20.9    0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0
 Bakery Products                    40.7     16.3     0.6    0.4    19.8    30.1    27.2    45.9    19.8   23.1    12.6   32.3
 Food Products Not
 Elsewhere Classified               33.1     16.8     0.3    0.0     8.8    34.1    18.8    43.1    37.8   48.0    37.2   48.0
 Beverages                          27.7      7.3     1.3    1.5    10.4     5.6    16.5    10.3    69.9    76.4   69.8   81.3
 Textiles                           44.0     20.1     0.5    0.6    18.4     9.1    24.8    26.5    22.3   47.4    20.5   50.5
 Clothing                           95.9     37.2     2.5    2.2    20.4    22.2    26.2    36.1    33.3    20.4   32.0   23.7
 Tanning and Leather Products       32.0     23.0     0.2    0.1    18.8    0.0     20.3    19.7    16.7   45.1    16.7   45.1
 Footwear                           55.3     29.7     0.0    0.0    43.0    82.9    43.0    85.7    36.6   100.0   36.6   100.0
 Wood and Wood Products             13.9      8.2     0.1    0.3    13.4    11.6    20.4    16.9    39.3    36.9   36.6   58.2
 Paper and Paper Products           15.9      8.6     0.1    0.1     0.0    38.0    31.9    48.8    0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0
 Printing and Publishing             4.1      3.3     0.1    0.2    24.6    21.4    24.6    21.4    18.2     5.8   23.4    6.0
 Chemicals and Chemical Products    14.2      5.9     0.1    0.1    17.5    14.0    19.6    36.3    24.1    10.3   24.1    0.0
 Rubber and Plastic Products        19.8     13.5     0.1    0.2    22.9    23.0    22.9    28.2     0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0
 Non-Metallic Mineral Products       7.9      3.8     0.3    0.7    22.9    18.1    28.5    33.7    21.3    27.1   11.1   27.8
 Basic Metals                        4.4      1.2     0.2    0.1    11.8    11.0    19.9    11.0     5.0    0.0    27.6    0.0
 Fabricated Metal Products          15.2      6.2     0.2    0.7    32.0    16.3    51.2    25.1    17.1    40.9   13.5   40.6
 Machinery and Equipment             3.0      1.2     0.1    0.2     7.5     5.0    10.7     5.0     5.6   13.6     5.6    0.0
 Office, Accounting, and
 Computing Machinery                0.0      0.0      0.0    0.1    6.6      0.0     6.6     0.0     0.0   23.4    45.5    0.0
 Electrical Machinery and
 Apparatus                          12.1     6.5      0.1    0.2    3.6     18.2    15.3    22.3     0.0   25.9    0.0    42.9
 Radio, Television, and
 Communication Equipment            18.5     2.3      0.1    0.1    0.0     18.2     0.0    35.3    61.6   35.2    61.6   34.2
 Medical, Precision, and
 Optical Instruments                2.6      0.2      0.0    0.0    0.0      0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0
 Motor Vehicles, Trailers,
 and Semi Trailers                  63.5     24.6     0.0    0.3     0.0    20.3    26.7    20.3    0.0    47.0    0.0    45.4
 Other Transport Equipment          1.6      0.2      0.1    0.0    15.6    45.2    15.6    45.2    0.0    0.0     0.0     0.0
 Furniture                          28.7     17.9     0.4    0.3    22.9    18.7    23.3    30.1    26.1   30.4    22.0   33.0
 Manufacturing of Products
 Not Elsewhere Classified           26.3     10.4     0.5    0.1    18.2    14.6    22.5    14.6    32.7   0.0     30.3   0.0
 Non-traded                          0.0      0.0     84.7   86.6   21.2    22.2    31.4    37.4    12.4   17.3    11.1   18.7

This table reports summary statistics for each of the subsectors of employment, excluding agriculture. The sample is individuals
aged 15 to 60.




                                                              45
          Table A4: SACU tariffs and narrow unemployment by worker characteristics
                                                              Mining and
                                               Manufacturing Manufacturing                 All
                                                   (1)           (2)                       (3)
                           Males
                           Industry Tariff           0.049               -0.264          -0.239
                                                    (0.360)             (0.317)         (0.199)
                           Observations               753                 1634            8790
                           R2                        0.061               0.137           0.108
                           Females
                           Industry Tariff           0.105               -0.704          0.007
                                                    (0.668)             (0.447)         (0.173)
                           Observations               663                 799            8873
                           R2                        0.117               0.119           0.091
                           Rural
                           Industry Tariff         2.145***            2.127***          0.377
                                                    (0.698)             (0.504)         (0.230)
                           Observations               493                 591            6607
                           R2                        0.157               0.184           0.120
                           Urban
                           Industry Tariff      -0.430                  -0.442*          -0.185
                                               (0.378)                  (0.241)         (0.161)
                           Observations          923                     1841            11050
                           R2                   0.083                    0.129            0.096
                           Less than complete junior secondary
                           Industry Tariff      0.700                    -0.215          -0.030
                                               (0.733)                  (0.412)         (0.221)
                           Observations          1003                     1611           10787
                           R2                   0.073                    0.116            0.092
                           Completed junior secondary
                           Industry Tariff      -0.870                   0.010           0.411
                                               (1.181)                  (0.533)         (0.257)
                           Observations          204                      355            2912
                           R2                   0.201                    0.209           0.137
                           30 years or younger
                           Industry Tariff      -0.273                  -0.760*          -0.225
                                               (0.500)                  (0.380)         (0.229)
                           Observations          649                      921             7842
                           R2                   0.057                    0.082            0.071
                           Older than 30
                           Industry Tariff      1.031                    0.439           0.122
                                               (0.634)                  (0.395)         (0.169)
                           Observations          767                     1512            9821
                           R2                   0.083                    0.160           0.113

The dependent variable is an indicator for being available to work and seeking work as opposed to working. Standard errors
are reported in parentheses and clustered by industry. *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, * p<0.1. The sample is restricted to individuals
aged 15 to 60 that were either working or available to work and sought work. Unemployed is defined as available to work
and sought work. All regressions include individual characteristics (age, gender, urban indicator, and indicators for finishing
primary, junior secondary, and senior secondary), initial industry characteristics (see Table 5) interacted with a 2005 indicator,
and industry and year fixed effects. The industry tariff is ln(1+tariff+surcharges).




                                                               46
           Table A5: SACU tariffs and broad unemployment by worker characteristics
                                                                   Mining and
                                                    Manufacturing Manufacturing             All
                                                        (1)           (2)                   (3)
                                  Males

                                  Industry Tariff         -0.034            -0.307         -0.342
                                                         (0.438)           (0.445)        (0.256)
                                  Observations             804               1742           9491
                                  R2                      0.084             0.186          0.137
                                  Females

                                  Industry Tariff         0.510             -0.517         -0.007
                                                         (0.768)           (0.598)        (0.360)
                                  Observations             741               883           10282
                                  R2                      0.109             0.118          0.126
                                  Rural

                                  Industry Tariff       2.115**            1.448**         0.279
                                                        (0.895)            (0.569)        (0.365)
                                  Observations            563                697           7911
                                  R2                     0.113              0.158          0.163
                                  Urban

                                  Industry Tariff      -0.101          -0.285              -0.253
                                                      (0.517)         (0.288)             (0.189)
                                  Observations          983             1928               11857
                                  R2                   0.093           0.149               0.110
                                  Less than complete junior secondary

                                  Industry Tariff      -0.126               -0.575         -0.181
                                                      (0.675)              (0.434)        (0.355)
                                  Observations          1108                 1773          12466
                                  R2                   0.082                0.138          0.125
                                  Completed junior secondary

                                  Industry Tariff         0.521             0.526          0.403
                                                         (1.420)           (0.509)        (0.424)
                                  Observations             221               375           3160
                                  R2                      0.187             0.211          0.167
                                  30 years or younger

                                  Industry Tariff         -0.039            -0.670         -0.183
                                                         (0.540)           (0.401)        (0.247)
                                  Observations             714               991            8851
                                  R2                      0.049             0.090          0.094
                                  Older than 30

                                  Industry Tariff         0.833             0.146          -0.050
                                                         (0.577)           (0.500)        (0.341)
                                  Observations             831              1634           10922
                                  R2                      0.115             0.201           0.168

The dependent variable is an indicator for being available to work as opposed to working. Standard errors are reported in
parentheses and clustered by industry. *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, * p<0.1. The sample is restricted to individuals aged 15 to 60
that were either working or available to work. Unemployed is defined as available to work regardless of whether they sought
work. All regressions include individual characteristics (age, gender, urban indicator, and indicators for finishing primary, junior
secondary, and senior secondary), initial industry characteristics (see Table 5) interacted with a 2005 indicator, and industry
and year fixed effects. The industry tariff is ln(1+tariff+surcharges).


                                                                47
          Table A6: SACU tariffs and work in informal firms by worker characteristics
                                                                 Mining and
                                                  Manufacturing Manufacturing          All
                                                      (1)           (2)                (3)
                                Males

                                Industry Tariff        -0.792           -0.467       -0.492*
                                                      (0.527)          (0.288)       (0.284)
                                Observations            649              1462         7548
                                R2                     0.187            0.256         0.365
                                Females

                                Industry Tariff        -0.546           -0.041       -0.454**
                                                      (0.395)          (0.215)        (0.228)
                                Observations            559               687          7466
                                R2                     0.574             0.615         0.625
                                Rural

                                Industry Tariff        1.470            0.338         -0.636
                                                      (1.677)          (0.851)       (0.575)
                                Observations            431              492           5597
                                R2                     0.517            0.560          0.594
                                Urban

                                Industry Tariff      -0.574          -0.087           -0.367
                                                    (0.389)         (0.265)          (0.329)
                                Observations          776             1656             9412
                                R2                   0.231            0.286            0.452
                                Less than complete junior secondary

                                Industry Tariff      -0.018            -0.513*      -0.801***
                                                    (0.635)            (0.266)       (0.304)
                                Observations          864               1408           8944
                                R2                   0.448              0.520         0.508
                                Completed junior secondary

                                Industry Tariff       2.307***         1.298**        -0.216
                                                       (0.643)         (0.533)       (0.562)
                                Observations             173             319           2537
                                R2                      0.334           0.388          0.551
                                30 years or younger

                                Industry Tariff       -1.101**        -0.946**       -0.685**
                                                       (0.511)         (0.357)        (0.321)
                                Observations             524             780           6274
                                R2                      0.327           0.369          0.456
                                Older than 30

                                Industry Tariff        -0.288           -0.201       -0.380*
                                                      (0.623)          (0.309)       (0.225)
                                Observations            684              1369         8742
                                R2                     0.474             0.549        0.546

The dependent variable is an indicator for working in an informal firm. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and
clustered by industry. *** p<0.01, **p<0.05, * p<0.1. The sample is restricted to workers aged 15 to 60. All regressions
include individual characteristics (age, gender, urban indicator, and indicators for finishing primary, junior secondary, and
senior secondary), initial industry characteristics (see Table 5) interacted with a 2005 indicator, and industry and year fixed
effects. Clothing workers are omitted. The industry tariff is ln(1+tariff+surcharges).




                                                                 48
                     Table A7: SACU tariffs and self-employment with employees

                                                                          Mining and
                                  Manufacturing                          Manufacturing                    All
                                         (1)                                 (2)                          (3)
                Panel A: Baseline specification

                Industry tariff        -0.351              0.029                                        -0.001
                                      (0.422)             (0.135)                                      (0.045)
                Observations            1608               2549                                         15417
                  2
                R                       0.096              0.095                                        0.091
                Panel B: Baseline specification, plus AGOA indicator

                Industry tariff        -0.339                0.042                                      -0.003
                                      (0.420)               (0.213)                                    (0.136)
                AGOA indicator        0.168*                 0.008                                      -0.001
                                      (0.097)               (0.085)                                    (0.048)
                Observations            1608                  2549                                      15417
                  2
                R                       0.097                0.095                                      0.091
                Panel C: Baseline specification, omitting clothing industry

                Industry tariff                   -0.325                       0.030                    -0.004
                                                 (0.418)                      (0.216)                  (0.136)
                Observations                       1210                        2151                     15019
                R2                                 0.098                       0.096                    0.092

The dependent variable is an indicator variable for being self-employed with employees. Standard errors are reported in
parentheses and clustered by industry. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The sample is restricted to workers aged 15 to
60. All regressions include individual characteristics (age, gender, urban indicator, and indicators for finishing primary, junior
secondary, and senior secondary), initial industry characteristics (see Table 5) interacted with a 2005 indicator, and industry
and year fixed effects. The industry tariff is ln(1+tariff+surcharges).




                                                               49
                   Table A8: SACU tariffs and self-employment without employees

                                                                          Mining and
                                  Manufacturing                          Manufacturing                    All
                                         (1)                                 (2)                          (3)
                Panel A: Baseline specification

                Industry tariff        -0.116              0.049                                        -0.027
                                      (0.228)             (0.103)                                      (0.074)
                Observations            1608               2549                                         15417
                  2
                R                       0.364              0.391                                        0.418
                Panel B: Baseline specification, plus AGOA indicator

                Industry tariff        -0.127               -0.269*                                     -0.174
                                      (0.211)               (0.156)                                    (0.154)
                AGOA indicator        -0.163*              -0.206***                                    -0.071
                                      (0.083)               (0.058)                                    (0.052)
                Observations            1608                  2549                                      15417
                  2
                R                       0.364                0.392                                      0.418
                Panel C: Baseline specification, omitting clothing industry

                Industry tariff                   -0.069                       -0.257                   -0.178
                                                 (0.212)                      (0.171)                  (0.154)
                Observations                       1210                         2151                    15019
                R2                                 0.431                       0.463                    0.433

The dependent variable is an indicator variable for being self-employed without employees. Standard errors are reported in
parentheses and clustered by industry. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The sample is restricted to workers aged 15 to
60. All regressions include individual characteristics (age, gender, urban indicator, and indicators for finishing primary, junior
secondary, and senior secondary), initial industry characteristics (see Table 5) interacted with a 2005 indicator, and industry
and year fixed effects. The industry tariff is ln(1+tariff+surcharges).




                                                               50
                               Table A9: SACU tariffs and unpaid family help

                                                                        Mining and
                                 Manufacturing                         Manufacturing                      All
                                        (1)                                (2)                            (3)
               Panel A: Baseline specification

               Industry tariff      -0.709**              -0.167                                        0.041
                                     (0.276)             (0.128)                                       (0.103)
               Observations           1608                 2549                                         15417
                 2
               R                      0.111               0.105                                         0.120
               Panel B: Baseline specification, plus AGOA indicator

               Industry tariff      -0.720***              -0.437**                                  -0.308***
                                      (0.223)               (0.165)                                   (0.115)
               AGOA indicator        -0.158**             -0.175***                                  -0.168***
                                      (0.062)               (0.062)                                   (0.041)
               Observations            1608                  2549                                      15417
                 2
               R                       0.113                 0.109                                     0.122
               Panel C: Baseline specification, omitting clothing industry

               Industry tariff               -0.698***                      -0.438**                 -0.309***
                                              (0.221)                        (0.166)                  (0.115)
               Observations                     1210                          2151                     15019
               R2                              0.120                          0.116                    0.123

The dependent variable is an indicator variable for being self-employed as an unpaid family helper. Standard errors are reported
in parentheses and clustered by industry. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The sample is restricted to workers aged 15 to
60. All regressions include individual characteristics (age, gender, urban indicator, and indicators for finishing primary, junior
secondary, and senior secondary), initial industry characteristics (see Table 5) interacted with a 2005 indicator, and industry
and year fixed effects. The industry tariff is ln(1+tariff+surcharges).




                                                               51
