                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 HEDGING MACROECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL UNCERTAINTY AND VOLATILITY

                                         Ian Dew-Becker
                                          Stefano Giglio
                                          Bryan T. Kelly

                                       Working Paper 26323
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26323


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019




We appreciate helpful comments from Dmitry Muravyev, Federico Gavazzoni, Nina
Boyarchenko, Ivan Shaliastovich, Emil Siriwardane, and seminar participants at Kellogg, CITE,
Syracuse, Yale, the University of Illinois, the Federal Reserve Board, UT Austin, LBS, LSE,
Columbia, Queen Mary, FIRS, WFA, INSEAD, SITE, the NBER, UIUC, the MFA, Temple, the
AEA, UBC, the CBOE, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26323.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ian Dew-Becker, Stefano Giglio, and Bryan T. Kelly. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Hedging Macroeconomic and Financial Uncertainty and Volatility
Ian Dew-Becker, Stefano Giglio, and Bryan T. Kelly
NBER Working Paper No. 26323
September 2019
JEL No. E32,G12,G13

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the pricing of uncertainty shocks using a wide-ranging set of options that reveal premia
for macroeconomic risks. Portfolios hedging macro uncertainty have historically earned zero or
even significantly positive returns, while those exposed to the realization of large shocks have
earned negative premia. The results are consistent with an important role for "good uncertainty".
Options for nonfinancials are particularly important for spanning macro risks and good
uncertainty. The results dictate the role of uncertainty and volatility in structural models and we
show they are consistent with a simple extension of the long-run risk model.


Ian Dew-Becker                                   Bryan T. Kelly
Kellogg School of Management                     Yale School of Management
Northwestern University                          165 Whitney Ave.
2001 Sheridan Road                               New Haven, CT 06511
Evanston, IL 60208                               and NBER
and NBER                                         bryan.kelly@yale.edu
ian.dewbecker@gmail.com

Stefano Giglio
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
stefano.giglio@yale.edu
1     Introduction
Background
    A major concern among policymakers and economists is whether uncertainty shocks have
negative effects on the economy. There are numerous theories that explore the relationship
between uncertainty and real activity. Some models focus on contractionary effects of un-
certainty, such as models with wait-and-see effects in investment, while others argue that
uncertainty can be high in periods of high growth, like the late 1990's, due to learning effects
(Pastor and Veronesi (2009)). The effect of uncertainty shocks on the economy is thus an
empirical question.1
    The finance literature has recently developed a set of models that can simultaneously
accommodate both types of mechanisms.2 Sometimes there is uncertainty about how good
a new technology will be, as perhaps happened in the late 1990's, while in others one may
be uncertain about exactly how destructive an event, like the financial crisis, will be: there
are both good and bad types of uncertainty. The average uncertainty shock may therefore
be good, bad, or neutral, depending on their relative volatilities.
    The empirical literature studying the real effects of uncertainty has focused almost en-
tirely on analyzing raw correlations or using vector autoregressions (VARs) with varying
identifying assumptions. That work thus far has not resolved the question of whether un-
certainty is on average contractionary or expansionary in either the short- or long-run.3
Methods
   This paper develops a novel empirical approach using insights from finance to evaluate
the effects of uncertainty shocks on the economy. Instead of studying a VAR, with all of
the associated identification challenges and opacity, we use financial markets to provide a
window on how investors perceive uncertainty shocks. We construct portfolios that directly
hedge innovations in uncertainty and then measure their average returns. If investors accept
negative average returns on those hedging portfolios, as they would on an insurance contract,
that implies that they view uncertainty as being bad on average, in the sense that it rises
in high marginal utility states. On the other hand, if the hedging portfolios have positive
   1
     See Caballero (1999) and Bloom (2009) for wait-and-see type models. Gilchrist and Williams (2005) and
Bloom et al. (2017) extensively discuss the potentially expansionary effects of uncertainty shocks in such
models.
   2
     See Bekaert, Engstrom, and Ermolov (2015), Segal, Shaliastovich, and Yaron (2015), Patton and Shep-
pard (2015), and Barun´ ik, Ko cenda and V´acha (2016).
   3
     For contractionary effects see Bloom (2009), Alexopoulos and Cohen (2009), Leduc and Liu (2016), and
Caldara et al. (2016). Papers finding little or no effect include Bachmann and Bayer (2013) and Berger,
Dew-Becker, and Giglio (2018)). For reverse causation, see Bachmann and Moscarini (2012), Ludvigson,
Ma, and Ng (2015), and Creal and Wu (2017).


                                                    2
average returns, then investors view uncertainty as typically rising in low marginal utility or
good states. Rather than running sophisticated regressions of output on uncertainty, we let
investors speak to the question.
    While there is a large literature that estimates the risk premia for uncertainty based
on the pricing of S&P 500 options,4 recent evidence shows that aggregate uncertainty has
multiple dimensions (Ludvigson, Ma, and Ng (2015); Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2015)).
S&P 500 uncertainty is related to conditions in the financial sector, but there is good reason
to think that the driving force in the economy could be uncertainty about other features of
the macroeconomy, such as interest rates, inflation, or the availability of inputs to production,
like crude oil.5 This paper contributes to the literature by estimating risk premia associated
with uncertainty in 19 different markets covering a range of different features of the economy,
including financial conditions, inflation, and the prices of real assets. We find that there are
important differences between the financial uncertainty that has been studied in the past
and uncertainty about the real economy, which is novel to this paper.
    We also study uncertainty indexes from Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng (JLN; 2015) and the
economic policy uncertainty (EPU) index of Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2015). Fitting those
indexes actually requires using more than just the S&P 500 ­ the results show that in order
to span uncertainty about the real economy, it is important to have implied volatilities for
real assets, like energies and metals, underscoring the value of the breadth of our dataset.
    So far we have discussed economic uncertainty ­ the dispersion of agents' conditional
distribution for future outcomes ­ but much of the literature also studies volatility ­ the
magnitude of realized shocks to fundamentals. Whereas uncertainty in theoretical models
is a forward-looking conditional variance, volatility is a backward-looking sample variance.
                                                2                   2
That is, for some shock , with vart (t+1 ) = t    , uncertainty is t  , while volatility is 2 t . The
distinction is crucial from the theoretical point of view: models in which forward-looking
                                                                      2
uncertainty matters for the economy have predictions about t             but not about 2    t . Our
analysis of returns on options yields hedging portfolios for both uncertainty and volatility,
 2 and 2 , taking advantage of the fact that options of different maturities have different
exposures to  2 and 2 .
Results
  The empirical analysis yields two key findings. First, across 19 individual option markets,
   4
     See Egloff, Leippold, and Wu (2010), Dew-Becker et al. (2017), Van Binsbergen and Koijen (2017),
Andries et al. (2015), and Ait-Sahalia, Karaman, and Mancini (2015).
   5
     See, for example, Bretscher, Schmid, and Vedolin (2018) for a study of the real effects of interest
rate uncertainty, Elder and Serletis (2010) for oil price uncertainty, Darby et al. (1999) for exchange rate
uncertainty, and Huizinga (1993) and Elder (2004) for inflation uncertainty.



                                                     3
portfolios that directly hedge uncertainty shocks have historically earned returns that are
in the majority of cases positive. For nonfinancial underlyings and the JLN macro and
inflation uncertainty indexes ­ which we show hedge uncertainty about the real economy ­
the premia are statistically and economically significantly positive, with Sharpe ratios near
0.5. The results imply that investors in these markets view periods of high uncertainty about
the real economy as being good on average ­ good uncertainty is relatively more important
than bad.
    For the financial sector (that includes the S&P 500) and the JLN financial uncertainty
and EPU index (which we show is tightly linked to financial markets), the premium on
uncertainty is not distinguishable from zero, implying that good and bad uncertainty are
roughly balanced over time. So financial uncertainty in some episodes is associated with how
good the future will be, while in others the uncertainty is about how bad things will be, with
the two channels equally important.
    The second empirical result runs in the opposite direction: consistently across both the
financial and real sectors of the economy, portfolios that hedge realized volatility ­ large
realized futures returns, positive or negative ­ earn statistically and economically significantly
negative returns. Investors on average therefore view periods in which shocks to fundamentals
themselves are large as being bad. This result contributes to the growing literature studying
skewness risk in the economy: if shocks to the economy are skewed to the left, then large
shocks tend to be bad.6 An explanation for the pricing of realized volatility is then simply
that hedging realized volatility helps hedge downward jumps and disasters.
    The two key results of the paper ­ that uncertainty carries a nonnegative premium
across almost all of our 19 option markets while realized volatility caries a statistically and
economically significant negative premium ­ have at least two important implications for
policymakers. First, since good uncertainty tends to dominate bad uncertainty in the broad
cross-section on average ­ particularly for the macroeconomy ­ policymakers and economists
should not reflexively view uncertainty as signaling trouble for the economy. At least as
often, it is actually associated with positive events. Second, because the negative variance
risk premium that has been observed in the past for the S&P 500 holds robustly across many
markets, jumps ­ which drive surprises in realized volatility ­ tend to be robustly viewed
as bad events by investors, regardless of where they occur. According to asset prices, what
policymakers should focus on, rather than uncertainty about the future (the possibility that
something extreme might happen), is the realization of extreme (typically negative) events.
    For investors, the results imply that it is jump risk that is primarily priced in options
  6
      See Barro (2006), Bloom, Guvenen, and Salgado (2016), and Seo and Wachter (2018a,b)



                                                   4
markets, rather than variation in implied volatility. In option-pricing language, investors are
compensated for selling gamma, not vega. If anything, vega has historically earned a positive
premium. So the mean-variance efficient portfolio among the assets we study is short gamma
­ jump risk ­ and either neutral to or long vega (exposure to implied volatility).7
    Our last contribution is to show that the two empirical results are consistent with a simple
consumption-based asset pricing model. We take the standard long-run risk model and enrich
it to include both good and bad volatility shocks. In addition to its well known ability to
match the equity premium, this extension also allows it to match the premia on implied and
realized volatility, while generating novel facts for consumption skewness. Furthermore, it
shows how the premia we study sharply identify the quantitative importance of good and
bad uncertainty shocks, and clarifies exactly what makes "good" uncertainty good.
Relationship with past work
    The paper is related to two main strands of literature. The first studies the relation-
ship between uncertainty and the macroeconomy. Numerous channels have been proposed
through which uncertainty about various aspects of the aggregate economy may have real
effects, but the models do not generate a uniform prediction that uncertainty shocks are nec-
essarily contractionary.8 While there are contractionary forces, such as wait-and see effects
and Keynesian demand channels, there are also forces through which uncertainty can be
expansionary, including learning, precautionary saving, and the Oi­Hartman­Abel effect.9
Our results are consistent with an important role for expansionary forces ­ good uncertainty
shocks.
    The related empirical literature tries to measure whether uncertainty does in fact have
contractionary effects.10 This paper builds on work that has typically focused on VAR
evidence by providing measures of risk premia that indicate how investors perceive the effects
of aggregate uncertainty shocks. It also builds on the finance literature estimating the
pricing of uncertainty and volatility (2 ) risk. While the past literature has primarily studied
S&P 500 implied volatility,11 an important contribution of this paper is to examine a much
   7
     See Ait-Sahalia, Karaman, and Mancini (2015) for evidence on the S&P 500. This paper shows that the
same result holds for options on a much broader range of underlyings, which helps increase diversification,
and that that range of underlyings is important for spanning the whole range of shocks that hit the economy.
   8
     See Basu and Bundick (2017), Bloom (2009), Bloom et al. (2017), Leduc and Liu (2015), and Gourio
(2013).
   9
     Oi (1961), Hartman (1972), and Abel (1983). See analysis in Gilchrist and Williams (2005) and Bloom
et al. (2017)
  10
     Recent examples include Berger, Dew-Becker, and Giglio (2017), Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng (2015),
Ludvigson, Ma, and Ng (2015), Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2015), Bachmann and Bayer (2013), and Alex-
opoulos and Cohen (2009).
  11
     In macroeconomics, see Bloom (2009), and Basu and Bundick (2017), among many others. In finance,
see, for example, Carr and Wu (2009), Bollerslev and Todorov (2011), Ait-Sahalia, Karaman, and Mancini


                                                     5
broader range of asset classes, showing that they have a better link to uncertainty about
macroeconomic outcomes. Furthermore, this paper isolates the premium on implied volatility
as opposed to just the realized variance risk premium studied in past work in finance ­
the distinction between the two is crucial because it is only implied volatility, not realized
volatility, that captures the forward-looking concept of uncertainty on which the theoretical
models are based.
    In the literature on good and bad uncertainty, some papers have used option prices to
specifically identify the good and bad components (e.g. Kilic and Shaliastovich (2019)).
That method requires using a full range of strikes, and thus is most appropriate in very deep
option markets, such as that for the S&P 500. Here, since we use a wide range of underlyings,
we focus on at-the-money options, which are most liquid, to give the most accurate data.
However, we show analytically that even with the returns on just at-the-money options, we
can still uncover the relative importance of good and bad shocks. Identifying good and bad
volatility separately also requires making assumptions about exactly how they affect asset
prices ­ for example, the common assumption that good volatility affects only the right-
hand side of the distribution of returns. Since we do not claim to separately identify the
components, we can avoid those added restrictions.
    Finally, it is important to distinguish between aggregate uncertainty ­ uncertainty about
the state of the aggregate economy ­ and idiosyncratic uncertainty, or uncertainty about
shocks at, say, the household or firm level. Our results apply to sector-level uncertainty,
since we price uncertainty shocks in areas like the stock market, interest rates, and the price
of oil and other goods. The concept of uncertainty thus lies somewhere between aggregate and
purely idiosyncratic. Our results do not address models based on purely firm- or household-
level shocks, e.g. Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2014).
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1.1 describes in more detail
the paper's key distinction between realized and implied volatility and discusses how they
are distinguished conceptually and empirically. Section 2 describes the data and its basic
characteristics. Section 3 discusses the construction of portfolios that hedge realized volatility
and uncertainty. Section 4 reports the cost of hedging volatility and uncertainty in our
data and section 5 presents robustness results. Finally, section 6 briefly presents a simple
consumption-based model consistent with the results and section 7 concludes.
(2015), and Dew-Becker et al. (2015). There are a few papers that have studied specific markets, such as
individual equities (e.g. Bakshi, Kapadia, and Madan (2003)) or Treasury bonds (Mueller, Vedolin, and Yen
(2017)). Prokopczuk et al. (2017) examine the variance risk premium across many of the same markets that
we study (see also Trolle and Schwartz (2010)).




                                                   6
1.1     The distinction between implied and realized volatility
In models of time-varying uncertainty, both structural and reduced form, there is typically
                                                                                       2
a shock, say, t , that has a time-varying conditional variance, vart-1 (t ) = t         -1 . Given
that structure, realized volatility measures the volatility of the realized shock in period t,
2t . Uncertainty, on the other hand, is the forward-looking conditional variance, t , which
                                                                                           2

                                                                          2
can also be viewed as the expectation of future realized volatility (t      = Et [2
                                                                                  t+1 ]). Realized
volatility therefore measures the magnitude of the shock that occurred in the present period,
while uncertainty measures the expected future magnitude of shocks.
     Current realized volatility and the expectation of future volatility (uncertainty) are em-
pirically related. So a natural question is whether it makes theoretical and practical sense
to distinguish between implied and realized volatility. Since we are studying asset prices,
when uncertainty rises, current asset prices typically fall; in turn, this means that the square
of the price change (realized volatility) rises. This intuition seems to imply that implied
and realized volatility are mechanically connected, and cannot logically or empirically be
distinguished.
     That intuition has a flaw. It is true that when uncertainty rises, prices fall and realized
volatility increase. But it is also true that when uncertainty falls, prices rise and realized
volatility still increases: realized volatility is a quadratic function of price movements, so
both uncertainty increases and decreases induce an increase in realized volatility. To a good
approximation, uncertainty shocks will actually have no average effect on ­ and hence no
mechanical correlation with ­ realized volatility.
     We show below that the correlation between implied and realized volatility shocks in
the markets we study is far from 1 ­ in fact it averages only 0.2 (see table 3 and section
3.2) ­ showing that there is independent variation that can be used to distinguish investors
attitudes to them.12


2      Measures of uncertainty and realized volatility
This section describes our main data sources and then examines various measures of uncer-
tainty and realized volatility.
  12
    This implies volatility is not driven by a pure GARCH model (Engle (1982); Bollerslev (1986)): implied
volatility is not a deterministic function of past realized volatility.




                                                    7
2.1     Data
2.1.1    Options and futures

We obtain data on prices of financial and commodity futures and options from the end-of-day
database from the CME Group, which reports closing settlement prices, volume, and open
interest for markets covering financial, energy, metals, and agricultural underlyings over the
period 1983­2015. Each market includes both futures and options, with the options written
on the futures. The futures may be cash- or physically settled, while the options settle into
futures. As an example, a crude oil call option gives its holder the right to buy a crude oil
future at the strike price. The underlying crude oil future is itself physically settled ­ if held
to maturity, the buyer must take delivery of oil.13
    To be included in the analysis, contracts are required to have least 15 years of data and
maturities for options extending to at least six months, which leaves 14 commodity and 5
financial underlyings. The final contracts included in the data set have 18 to 31 years of
data. A number of standard filters are applied to the data to reduce noise and eliminate
outliers. Those filters are described in appendix A.1.
    We calculate implied volatility for all of the options using the Black­Scholes (1973) model
(technically, the Black (1976) model for the case of futures).14 Unless otherwise specified,
implied volatility is calculated at the three-month maturity.
    In addition to depending on uncertainty, implied volatilities also contain a risk premium,
which can potentially vary over time. However, even in the presence of that risk premium
implied volatilities appear to provide good summaries of the available information in the
data for forecasting future volatility, driving out other standard uncertainty measures from
forecasting regressions. Appendix A.2 compares implied volatilities to regression-based fore-
casts of future volatilities and shows that they are all over 90 percent correlated (with an
average correlation of 97 percent), indicating that option-implied volatility is a good, if not
perfect, proxy for true (physical) uncertainty. For that reason, in what follows we will often
refer to implied volatility and uncertainty interchangeably, with the understanding that de-
viations due to time-varying risk premia are quantitatively small at the monthly frequencies
we focus on.15
  13
     The underlying futures in general expire in the same month as the option. Crude oil options, for example,
currently expire three business days before the underlying future.
  14
     The majority of the options that we study have American exercise, while the Black model technically
refers to European options. We examine IVs calculated assuming both exercise styles (we calculate American
IVs using a binomial tree) and obtain nearly identical results. Since there are no dividends on futures
contracts, early exercise is only rarely optimal for the options studied here.
  15
     See also Bekaert, Hoerova, and Lo Duca (2013) for an analysis of the variation in risk premia in implied
volatilities.


                                                      8
2.1.2    Alternative uncertainty measures

In addition to implied volatilities, we also examine two other measures which are not based on
asset prices and are constructed to measure uncertainty about the macroeconomy. The first
uncertainty index is developed in a pair of papers by Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng (JLN; 2015)
and Ludvigson, Ma, and Ng (2017). We follow their construction methodology and further
extend it to yield measures of uncertainty that pertain to financial markets, real activity,
and goods prices, with the latter two also being combined into an overall macroeconomy
group.16 The goal of the JLN framework is to estimate uncertainty on each date, t      2
                                                                                         . The
                                                                    17
method can also be extended to create a realized volatility index.
    The second uncertainty index is the Economic Policy Uncertainty (EPU) index of Baker,
Bloom, and Davis (2015). The EPU index is constructed based on media discussion of un-
certainty, the number of federal tax provisions changing in the near future, and forecaster
disagreement. Unlike the JLN framework, there is no distinction in this case between volatil-
ity and uncertainty, so we treat the EPU index as measuring only uncertainty.
    Unlike option implied volatilities, these indexes do not measure uncertainty implied by
asset prices. So while they certainly have measurement error of their own, it is not due to
a time-varying volatility risk premium. In that sense, they have a separate source of error
from the option implied volatilities and thus give a useful alternative perspective.


2.2     The time series of implied volatility
Figure 1 plots option implied volatility for three major futures: the S&P 500, crude oil, and
US Treasury bonds. The implied volatilities clearly share common variation; for example, all
rise around 1991, 2001, and 2008. On the other hand, they also have substantial independent
variation. Their overall correlations (also reported in the figure) are only in the range 0.5­0.6.
    Table 1 reports pairwise correlations of implied volatility across the 19 underlyings. The
largest correlations in implied volatility are among similar underlyings ­ crude and heating
  16
     The construction involves two basic steps. First, realized squared forecast errors are constructed for
280 macroeconomic and financial time series. 134 macro series are from McCracken and Ng (2016), while
the remaining financial indicators are from Ludvigson and Ng (2007). Our analysis uses code from the
replication files of JLN. The macro price series are defined as those referring to price indexes, and the real
series are the remainder of the macro time series. Denoting the error for series i as i,t , there is a variance
           2
process, i,t  = E 2            2                                    2                         2
                      i,t . So i,t constitutes a noisy signal about i,t . JLN then estimate i,t from the history
    2
of i,t using a two-sided smoother and create an uncertainty index as the first principal component of the
             2                                                                                   2
estimated i,t  . For the component indexes, we take the first principal component of the i,t        corresponding
to the relevant group of indicators.
  17
     This is done by taking the first principal component from the cross-section of the 2   i,t in a given month,
                  2
instead of the i,t  .



                                                       9
oil, the agricultural products, gold and silver, and the British Pound and Swiss Franc.
Correlations outside those groups are notably smaller, in many cases close to zero.
    The largest eigenvalue of the correlation matrix explains 43 percent of the total variation.
The remaining eigenvalues are much smaller, though ­ even the second largest only explains
15 percent of the total variation. Eight eigenvalues are required to explain 90 percent of
the total variation in the IVs, which is perhaps a reasonable estimate of the number of
independent components in the data.
    The common variation in the implied volatilities is much larger than the common varia-
tion in the underlying futures returns. The largest principal component for the futures re-
turns explains less than half as much variation ­ 18 percent versus 43. In other words, while
the individual futures prices may be driven by idiosyncratic shocks, or their correlations with
each other might change over time, masking common variation, investor uncertainty about
futures returns has a substantial degree of commonality across markets (similar to Herskovic
et al. (2016)), showing that we are not studying uncertainty that is purely idiosyncratic and
isolated to individual futures markets. The table below formalizes that result, reporting the
variation explained by the first eigenvalue for implied volatility, realized volatility (discussed
below), and the underlying futures returns, along with bootstrapped 95-percent confidence
bands.

Fraction of variation explained by largest eigenvalue
                                                Futures
                                  IV     RV      return
 Largest Eigenvalue (% explained)      42.5%    34.6%     17.9%

                                       36.9%    23.5%     16.7%
         95% Bootstrap CI
                                       49.3%    42.1%     21.1%



2.3    Projecting the uncertainty indexes onto the 19 IVs
Our analysis focuses on option prices and returns, but we are interested in what they can
tell us about economically motivated uncertainty indexes. So our first question is whether
the option implied volatilities are able to span the other indexes. Figure 2 examines that
question, quantifying how well the 19 IVs can replicate the JLN and EPU indexes. It
plots the time series of the JLN indexes and EPU index against the fitted values from their
projection onto the 19 implied volatilities and a constant. The right-hand panels plot the
pairwise correlations of the implied volatilities in the individual markets with the fitted

                                               10
uncertainty. For financials, the correlation with S&P 500 implied volatility is 95 percent.
The next highest correlation is only 62 percent, for Treasury bonds. So figure 2 shows that
fitted financial uncertainty is very nearly equivalent to S&P 500 implied volatility.18
    The second row plots fitted uncertainty for real variables. In this case, gold, copper, crude
oil, and heating oil are the most important contributors. The implied volatilities capture
well the lower-frequency variation, though they may miss some of the more high-frequency
variation.
    The results for the price component of JLN uncertainty are reported in the third row.
The highest correlations are again for heating oil, crude oil, natural gas, gold, and copper.
These results show that uncertainty about the real economy and inflation are driven by
similar factors, and that those factors are notably distinct from financial uncertainty. They
also show why having a broad range of IVs, and looking at markets beyond the S&P 500, is
important, emphasizing the paper's contribution.
    The bottom panels plot results for the EPU index. The highest pairwise correlations
are with financial IVs, Treasuries, gold, the S&P 500, and currencies. So the fit of the IVs
to the EPU index comes mostly from the financial rather than the nonfinancial options.
That implies that the EPU index measures a similar type of uncertainty as other financial
uncertainty measures, perhaps because news coverage often focuses on financial markets.19
    Appendix A.3.1 shows that even though the options do not perfectly replicate the uncer-
tainty indexes, the capture the economically relevant part. In particular, the spanned part
is related to economic outcomes, while the unspanned part is not.
    Finally, appendix A.3.2 examines similar regressions for realized volatility, instead of
uncertainty, and comes to similar conclusions.


3      Constructing option portfolios to hedge uncertainty
Implied volatility and the uncertainty indexes are not directly tradable ­ only the options
themselves are. This section shows how to construct option portfolios that hedge shocks to
implied and realized volatility in each of the 19 markets and also the JLN and EPU indexes.
   In principle, the uncertainty indexes could be hedged with other assets, not just options.
We focus on option returns because they depend directly on volatility and uncertainty ­ which
  18
     The strong fit the S&P 500 implied volatility is not simply due to the fact that S&P 500 returns are
included in the JLN construction. The results are similar when all variables involving the S&P 500 index
(returns, dividends, etc.) are dropped.
  19
     To account for possible overfitting due to the fact that we have 19 explanatory variables, we experimented
with lasso and variable selection based on information criteria. The results were highly similar in all cases.



                                                      11
is why they are used to construct implied volatility measures ­ whereas for other assets, like
equities, the connection is less clear and stable. Adding more assets also increases estimation
error and overfitting.
    We report results for two approaches to hedging shocks. The first uses the Black­Scholes
model to give analytic approximations for portfolio loadings. The second, in section 5.4,
simply estimates a standard linear factor model ­ thus estimating the loadings empirically.
The first requires more assumptions but is statistically more powerful, while the second is
more robust but generates somewhat wider confidence bands. The results from both are
economically highly similar.


3.1     Straddle portfolios
We study two-week returns on straddles with maturities between one and six months.20
A straddle is a portfolio holding a put and a call with the same maturity and strike; we
specifically study zero-delta straddles, that is, straddles with the strike set so that the Black­
Scholes delta of the portfolio ­ the derivative of its price with respect to the value of the
underlying ­ is zero. The final payoff of a zero-delta straddle depends on the absolute value
of the return on the underlying, meaning that they have symmetrical exposures to positive
and negative returns, and no local directional exposure to the underlying. For the remainder
of the paper, we refer to zero-delta straddles simply as straddles (that is, we only work with
zero-delta straddles).
    Straddles give investors exposure both to realized and implied volatility. They are ex-
posed to realized volatility because the final payoff of the portfolio is a function of the
absolute value of the underlying futures return. But when a straddle is sold before maturity,
the sale price will also depend on expected future volatility, meaning that straddles can give
exposure to uncertainty shocks.
    The exposures of straddles can be approximated theoretically using the Black­Scholes
model, as in Coval and Shumway (2001), Bakshi and Kapadia (2003), and Cremers, Halling,
  20
    Past work on option returns and volatility risk premia has examined returns at frequencies of anywhere
from a day (e.g. Andries et al. (2017)), to holding to maturity (Bakshi and Kapadia (2003)). The precision
of estimates of the riskiness of the straddles is, all else equal, expected to be higher with shorter windows.
On the other hand, shorter windows cause any measurement error in option prices to have larger effects.
   Some of the existing literature, beginning with Bakshi and Kapadia (2003), examines delta-hedged returns.
Even with delta hedging, the higher-order risk exposures of the straddles change substantially as the price
of the underlying changes over time.
   Another alternative is to examine returns on synthetic variance swaps. Synthetic variance swap prices are
constructed using the full range of strikes, so they require much more data than straddles. The markets we
study do not all have liquid options at extreme strikes and multiple maturities, so we focus on straddles,
which just require liquidity near the money.


                                                     12
and Weinbaum (2015). Appendix A.4 shows that the partial derivatives of the zero-delta
straddle return with respect to the underlying futures return, f , its square, and the change
in volatility, can be approximated as

                                                   rn,t
                                                         0,                                                (1)
                                                   ft
                                            2 rn,t      -1
                                                    2  n ,                                                 (2)
                                          (ft /t-1 )
                                           rn,t
                                                       1,                                                  (3)
                                          (t /t-1 )

where rn,t is the return on date t of a straddle with maturity n, ft is the return on the
underlying future, t is the implied volatility of the underlying, and  is the first-difference
operator.21
   The first partial derivative says that the straddles have close to zero local exposure to
the futures return. The second line says that the exposure of straddles to squared returns
on the underlying ­ realized volatility ­ is approximately inversely proportional to time to
maturity. The third line shows that straddles are also exposed to changes in expected future
                    t
volatility, through t-1
                        , and that exposure is approximately constant across maturities.


3.2     Hedging RV and IV in each market
Cremers, Halling, and Weinbaum (2015) show that the implied sensitivities in (1)­(3) give a
method for constructing portfolios that the Black­Scholes model says should give exposures
only to realized volatility ­ (fn,t /t-1 )2 ­ or implied volatility, measured by t /t-1 . The
method is to construct, for each market, two portfolios,

                                          5
                               rvi,t =       (ri,1,t - ri,5,t )  (ft /t-1 )2 ,                             (4)
                                         24
                                         5           1
                               ivi,t   =   ri,5,t - ri,1,t  t /t-1 .                                       (5)
                                         4           4

where the approximations follow from equations (1)­(3).22 Throughout the paper, capitalized
RV and IV refer to the levels of realized and implied volatility, while lower-case rv and
iv refer to the associated portfolio returns. We use the one- and five-month straddles to
  21
      We ignore here the fact that options at different maturities have different underlying futures contracts.
If that elision is important, it can be expected to appear as a deviation of the estimated factor loadings from
the predictions of the approximations (1)­(3).
   22
      Note that equation (2) gives the second derivative, which has weight 1/2 in the Taylor approximation.
So the loading on the squared future return for a straddle of maturity n is (2n)-1 , which implies that the
coefficient for (4) is 5/24.


                                                      13
construct the portfolios as those are the shortest and longest maturities that we consistently
observe in the data.
    The purpose of constructing these portfolios is to give a simple and direct method of
measuring the premia associated with realized and implied volatility that does not require
any complicated estimation or data transformation. One might worry that they do not obtain
the desired exposures in practice. Figure A.2 and table A.1 in the appendix show that the
theoretical predictions for the loadings are fairly accurate (though not perfect) empirically.
Appendix A.4 also examines the accuracy of the Black­Scholes approximation for returns in
a simulated setting.
    Even though the rv and iv portfolios theoretically load on separate risk factors, they
need not be uncorrelated. It is well known from the GARCH literature (e.g. Engle (1982)
and Bollerslev (1986)) that in many markets, innovations to realized volatility are correlated
with innovations to implied volatility. Table 3 reports the correlations between the rv and iv
returns in the 19 markets. GARCH effects appear most strongly for the financial underlyings
and precious metals, where the average correlation is 0.44. For the other nonfinancial un-
derlyings, the effects are much smaller, and the correlation between the rv and iv returns is
only 0.03 on average (it is 0.09 on average across all nonfinancials). So for the nonfinancials,
innovations to realized and implied volatility returns are essentially independent on average.
These weak correlations are valuable for the identification, since they show that surprises in
realized and implied volatility are far from the same and can be hedged separately.


3.3    Hedging the JLN and EPU indexes
Finally, using the results in figure 2 showing that the 19 IVs span most of the variation in the
JLN and EPU uncertainty indexes, we construct portfolios that optimally hedge the levels
of those indexes. For each index, we obtain the weights for the hedging portfolio from the
regression coefficients in sections 2.3 and A.3.2. For each uncertainty index j , we estimate
the regression
                                  JLN Utj = a +      bj
                                                      i IVi,t + j,t                          (6)
                                                  i

and then construct a hedging portfolio as

                                       hedge,j
                                     ivt                  bj
                                                           i ivi,t                          (7)
                                                      i


the coefficients bj
                  i therefore tell us the weight of the iv portfolio of market i in the hedging
portfolio for index j . We create such portfolios for each of the JLN uncertainty indexes and


                                              14
the EPU index. We also construct similarly a hedge portfolio for the JLN realized volatility
series (JLN RV ) from the regression

                              JLN RVtj = a +                bRV,j
                                                             i    RVi,t + RV,j,t                          (8)
                                                        i
                                  hedge,j
                                rvt                   bj
                                                       i rvi,t                                            (9)
                                                  i


   For the main results, the hedging weights, bj  i , are estimated using the full-sample re-
gression. Section 4.2 reports results using hedging weights estimated on a rolling basis, bj
                                                                                           i,t ,
        j
where bi,t is estimated with a regression using data up to date t - 1.23


4     The cost of hedging
This section reports our main results on the price of hedging shocks to volatility and uncer-
tainty. Given a hedging portfolio, the cost of hedging is the negative of the average excess
return (risk premium) on the portfolio. We report all risk premia in terms of Sharpe ratios,
which reveal the compensation for bearing a risk (or the cost of hedging it) per unit of risk,
and are therefore more easily comparable across markets. For reference, the historical Sharpe
ratio of US equities in our sample is 0.52.
    The cost of hedging a risk has a simple but important economic interpretation: it mea-
sures the extent to which the risk is "bad" with respect to state prices or marginal utility.
Consider a factor X and an asset with returns RX that hedges it, in the sense that RX varies
one-for-one (and is perfectly correlated) with innovations to X . Then if M represents the
stochastic discount factor,

                    RX,t+1 - Rf                            Xt+1 - Et Xt+1
                E                  = -cov Mt+1 - Et Mt+1 ,                               Rf ,            (10)
                    stdt (RX,t+1 )                          stdt (Xt+1 )

where Rf is the gross risk-free rate, which we treat as constant for the sake of exposition,
Et is the expectation operator, and stdt is the standard deviation conditional on date-t
information. The equation says that the negative of the risk premium on a portfolio that
hedges the risk X measures the covariance of innovations in Xt+1 with state prices. More
generally, when the correlation between RX and innovations in X is less than 1, E [RX - Rf ]
  23
     An alternative would be to calculate weights for a portfolio that hedges innovations in the JLN and
EPU indexes rather than the levels. The problem with that method in our case is that the JLN indexes are
constructed based on a two-sided filter (in the jargon, a "smoother"), meaning that the changes from period
to period (or residuals from an autoregressive model) do not represent statistical innovations and are in fact
extremely smooth.

                                                      15
measures the covariance of state prices with the part of innovations to X that is spanned by
RX . So if the premium E [RX - Rf ] is negative, times when RX , and hence X , rise are bad
times, in which state prices are high.
    When X represents uncertainty, we might think of it as having two components ­ good
and bad uncertainty. That is, Xt = Xtgood + Xtbad . In that case, the covariance of Xt with the
pricing kernel is exactly the sum of the covariances of Xtgood and Xtbad with the pricing kernel.
If the risk premium on uncertainty is positive (as we will show to be the case empirically in
the next sections), that means that the overall covariance of X with with pricing kernel is
negative. Under the natural assumption that covt Xtgood                               bad
                                                          +1 , Mt+1 < 0 < covt Xt+1 , Mt+1 ,
that would mean that the component coming from good uncertainty dominates the overall
covariance with state prices. Formally, we have the following result:

Proposition 1 Assume Xt = Xtgood +Xtbad and covt Xtgood                  bad
                                                   +1 , Mt+1 < 0 < covt Xt+1 , Mt+1 .
Then E [RX,t+1 - Rf ] > 0 implies that

                              Xtgood
                                +1 - Et Xt+1
                                            good
                                                                                    Xtbad        bad
                                                                                       +1 - Et Xt+1
     covt    Mt+1 - Et Mt+1 ,                         > cov Mt+1 - Et Mt+1 ,                             .
                                 stdt (Xt+1 )                                         stdt (Xt+1 )
                                                                                                        (11)
Furthermore,
                                                good         good                             bad        bad
     RX,t+1 - Rf                               Xt +1 - Et Xt+1                               Xt+1 - Et Xt+1
E                   =   cov Mt+1 - Et Mt+1 ,                        - cov Mt+1 - Et Mt+1 ,                      Rf .
     stdt (RX,t+1 )                               stdt (Xt+1 )                                stdt (Xt+1 )
                                                                                                        (12)

   In other words, if assets that hedge uncertainty shocks earn positive premia, that means
that the covariance of total uncertainty with the pricing kernel is driven relatively more
by good than bad uncertainty. Furthermore, the magnitude of the premium measures the
magnitude of the gap between the relative importance of the good and bad uncertainty
shocks. A more positive premium implies the good uncertainty shocks contribute more,
while a more negative premium implies greater importance for the bad uncertainty shocks.


4.1         Hedging uncertainty shocks
The solid (blue) series in figure 3 plots sample Sharpe ratios and confidence bands for the
various rv and iv portfolios. The top panel plots results for iv and the bottom panel rv .
The boxes are point estimates while the bars represent 95-percent confidence bands based
on a block bootstrap.24
    24
    The bootstrap is constructed with 50-day blocks and 5000 replications. It is used to account for the fact
that the returns use overlapping windows. Hansen­Hodrick type standard errors are not feasible here due

                                                     16
    Across the top panel, the iv portfolios tend to earn zero or even positive returns. For
financials, the average Sharpe ratios tend to be near zero or weakly negative (the S&P,
in particular, yields a Sharpe ratio of -0.23, which is just 1 standard error from zero and
therefore statistically not significant). For the nonfinancials, all 14 sample Sharpe ratios are
actually positive. Overall, for only one out of 19 contracts (British pound) do we find a
significantly negative Sharpe ratio.
    To formally estimate the average Sharpe ratios across contracts, we use a random effects
model, which yields an estimate of the population mean Sharpe ratio while simultaneously
accounting for the fact that each of the sample Sharpe ratios is estimated with error, and
that the errors are potentially correlated across contracts (see appendix A.5).
    For both nonfinancials and all markets overall, the estimated population mean Sharpe
ratio is statistically and economically significantly positive, while for financials it is close to
zero. The group-level means have the advantage of being much more precisely estimated
than the Sharpe ratios for the markets individually. They show that on average, instead of
there being a cost to hedging uncertainty shocks, uncertainty-hedging portfolios actually earn
positive returns. For nonfinancials, the average Sharpe ratio is 0.37, and the lower end of
the 95-percent confidence interval is 0.14. For the overall mean, the corresponding numbers
are 0.26 and 0.5, so the average Sharpe ratios are significantly positive in both cases.
    The right-hand section of figure 3 reports the Sharpe ratios for the portfolios hedging
the EPU and JLN indexes. Since those hedging portfolios are constructed combining the
individual iv portfolios, it is not surprising that they reflect the Sharpe ratios of those port-
folios. The hedging portfolios for JLN financial uncertainty and the EPU index both place
relatively more weight on the financials, which have Sharpe ratios that are weakly negative
and indistinguishable from zero. The portfolios hedging macro and price uncertainty, on
the contrary, have Sharpe ratios that are positive and in one case marginally statistically
significant.
    The top panel of figure 3 contains our key results on the cost of hedging different types of
uncertainty shocks. It shows that across the board, risk premia for uncertainty are indistin-
guishable from zero or, if anything, somewhat positive. The results allow us to quantify the
relative importance of good and bad uncertainty across the various markets. For financial
underlyings, including the S&P 500, the zero or very weakly negative risk premium implies
that there is close to an equal split between good and bad uncertainty. For the nonfinancial
underlyings, which are closely linked to the JLN real and price uncertainty series, the results
imply that the majority of the variation in uncertainty is of the good type. So overall, across
to the fact that observations in the data are not equally spaced in time. The block bootstrap additionally
accounts for other sources of serial correlation in the returns, such as time-varying risk premia.


                                                   17
a wide range of underlying economic risks, good uncertainty seems to equal or even dominate
bad uncertainty.


4.2     Hedging realized volatility shocks
The bottom panel of figure 3 reports analogous results for the cost of hedging realized
volatility shocks. The numbers are drastically different. Whereas the iv portfolios have
historically earned weakly positive returns, the rv portfolios have almost all historically
earned strongly negative returns. For the S&P 500, this result is well known and is referred
to as the variance risk premium. The S&P 500 rv portfolio has the most negative Sharpe
ratio, at -1.19 ­ the premium for selling insurance against shocks to realized volatility is more
than twice as large as the premium on the stock market over the same period. Treasuries also
have a significantly negative return, but the other financials in our sample ­ all currencies
­ have Sharpe ratios close to zero. For the nonfinancials, 11 of 14 estimated Sharpe ratios
are negative. So whereas the cost of hedging uncertainty shocks with the iv portfolios is
consistently negative in the top panel, the cost of hedging realized volatility shocks using
the rv portfolios is positive in the bottom panel.
    Looking at the category means, in this case all three estimates ­ financials, nonfinancials,
and all assets ­ are negative. The values are statistically significant for the nonfinancials
and the overall mean. The point estimate for the overall mean Sharpe ratio is -0.28 and the
upper end of the 95-percent confidence interval is -0.04. Those values are almost the same
as what we obtain for the iv portfolios, but with the opposite sign.
    Finally, the right-hand section of the bottom panel of figure 3 reports the returns from
the JLN rv hedging portfolios ­ those that hedge the realized volatility of the JLN macro
series.25 Again, consistent with the fact that the rv portfolios themselves consistently earn
negative returns, hedging the JLN indexes for realized volatility historically has a positive
cost. For all three subindexes, the hedging portfolios earn extremely negative returns, with
the Sharpe ratios for financial, real, and price volatility at -1.18, -0.94, and -0.96.
    In sum, in stark contrast to the results for hedging uncertainty, the bottom panel of figure
3 shows that there has historically been an extremely large cost to hedge realized volatility.
Contracts that, rather than loading on changes in implied volatility, load on actual realized
squared returns ­ which the analysis above shows directly hedge extreme events in the
macroeconomy ­ earn negative Sharpe ratios with magnitudes up to twice as large as that
for the overall stock market. So while uncertainty shocks in the economy appear to be a mix
  25
    There is no realized volatility equivalent of the EPU index, so here we only look at the JLN ones, for
which both the uncertainty and the realized volatility versions can be constructed, as discussed above.


                                                   18
of good and bad (with close to equal importance for financials, and tilted towards good for
nonfinancials), volatility ­ the realization of large shocks ­ is viewed as mostly bad, for both
financials and nonfinancials.
    But how can that be? Doesn't uncertainty lead to higher volatility? The answer is that
what we are pricing is innovations. When there is a surprise in volatility ­ 2   t is larger than
expected ­ that is typically bad. On the other hand, when there is a shock to uncertainty
    2
­ t   unexpectedly rises, that is apparently sometimes associated with good news (a new
invention) and sometimes bad. Section 6 formalizes that idea, describing a simple extension
of the standard long-run risk model of Bansal and Yaron (2004) that is consistent with our
results.


4.3    Combined portfolios
An alternative way to hedge aggregate uncertainty is simply to buy all the iv or rv portfolios
simultaneously. Since tables 1 and 2 show that realized and implied volatility are imperfectly
correlated across markets, even larger Sharpe ratios can be earned by holding portfolios that
diversify across the various underlyings. Table 4 reports results of various implementations
of such a strategy. Looking first at the top panel, the first row reports results for portfolios
that put equal weight on every available underlying in each period, the second row uses only
nonfinancial underlyings, and the third row only financial underlyings. The columns report
Sharpe ratios for various combinations of the rv and iv portfolios. The first two columns
report Sharpe ratios for strategies that hold only the rv or only the iv portfolios, the third
column uses a strategy that is short rv and long iv portfolios in equal weights, while the final
column is short rv and long iv , but with weights inversely proportional to their variances
(i.e. a simple risk parity strategy).
    The Sharpe ratios reported in table 4 are generally larger than those in figure 3. The
portfolios that are short rv and long iv are able to attain Sharpe ratios above 1. The largest
Sharpe ratios come in the portfolios that combine rv and iv , which follows from the fact that
they are positively correlated, so going short rv and long iv leads to internal hedging. All of
that said, these Sharpe ratios remain generally plausible. Values near 1 are observed in other
contexts (e.g. Broadie, Chernov, and Johannes (2009) for put option returns, Asness and
Moskowitz (2013) for global value and momentum strategies, and Dew-Becker et al. (2017)
for variance swaps).
    The portfolios that take advantage of all underlyings simultaneously seem to perform
best, presumably because they are the most diversified. While holding exposure to implied
volatility among the financials earns effectively a zero risk premium, it is still generally


                                               19
worthwhile to include financials for the sake of hedging.
    Finally, the bottom panel of table 4 reports the skewness of the various strategies from
above. One might think that the negative returns on the rv portfolio are driven by its
positive skewness, but the iv portfolio also is positively skewed and has positive average
returns. So the degree of skewness does not seem to explain differences in average returns
in this setting.


5     Robustness
This section examines some potential concerns about the robustness of the results.


5.1    One-week holding period returns
Our main analysis is based on two-week holding period returns for straddles, which strike
a balance between having more precise estimates of risk premia and reducing the impact of
measurement error in prices. We have repeated all of our analysis using one-week holding
period returns, and find very similar results. Appendix figure A.5 is the analog of figure
3, but constructed using one-week returns. The results are qualitatively and quantitatively
very similar to the baseline.


5.2    Split sample and rolling window results
To address the concern that the results could be driven by outliers (though note that there
would need to be outliers in all 19 markets), figures A.6 and A.7 replicate the main results in
figure 3, but splitting the sample in half (before and after June 2000). The confidence bands
are naturally wider, and the point estimates vary more from market to market in the two
figures. Nevertheless, the qualitative results are the same as in the full-sample case, showing
that realized volatility earns a negative premium while the premium on implied volatility is
positive.
    To further evaluate the possibility that the results are driven by a small number of
observations, figure A.8 plots Sharpe ratios for the rv and iv portfolios in five-year rolling
windows for each of the 19 markets, as well as for the equal-weighted portfolios of all 19
markets. The sample Sharpe ratios are reasonably stable over time. In no case do the
results appear to be driven by a single outlying period or episode. Note that these results
are not informative about variation in the conditional risk premium; with a five-year window,
the standard error for the Sharpe ratios is 0.45, so even if the true conditional Sharpe ratios


                                              20
are constant, the five-year rolling estimates should display large amounts of variation over
time.


5.3       Expanding windows for hedging uncertainty indexes
In the baseline results, the weights in the hedging portfolios for the uncertainty indexes are
fixed over time and estimated based on the full sample. As an alternative, the following
table reports the annualized Sharpe ratios of the iv and rv portfolios hedging the indexes
with weights estimated with expanding (backward-looking) windows. The results are similar
to those reported in Figure 3: negative for the rv portfolio and positive (or close to zero) for
the iv portfolio.
Sharpe ratios for portfolios hedging the JLN and EPU indexes with rolling
weights
        Financial Unc.      Real Unc. Price Unc.          EPU
 iv           0.06             0.37           0.52        -0.17
 rv           -1.49            -0.37         -0.94


5.4       Linear factor models
The evidence presented on the pricing of implied and realized volatility risk relies on the
Black­Scholes model to give an approximation for the risk exposures of the portfolios. Ap-
pendix A.4 provides evidence that those predictions are an accurate description of the data,
but our findings are not actually dependent on that model. To estimate the price of risk for
realized and implied volatility purely empirically, with no appeal to exposures from a theo-
retical model, we now estimate standard factor specifications which estimate risk exposures
freely from the data.
    Typical factor models use a small number of aggregate factors. Here, though, we are
interested in the price of risk for shocks to all 19 types of uncertainty. We therefore estimate
market-specific factor models. This is similar to the common practice of pricing equities
with equity-specific factors, bonds with bond factors, currencies with currency factors, etc.26
 26
      The analysis is similar to those of Jones (2006) and Constantinides, Jackwerth, and Savov (2013).




                                                     21
5.4.1     Specification

For each market we estimate a time-series model of the form
                                                                         2
                                 f      fi,t     f2 1          fi,t            IV     IVi,t
               ri,n,t = ai,n +   i,n           + i,n                         + i,n            + i,n,t ,        (13)
                                       IVi,t-1       2        IVi,t-1                 IVi,t-1

where fi,t is the futures return for underlying i and IVi,t is the change in the five-month
at-the-money implied volatility for underlying i. The underlying futures return controls for
any exposure of the straddles to the underlying, though the Black­Scholes model predicts
that effect to be small.
    Much more important is the fact that straddles have a nonlinear exposure to the fu-
tures return. (fi,t /IVi,t-1 )2 captures that nonlinearity. Consistent with the construction and
                                         f2
interpretation of the rv portfolio, i,n     will be interpreted as the exposure of the straddles
                       27
to realized volatility. Finally, the third factor is the change in the at-the-money implied
volatility for the specific market at the five-month maturity.28
    We estimate a standard linear specification for the risk premia,
                                                                                  2
                      f f               fi,t       f 2
                                                     f    2              fi,t            IV IV            IVi,t
        E [ri,n,t ] = i i,n Std                  + i i,n Std                           + i i,n Std                  +(14)
                                                                                                                      i,n ,
                                       IVi,t-1                          IVi,t-1                           IVi,t-1
                     f
E [fi,t /IVi,t-1 ] = i Std(fi,t /IVi,t-1 ).                                                                           (15)

where i,n is a fitting error. The  coefficients represent the risk premia that are earned
by investments that provide direct exposure to the factors. Due to the scaling by standard
deviations, the  's are estimates of what the Sharpe ratios on the factors would be if it were
                                                    2
possible to invest in them directly (neither fi,t     nor IVi,t is an asset return that one can
directly purchase in our data; fi,t itself is tradable, though, which is why we impose the second
equality). The difference between the method here and the rv and iv portfolios discussed
above is that the factor model does not require assumptions about the risk exposures of the
straddles ­ instead estimating them from (13) ­ whereas the rv and iv portfolios rely on the
Black­Scholes model. So the results using the factor models should be more robust, but also
have more estimation error.
  27
     The results are similar when the second factor is the absolute value of the futures return or when it is
measured as the sum of squared daily returns over the return period.
  28
     Since the IVs may be measured with error, we construct this factor by regressing available implied
volatilities on maturity for each underlying and date and then taking the fitted value from that regression
at the five-month maturity.




                                                         22
5.4.2   Results

The dashed (red) series in figure 3 plots the estimated risk premia across the various markets
along with 95-percent confidence bands. The top panel plots iIV , while the bottom panel
         2
plots if . Simple inspection shows that the results are extremely close to those for the iv
                                                                               2
and rv portfolios. The iIV estimates are almost all positive, while the if are almost all
negative. As before, we produce a random effects estimate of the mean of the risk premia
in various groups. The random effects estimates of the means in the various groups are also
similar, both in magnitude and statistical significance, to the main results in the solid series.
The main difference between the two series is that the confidence bands are wider for the
factor model estimates, which is consistent with the fact that the factor model estimates
impose less structure and must estimate the factor loadings of the individual straddles.


5.5     Pricing the independent parts of RV and IV
The main results above report returns associated with assets that hedge innovations to
realized and implied volatility. Table 3 shows that those returns are positively correlated:
months with increases in realized volatility also tend to have increases in implied volatility.
A natural question is what would happen if we were to construct a portfolio that loaded on
the independent part of those returns, e.g. an increase in implied volatility holding realized
volatility fixed. Section A.8 in the appendix reports an SDF-based analysis that prices the
independent components and shows that the results are similar to the main specification
(see figure A.9).


5.6     Liquidity
If the options used here are highly illiquid, the analysis will be substantially complicated for
three reasons. First, to the extent that illiquidity represents a real cost faced by investors
­ e.g. a bid/ask spread ­ then returns calculated from settlement prices do not represent
returns earned by investors. Second, illiquidity itself could carry a risk premium that the
options might be exposed to. Third, bid/ask spreads represent an added layer of noise
in prices. The identification of the premia for realized volatility and uncertainty depends
on differences in returns on options across maturities, so what is most important for our
purposes is how liquidity varies across maturities. This section shows that the liquidity of
the straddles studied here is generally highly similar to that of the widely studied S&P 500
contracts traded on the CBOE, and the liquidity does not appear to substantially deteriorate
across maturities.

                                               23
    We measure liquidity using two methods. First, since our data set does not include
posted bid/ask spreads, we estimate the standard Roll (1984) effective spread using the
daily returns.29 The top panel of appendix figure A.10 plots the effective bid/ask spreads
for straddles at maturities of 1, 3, and 5 months. The average posted bid/ask spreads for
CBOE S&P 500 straddles, for which we have data since 1996, are also reported in the figure.
At the one-month maturity, the effective spreads are approximately 6 percent on average,
which is similar to the 6.6-percent average posted spreads for one-month CBOE S&P 500
straddles. More importantly, the spreads actually decline at longer maturities indicating
that there is less observed negative autocovariance in returns for options at those maturities.
For the three- and five-month options, the spreads are smaller by about half, averaging 2 to
3 percent. This is again consistent with posted spreads for CBOE S&P 500 contracts, which
decline to 4.0 percent on average at six months.30
    As a second measure of liquidity, we obtained posted bid/ask spreads for the options
closest to the money on Friday, 8/4/2017 for our 19 contracts plus the CBOE S&P 500
options at maturities of 1, 4, and 7 months. Those spreads are plotted in the bottom
panel of figure A.10. For the majority of the options, the spreads are less than 3 percent,
consistent with the 4.1-percent bid/ask spread for one-month S&P 500 options at the CBOE.
Across nearly all the contracts, the posted spreads again decline with maturity, and for 10
of the 19 contracts the one-month posted spreads are nearly indistinguishable from that for
the S&P 500, which is typically viewed as a highly liquid market and where incorporating
bid-ask spreads generally has minimal effects on return calculations (Bondarenko (2014)).
    Figure A.10 yields two important results. First, it shows that the liquidity of the straddles
is reasonably high, in the sense that effective and posted spreads are both relatively narrow
in absolute terms for most of the contracts and that they compare favorably with spreads
for the more widely studied S&P 500 options traded at the CBOE. Second, liquidity does
not appear to deteriorate as the maturity of the options grows, and in fact in many cases
there are improvements with increasing maturities, again consistent with CBOE data.
    Section A.4.3 in the appendix reports statistics for volume across maturities, showing
that the markets are generally fairly similar. Section A.4.4 reports an additional robustness
test that measures returns using a method that is robust to certain types of measurement
errors in prices, showing that the main results are essentially identical.
  29
     The Roll model assumes that there is an unobservable mid-quote that follows a random walk in logs and
that observed prices have equal probability of being from a buy or sell order. Bid-ask bounce then induces
negative autocorrelation in returns, from which the spread can be inferred (when the autocorrelation is
positive, we set the spread to zero).
  30
     Even though postead spreads growth in absolute terms with maturity, straddle prices grow by more
(approximately with the square root of maturity), causing the percentage spreads to decline.


                                                   24
    Finally, it is useful to note that while the liquidity of option markets changed significantly
in the last 30 years, the patterns in risk premia for the rv and iv portfolios appear stable
over time (see, for example, the rolling Sharpe ratios of figure A.8), suggesting that liquidity
is not the main driver of our results.
    Even though the liquidity is similar across many of the markets, one might still ask how
trading costs affect the returns we have been studying. Any trading cost will lower the return
of a portfolio, regardless of whether an investor is long or short. By studying returns based
on quoted prices, we are essentially looking at the return averaged across what the buyer
and seller receive. For example, if the return on a portfolio based on quoted prices is 10
percent and there are total trading costs to each side of 1 percent, then the buyer earns a
return of 9 percent while the seller has a loss of 11 percent. Looking at quotes is therefore
natural for illustrating the return that the average investor sees.


6     Model
To help provide some context for the empirical results and fit them into a standard frame-
work, this section describes results from a simple extension of the standard long-run risk
model of Bansal and Yaron (2004). The analysis is primarily in appendix A.10 and here we
report the specification and key results.
   Agents have Epstein­Zin preferences over consumption , Ct , with a unit elasticity of
substitution, where the lifetime utility function, vt , satisfies

                                              
                     vt = (1 -  ) log Ct +      log Et exp ((1 - ) vt+1 )                    (16)
                                             1-

where  is the coefficient of relative risk aversion. Consumption growth follows the process

                                      2        2
                   ct = xt-1 +        B,t -1 + G,t-1 t + Jbt                                 (17)
                    xt = x xt-1 + x x,t + x,G ,G,t - x,B ,B,t                                (18)
                   2
                   j,t = (1 -  ) ¯2    2
                                  j +  j,t-1 + j ,j,t , for j  {B, G}                        (19)

where t and the ·,t are independent standard normal random variables. xt represents the
consumption trend. We have two deviations from the usual setup. First, we include jump
shocks, Jbt , where bt is a Poisson distributed random variable with intensity  and J is the
magnitude of the jump. This addition allows for random variation in realized volatility and
is drawn from Drechsler and Yaron (2011). Second, there are two components to volatility,
                                                       2
which we refer to as bad and good. Bad volatility, B     , is associated with low future con-

                                               25
                                            2
sumption growth, while good volatility, G     , is associated with high future growth (where all
of the · coefficients are nonnegative).
    Define realized volatility to be the realized quadratic variation in consumption growth,
while implied volatility is the conditional variance of consumption growth (these are formal-
ized in the appendix).

Proposition 2 The average excess returns on forward claims to realized and implied volatil-
ity for consumption growth in this model are,

         E [RVt+1 - PRV,t ] = J 2  (1 - exp (-J ))                                         (20)
                                                                  2   2
          E [IVt+1 - PIV,t ] = ( - 1) vY,x (x,G G - x,B B ) + vY, G + B                    (21)

where Px,t is the forward price for x. E [IVt+1 - PIV,t ] > 0 for x,G sufficiently larger than
x,B . Furthermore, the sign of E [RVt+1 - PRV,t ] is the same as the sign of J and of the
conditional skewness of consumption growth (i.e. the skewness of ct+1 conditional on date-
t information).

    Proposition 2 contains our key analytic results. We analyze premia for realized and
implied volatility on consumption ­ real activity ­ consistent with the focus in the empirical
analysis on macro volatility and uncertainty. The negative premium on realized volatility
is driven by downward jumps, similar to the literature on the volatility risk premium in
equities (Drechsler and Yaron (2011), Wachter (2013)). The sign of the premium on implied
volatility depends on the contribution of good versus bad volatility. When good volatility
shocks, where high volatility is associated with high future growth (e.g. due to learning
about new technologies), are relatively larger than bad volatility shocks (x,G G > x,B B )
the premium on implied volatility can be positive.
    The appendix provides a numerical calibration of the model using values close to those in
Bansal and Yaron's (2004) original choices. It shows that the model generates quantitatively
realistic Sharpe ratios for implied and realized volatility in addition to a reasonable equity
premium.
    The key economic mechanism for the positive pricing of uncertainty shocks is that high
volatility is sometimes associated with higher long-term growth. Intuitively, that mechanism
contributes positive skewness to consumption growth, while the jumps contribute negative
skewness. The appendix provides novel evidence on the skewness of consumption growth
consistent with the model. In particular, conditional skewness in the model, which depends
only on the jumps, is more negative than the skewness of expected consumption growth,


                                              26
which depends on the relationship of volatility and long-run growth (x). We show that
consumption growth displays exactly the same pattern in US data.
    So a simple version of the long-run risk model with good and bad volatility shocks and
jumps in consumption can match our key empirical facts. Furthermore, the empirical results
are sharp, in the sense that the sign of the premium on implied volatility identifies the
relative importance of the bad and good volatility shocks, while the sign of the premium on
realized volatility identifies the sign of consumption jumps.


7     Conclusion
This paper studies the pricing of uncertainty and realized volatility across a broad array of
options on financial and commodity futures. Uncertainty is proxied by implied volatility
­ which theoretically measures investors' conditional variances for future returns ­ and a
number of uncertainty indexes developed in the literature. Realized volatility, on the other
                                                                                              2
hand, measures how large realized shocks have been. In modeling terms, if t+1  N (0, t          ),
                  2
uncertainty is t    , while volatility is the realization of 2
                                                             t.
    A large literature in macroeconomics and finance has focused on the effects of uncertainty
on the economy. This paper explores empirically how investors perceive uncertainty shocks.
If uncertainty shocks have major contractionary effects so that they are associated with high
marginal utility for the average investor, then assets that hedge uncertainty should earn
negative average returns. On the other hand, the finance literature has recently argued that
in many cases uncertainty can be good. For example, during the late 1990's, it may have
been the case that investors were not sure about how good new technologies would turn out
to be.
    The contribution of this paper is to construct hedging portfolios for a range of types
of macro uncertainty, including interest rates, energy prices, and uncertainty indexes. The
cost of hedging uncertainty shocks reveals the relative importance of good and bad types of
uncertainty. Furthermore, using a wide range of options is important for capturing uncer-
tainty about the real economy and inflation, as opposed to just about financial markets. The
empirical results imply that uncertainty shocks, no matter what type of uncertainty we look
at, are not viewed as being negative by investors, or at least not sufficiently negative that it
is costly to hedge them. Financial uncertainty appears to be roughly equally split between
the good and bad types, while nonfinancial uncertainty is relatively more strongly driven by
good uncertainty ­ the cost of hedging nonfinancial uncertainty shocks is negative.
    What is highly costly to hedge is realized volatility. Portfolios that hedge extreme returns


                                               27
in futures markets ­ and hence large innovations in macroeconomic time series ­ earn strongly
negative returns, with premia that are in many cases one to two times as large as the premium
on the aggregate stock market over the same period. So what is consistently high in bad
times is not uncertainty, but realized volatility. Periods in which futures markets and the
macroeconomy are highly volatile and display large movements appear to be periods of high
marginal utility, in the sense that their associated state prices are high. This is consistent
with (and complementary to) the findings in Berger, Dew-Becker, and Giglio (2019), who
provide VAR evidence that shocks to volatility predict declines in real activity in the future,
while shocks to uncertainty do not.
    Berger, Dew-Becker, and Giglio (2019) show that the VAR evidence and pricing results
for realized volatility are consistent with the view that it is downward jumps in the economy
that investors are most averse to. They show that a simple model in which fundamental
shocks are both stochastically volatile and negatively skewed can quantitatively match the
pricing of uncertainty and realized volatility, along with the VAR evidence. Similarly, Seo
and Wachter (2018a,b) show that negative skewness can explain the pricing of credit default
swaps and put options. This paper thus also contributes to the growing literature studying
the effects of skewness. In a world where fundamental shocks are negatively skewed, the
most extreme shocks ­ those that generate realized volatility ­ tend to be negative, which
can explain why realized volatility would be so costly to hedge.


References
Abel, Andrew B., "Optimal Investment Under Uncertainty," American Economic Review, 1983,
   73 (1), 228­233.

Ait-Sahalia, Yacine, Mustafa Karaman, and Loriano Mancini, "The Term Structure of
    Variance Swaps, Risk Premia and the Expectations Hypothesis," 2015. Working paper.

Alexopoulos, Michelle and Jon Cohen, "Uncertain Times, Uncertain Measures," 2009. Work-
    ing paper.

Andries, Marianne, Thomas M Eisenbach, Martin C Schmalz, and Yichuan Wang,
   "The term structure of the price of variance risk," 2015.

Asness, Clifford S, Tobias J Moskowitz, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, "Value and momentum
   everywhere," The Journal of Finance, 2013, 68 (3), 929­985.

Bachmann, Rudiger and Christian Bayer, ""Wait-and-See" business cycles?," Journal of
   Monetary Economics, 2013, 60 (6), 704­719.

     and Giuseppe Moscarini, "Business Cycles and Endogenous Uncertainty," 2012. Working
    paper.


                                              28
Baker, Scott R, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J Davis, "Measuring economic policy uncer-
   tainty," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (4), 1593­1636.

Bakshi, Gurdip and Nikunj Kapadia, "Delta-Hedge Gains and the Negative Market Volatility
   Risk Premium," The Review of Financial Studies, 2003, 16(2), 527­566.

    ,      , and Dilip Madan, "Stock Return Characteristics, Skew Laws, and the Differential
    Pricing of Individual Equity Options," Review of Financial Studies, 2003, 16 (1), 101­143.

Barro, Robert J., "Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century," Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 2006, 121(3), 823­866.

Barun´
     ik, Jozef, Evzen Ko  cenda, and Luk´   a s V´acha, "Asymmetric connectedness on the U.S.
   stock market: Bad and good volatility spillovers," Journal of Financial Markets, 2016, 27, 55
   ­ 78.

Basu, Susanto and Brent Bundick, "Uncertainty Shocks in a Model of Effective Demand,"
   2015. Working paper.

Bekaert, Geert, Eric Engstrom, and Andrey Ermolov, "Bad environments, good environ-
   ments: A non-Gaussian asymmetric volatility model," Journal of Econometrics, 2015, 186 (1),
   258­275.

    , Marie Hoerova, and Marco Lo Duca, "Risk, uncertainty and monetary policy," Journal
    of Monetary Economics, 2013, 60 (7), 771­788.

Berger, David, Ian Dew-Becker, and Stefano Giglio, "Uncertainty shocks as second-moment
    news shocks," 2017. Working paper.

Binsbergen, Jules H. Van and Ralph S.J. Koijen, "The Term Structure of Returns: Facts
    and Theory," Journal of Financial Economics, 2017, 124 (1), 1­21.

Black, Fischer, "The pricing of commodity contracts," Journal of Financial Economics, 1976, 3
    (1-2), 167­179.

     and Myron Scholes, "The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities," The Journal of
    Political Economy, 1973, 81 (3), 637­654.

Bloom, Nicholas, "The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks," Econometrica, 2009, 77(3), 623­685.

    , Max Floetotto, Nir Jaimovich, Itay Saporta-Eksten, and Stephen J. Terry, "Really
    Uncertain Business Cycles," 2014. Working paper.

Bollerslev, Tim, "Generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity," Journal of econo-
    metrics, 1986, 31 (3), 307­327.

     and Viktor Todorov, "Tails, fears, and risk premia," Journal of Finance, 2011, 66(6),
    2165­2211.

Bondarenko, Oleg, "Why Are Put Options So Expensive?," Quarterly Journal of Finance, 2014,
   04 (03), 1450015.



                                              29
Bretscher, Lorenzo, Lukas Schmid, and Andrea Vedolin, "Interest rate risk management
    in uncertain times," The Review of Financial Studies, 2018, 31 (8), 3019­3060.

Broadie, Mark, Mikhail Chernov, and Michael Johannes, "Understanding Index Option
    Returns," The Review of Financial Studies, 2009, 22(11), 4493­4529.

Caballero, Ricardo J, "Aggregate investment," Handbook of macroeconomics, 1999, 1, 813­862.

Caldara, Dario, Cristina Fuentes-Albero, Simon Gilchrist, and Egon Zakraj           sek, "The
    macroeconomic impact of financial and uncertainty shocks," European Economic Review, 2016.

Choi, Hoyong, Philippe Mueller, and Andrea Vedolin, "Bond Variance Risk Premiums,"
   Review of Finance, 2017, 21 (3), 987­1022.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Roberto Motto, and Massimio Rostagno, "Risk Shocks," Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 2014, 104(1), 27­65.

Constantinides, George M, Jens Carsten Jackwerth, and Alexi Savov, "The puzzle of
   index option returns," Review of Asset Pricing Studies, 2013, 3 (2), 229­257.

Creal, Drew D and Jing Cynthia Wu, "Monetary policy uncertainty and economic fluctua-
    tions," International Economic Review, 2017, 58 (4), 1317­1354.

Cremers, Martijn, Michael Halling, and David Weinbaum, "Aggregate Jump and Volatility
   Risk in the Cross-Section of Stock Returns," The Journal of Finance, 2015, 70 (2), 577­614.

Darby, Julia, Andrew Hughes Hallett, Jonathan Ireland, and Laura Piscitelli, "The
   impact of exchange rate uncertainty on the level of investment," The Economic Journal, 1999,
   109 (454), 55­67.

Dew-Becker, Ian, Stefano Giglio, Anh Le, and Marius Rodriguez, "The price of variance
   risk," Journal of Financial Economics, 2017, 123 (2), 225 ­ 250.

Drechsler, Itamar and Amir Yaron, "What's Vol Got to Do with it?," The Review of Financial
    Studies, 2011, 24(1), 1­45.

Egloff, Daniel, Markus Leippold, and Liuren Wu, "The Term Structure of Variance Swap
    Rates and Optimal Variance Swap Investments," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Anal-
    ysis, 2010, 45(5), 1279­1310.

Elder, John, "Another perspective on the effects of inflation uncertainty," Journal of Money,
    Credit, and Banking, 2004, 36 (5), 911­928.

     and Apostolos Serletis, "Oil price uncertainty," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
    2010, 42 (6), 1137­1159.

Engle, Robert F, "Autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity with estimates of the variance of
    United Kingdom inflation," Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 1982, pp. 987­
    1007.

Gilchrist, Simon and John C Williams, "Investment, capacity, and uncertainty: a putty­clay
    approach," Review of Economic Dynamics, 2005, 8 (1), 1­27.


                                               30
Gourio, Francois, "Credit Risk and Disaster Risk," American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
   nomics, 2013, 5(3), 1­34. Working paper.

Hartman, Richard, "The effects of price and cost uncertainty on Investment," Journal of Eco-
   nomic Theory, 1972, 5 (2), 258­266.

Herskovic, Bernard, Bryan Kelly, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, "The
    common factor in idiosyncratic volatility: Quantitative asset pricing implications," Journal of
    Financial Economics, 2016, 119 (2), 249­283.

Huizinga, John, "Inflation uncertainty, relative price uncertainty, and investment in US manu-
    facturing," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 1993, 25 (3), 521­549.

Jones, Christopher S, "A nonlinear factor analysis of S&P 500 index option returns," The
    Journal of Finance, 2006, 61 (5), 2325­2363.

Jurado, Kyle, Sydney Ludvigson, and Serena Ng, "Measuring Uncertainty," American Eco-
    nomic Review, 2015, 105 (3), 1177­1216.

Kilic, Mete and Ivan Shaliastovich, "Good and bad variance premia and expected returns,"
     Management Science, 2019, 65 (6), 2522­2544.

Leduc, Sylvain and Zheng Liu, "Uncertainty shocks are aggregate demand shocks," Journal of
   Monetary Economics, 2016, 82, 20­35.

Ludvigson, Sydney C, Sai Ma, and Serena Ng, "Uncertainty and Business Cycles: Exogenous
   Impulse or Endogenous Response?," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
   2015.

McCracken, Michael W and Serena Ng, "FRED-MD: A monthly database for macroeconomic
   research," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 2016, 34 (4), 574­589.

Oi, Walter, "The Desirability of Price Instability Under Perfect Competition," Econometrica,
    1961, 29 (1), 58­64.

P´
 astor, L'ubo s and Pietro Veronesi, "Technological Revolutions and Stock Prices," The Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 2009, pp. 1451­1483.

Patton, Andrew J and Kevin Sheppard, "Good volatility, bad volatility: Signed jumps and
    the persistence of volatility," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2015, 97 (3), 683­697.

Prokopczuk, Marcel, Lazaros Symeonidis, and Chardin Wese Simen, "Variance risk in
    commodity markets," Journal of Banking & Finance, 2017, 81, 136­149.

Salgado, Sergio, Fatih Guvenen, and Nicholas Bloom, "Skewed Business Cycles," 2016.
    Working paper.

Segal, Gill, Ivan Shaliastovich, and Amir Yaron, "Good and bad uncertainty: Macroeco-
    nomic and financial market implications," Journal of Financial Economics, 2015, 117 (2),
    369­397.

Seo, Sang Byung and Jessica A. Wacheter, "Do Rare Events Explain CDX Tranche Spreads?,"
    The Journal of Finance, 0 (ja).

                                                31
    and Jessica A Wachter, "Option prices in a model with stochastic disaster risk," Manage-
    ment Science, 2018.

Trolle, Anders B and Eduardo S Schwartz, "Variance risk premia in energy commodities,"
    The Journal of Derivatives, 2010, 17 (3), 15­32.

Wachter, Jessica A., "Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate stock market
   volatility?," Journal of Finance, 2013, 68(3), 987­1035.




                                            32
                                                     Figure 1: Sample implied volatilities



                                                                                                             S&P 500 IV




33
     Note: Monthly implied volatilities calculated from three-month options using the Black­Scholes model.
                               Figure 2: Fit to uncertainty indexes




Note: The left-hand panels plot the fitted values from the regressions of the EPU and JLN indexes on
three-month implied volatility in the 19 markets. The right-hand panels plot pairwise correlations between
the individual implied volatility series and the fitted
                                                      34values from the regressions.
             Figure 3: RV and IV portfolio Sharpe ratios and factor risk premia




Note: Squares are point estimates and vertical lines represent 95-percent confidence intervals. The solid
series plots the Sharpe ratios for the rv and iv portfolios. The dotted series plots the estimated risk premia
from the factor model. The confidence bands for the rv and iv Sharpe ratios are calculated through a 50-
day block bootstrap, while those for the factor model 35use GMM standard errors with the Hansen­Hodrick
(1980) method used to calculate the long-run variance. The "Fin. mean", "Non-fin. mean", and "Overall
mean" points represent random effects estimates of group-level and overall means. The "JLN" and "EPU"
points are for the portfolios that hedge those indexes.
                    Table 1: Pairwise correlations of implied volatility across markets




                                                                    British Pound




                                                                                                                                                                             Soybean meal




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Feeder cattle
                                                                                                                                                                                             Soybean oil
                                             Swiss Franc




                                                                                                                                            Natural gas
                                                                                                                             Heating oil
                    Treasuries




                                                                                                                                                                  Soybeans
                                                                                                                Crude oil




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lean hog
                                  S&P 500




                                                                                                      Copper




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Wheat
                                                                                             Silver
                                                                                      Gold




                                                                                                                                                           Corn
                                                            Yen
    IV
    S&P 500         0.56
    Swiss Franc     0.53          0.29
    Yen             0.40          0.56        0.48
    British Pound   0.45          0.40        0.75          0.45
    Gold            0.52          0.57        0.21          0.28     0.37
    Silver          0.42          0.34        0.19          0.29     0.34             0.78
    Copper          0.39          0.49        0.14          0.35     0.35             0.74   0.77
    Crude oil       0.42          0.64        0.25          0.39     0.28             0.55   0.32     0.49
    Heating oil     0.41          0.64        0.23          0.36     0.24             0.51   0.28     0.51      0.95
    Natural gas     0.11          0.44       -0.03          0.03     0.03             0.33   0.06     0.44      0.49         0.63
    Corn            0.25          0.37       -0.11          0.14     0.11             0.50   0.56     0.57      0.22         0.18           0.12
    Soybeans        0.22          0.35       -0.05          0.17     0.17             0.47   0.48     0.57      0.30         0.29           0.21           0.85
    Soybean meal    0.28          0.33       -0.08          0.16     0.05             0.54   0.50     0.57      0.31         0.28           0.23           0.81   0.94
    Soybean oil     0.31          0.30        0.10          0.12     0.22             0.47   0.48     0.56      0.26         0.29           0.24           0.73   0.89       0.83
    Wheat           0.38          0.42        0.01          0.19     0.10             0.62   0.62     0.60      0.35         0.31           0.18           0.84   0.76       0.75            0.64
    Lean hog        0.29          0.42       -0.03          0.28    -0.10             0.27   0.16     0.35      0.41         0.47           0.40           0.29   0.37       0.39            0.38          0.36
    Feeder cattle   0.45          0.35        0.11          0.16     0.07             0.40   0.51     0.51      0.32         0.34           0.13           0.48   0.47       0.50            0.48          0.52    0.43
    Live cattle     0.51          0.28        0.24          0.18     0.07             0.38   0.41     0.45      0.32         0.39           0.27           0.32   0.33       0.43            0.49          0.43    0.47 0.84


Note: Pairwise correlations of three-month option-implied volatility across markets. The darkness of the
shading represents the degree of correlation.



                    Table 2: Pairwise correlations of realized volatility across markets
                                                                      British Pound




                                                                                                                                                                              Soybean meal




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Feeder cattle
                                                                                                                                                                                             Soybean oil
                                              Swiss Franc




                                                                                                                                             Natural gas
                                                                                                                              Heating oil
                     Treasuries




                                                                                                                                                                  Soybeans
                                                                                                                 Crude oil




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lean hog
                                   S&P 500




                                                                                                      Copper




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Wheat
                                                                                             Silver
                                                                                      Gold




                                                                                                                                                           Corn
                                                            Yen




    RV
    S&P 500         0.63
    Swiss Franc     0.17          0.12
    Yen             0.31          0.32       0.15
    British Pound   0.43          0.36       0.24            0.31
    Gold            0.44          0.47       0.15            0.24    0.31
    Silver          0.42          0.43       0.15            0.22    0.27             0.65
    Copper          0.52          0.51       0.11            0.24    0.43             0.50 0.53
    Crude oil       0.24          0.24       0.13            0.20    0.20             0.32 0.14       0.24
    Heating oil     0.20          0.22       0.04            0.14    0.15             0.30 0.11       0.15      0.91
    Natural gas     0.03          0.08       0.04           -0.04    0.00             0.05 -0.06      0.00      0.08         0.18
    Corn            0.33          0.35       0.04            0.09    0.27             0.37 0.40       0.50      0.12         0.03           -0.04
    Soybeans        0.33          0.30       0.03            0.16    0.30             0.33 0.35       0.40      0.11         0.05           -0.07          0.74
    Soybean meal    0.33          0.25       0.03            0.19    0.19             0.31 0.32       0.30      0.08         0.02           -0.06          0.68   0.94
    Soybean oil     0.48          0.43       0.11            0.21    0.42             0.40 0.41       0.51      0.17         0.12           -0.04          0.67   0.88       0.72
    Wheat           0.30          0.24       0.02            0.08    0.11             0.31 0.34       0.33      0.11         0.04           -0.08          0.63   0.51       0.47            0.47
    Lean hog        0.12          0.12       0.08            0.20   -0.03             0.00 0.00       0.05      0.10         0.09            0.11          0.07   0.11       0.12            0.11          0.12
    Feeder cattle   0.22          0.20       0.03            0.04    0.07             0.10 0.16       0.30      0.10         0.07            0.12          0.35   0.32       0.32            0.27          0.22    0.26
    Live cattle     0.41          0.24       0.13            0.11    0.11             0.17 0.24       0.28      0.07         0.07            0.09          0.22   0.22       0.27            0.30          0.23    0.28 0.63


Note: Pairwise correlations of monthly realized volatility across markets. The darkness of the shading
represents the degree of correlation.




                                                                                                               36
          Table 3: Correlations between rv and iv portfolio returns in each market

                                                      Std(rv)        Std(iv)   Corr(rv,iv)
                                    S&P 500            0.03           0.08        0.48
                                    T-bonds            0.03           0.08        0.01
                                    CHF                0.04           0.08        0.63
                                    JPY                0.04           0.08        0.61
                                    GBP                0.04           0.07        0.41
                                    Gold               0.04           0.12        0.48
                                    Silver             0.04           0.08        0.45
                                    Copper             0.03           0.10        0.03
                                    Crude Oil          0.04           0.09        0.05
                                    Heating oil        0.04           0.08        0.01
                                    Natural gas        0.04           0.08       -0.17
                                    Corn               0.04           0.08        0.06
                                    Soybeans           0.04           0.09        0.17
                                    Soybean meal       0.04           0.11        0.20
                                    Soybean oil        0.04           0.09        0.21
                                    Wheat              0.04           0.08        0.08
                                    Lean hog           0.05           0.10       -0.24
                                    Feeder cattle      0.05           0.10        0.03
                                    Live cattle        0.04           0.08       -0.12


Note: The table reports, for each underlying, the standard deviation of the two-week returns to the rv
and iv portfolios, and their correlation.




                         Table 4: Portfolios of rv and iv across markets


           Panel A: Sharpe ratios                                               rv+iv
                                  rv                    iv           Equal weight            Risk-parity
           All underlyings     -0.75 ***             0.54 **                1.09 ***               0.96 ***
           Nonfinancials       -0.65 ***             0.68 ***               0.96 ***               0.97 ***
           Financials          -0.37 **             -0.04                   0.42 ***               0.13


           Panel B: Skewness                                                    rv+iv
                                  rv                   iv            Equal weight            Risk-parity
           All underlyings     1.21 ***             1.81 ***                -0.73 ***              1.02 ***
           Nonfinancials       1.63 ***             1.52 ***                -1.31 ***              0.84 ***
           Financials          2.02 ***             2.94 ***                -1.40 ***              2.20 ***


Note: Sharpe ratios and skewness of portfolios combining rv and iv portfolios across markets. For each
panel, the first row reports a portfolio constructed using straddles from all available markets on each date,
the second row using only nonfinancial underlyings, the third row only financial underlyings. Each column
corresponds to a different portfolio. The first column is an equal-weighted RV portfolio, the second is an
equal-weighted IV portfolio, the third is an equal-weighted long-short IV minus RV portfolio, and the last
is the same long/short portfolio but weighted by the inverse of the variance (risk-parity). *** indicates
significance at the 1-percent level, ** the 5-percent level, and * the 10-percent level.



                                                                37
A.1       Data filters and transformations
The observed option prices very often appear to have nontrivial measurement errors. This
section describes the various filters we use and then proceeds to provide more information
about the specifics of the data transformations we apply. Code is available on request.
    First, we note that the price formats for futures and strike prices for many of the com-
modities change over time. That is, they will move between, say, 1/8ths, 1/16ths, and
pennies. We make the prices into a consistent decimal time series for each commodity by
inspecting the prices directly and then coding by hand the change dates.
    We then remove all options with the following properties
  1. Strikes greater than 5 times the futures price
  2. Options with open interest below the 5th percentile across all contracts in the sample
  3. Price less then 5 ticks above zero
  4. Maturity less than 9 days
  5. Maturity greater than 8 months.
  6. Options with prices below their intrinsic value (the value if exercised immediately)
    Note that in our baseline results, we do not remove options for which we have no volume
information, or for which volume is zero. However, we have reproduced our main analysis
(figure 3) including that filter and find, if anything, stronger results. We report them in
Appendix figure A.4.
    We then calculate implied volatilities using the Black­Scholes formula, treating the op-
tions as though they are European. We have also replicated the analysis using American
implied volatilities and find nearly identical results (the reason is that in most cases we
ultimately end up converting the IVs back into prices, meaning that any errors in the pric-
ing formula are largely irrelevant ­ it is just a temporary data transformation, rather than
actually representing a volatility calculation).
    The data are then further filtered based on the IVs:
  1. Eliminate all zero or negative IVs
  2. All options with IV more than 50 percent (in proportional terms) different from the
     average for the same underlying, date, and maturity
  3. We then filter outliers along all three dimensions, strike, date, and maturity, removing
     the following:

      (a) If the IV changes for a contract by 15 percent or more on a given day then
          moves by 15 percent or more in the opposite direction in a single day within the
          next week, and if it moves by less than 3 percent on average over that window,
          for options with maturity greater than 90 days (this eliminates temporary large
          changes in IVs that are reversed that tend to be observed early in the life of the
          options).

                                            A.1
      (b) If the IV doubles or falls by half in either the first or last observation for a contract
       (c) If, looking across maturities at a given strike on a given date, the IV changes by
           20 percent or more and then reverses by that amount at the next maturity (i.e.
           spikes at one maturity). This is restricted to maturities within 90 days of each
           other.
      (d) If the last, second to last, or third to last IV is 40 percent different from the
          previous maturity.
       (e) If, looking across strikes at a given maturity on a given date, the IV changes by
           20 percent and reverses at the next strike (for strikes within 10 percent of each
           other).
       (f) If the change in IV at the first or last strike is greater than 20 percent, or the
           change at the second or second to last option is greater than 30 percent.

    At-the-money (ATM) IVs are constructed by averaging the IVs of the options with the
first strike below and above the futures price. The ATM IV is not calculated for any obser-
vation where we do not have at least one observation (a put or a call) on both sides of the
futures price.
    To calculate ATM straddle returns, we first construct returns for straddles with all ob-
servable strikes. We calculate ATM straddle returns by averaging across the two closest
strikes above and below the current futures price as long as they are less than 0.5 ATM
standard deviations from the futures price. Denote the returns on the four straddles in order
of increasing strike as R1 to R4 , with associated strikes S1 to S4 . The interpolated return is
then
                 1     S3 - F        F - S2       1      S4 - F        F - S1
                    R2         + R3            +      R1         + R1                     (A.1)
                 2     S3 - S2       S3 - S2      2      S4 - S1       S4 - S1
That is, we linearly interpolate pairwise through R2 and R3 and then R1 and R4 and average
across those two interpolations. The reason to use four straddles instead of two is to try to
reduce measurement error. The linear interpolation ensures that the portfolio has an average
strike equal to the forward price F . If there is only one straddle available on either side of
the forward price, we then interpolate using just a single pair of options, the nearest to the
money on either side of the forward price.
    To calculate returns at standardized maturities, we again interpolate. If there are options
available with maturities on both sides of the target maturity and they both have maturities
differing from the target by less than 60 days, then we linearly interpolate. If options are not
available on both sides of the target, then we use a single option if it has a maturity within
35 days of the target. This does mean that the maturity of the option used for a portfolio
at a desired maturity can deviate from the target.


A.2       Implied volatility and regression forecasts
Implied volatilities are, under certain assumptions, expectations of future realized volatility
under the risk-neutral measure. If there is a time-varying volatility risk premium, then

                                               A.2
implied volatilities will be imperfectly correlated with physical expectations of future realized
volatility, which constitutes actual uncertainty. This section compares implied volatilities to
regression-based forecasts of future volatility to evaluate the quantitative magnitude of that
deviation.
   For each market, we estimate the regression

                          RVi,t = ai + bi (L) RVi,t-1 + ci IVi,t-1 + i,t                    (A.2)

where bi (L) is a polynomial in the lag operator, L, and ai and ci are coefficients. RVi,t is
realized volatility in month t for market i ­ the sum of squared daily futures returns during
the month. IVi,t is the (at-the-money) implied volatility at the end of month t in market i.
    The table below reports the correlation between the fitted values from that regres-
sion ­ which represent physical uncertainty ­ and implied volatility. That is, it reports
corr (bi (L) RVi,t-1 + ci IVi,t-1 , IVi,t-1 ). Ideally, we would like that correlation to be 1, so
that implied volatility is perfectly correlated with physical uncertainty, and hedging implied
volatility hedges uncertainty. Note that this does not require that risk premia are constant.
If bi (L) = 0 but ci = 1, risk premia are time-varying, but the physical uncertainty is still
perfectly correlated with implied volatility. It is only deviations of bi (L) from zero that
reduce the correlation. To the extent that the implied volatility summarizes all available
information, we would expect bi = 0.

   Correlations of implied volatility with fitted uncertainty
    S&P 500       0.966       Crude oil       0.998    Silver       0.984
    Treasuries    0.940       Feeder cattle   0.951    Soybeans     0.970
    British Pound 0.987       Gold            0.994    Soybean meal 0.974
    Swiss Franc   0.994       Heating oil     0.992    Soybean oil  0.946
    Yen           0.976       Lean hogs       0.937    Wheat        0.998
    Copper        0.963       Live cattle     0.919
    Corn          0.994       Natural gas     0.949

    The table shows that across the various markets, the correlations are all high, with a
minimum of 91.1 percent and a mean of 97.0 percent. So while implied volatility is not
literally the same as physical uncertainty, it appears to be fairly close. In the baseline
results, we allow for two lags in the polynomial b, but we have experimented with alternative
specifications and obtain similar results.


A.3       Further results on spanning the uncertainty in-
          dexes with options
A.3.1      The economic content of the spanned uncertainty indexes
This section examines the relationship of the spanned and unspanned parts of the uncertainty
indexes with the macroeconomy. Denote the fitted value from the regression of the JLN U


                                               A.3
and EP U indexes on the IVs with a circumflex, and the residuals by ; we then have the
following decomposition for the JLN financial index:

                        JLN UtFinancial = JLN UtFinancial + JLN
                                                            t
                                                                Financial
                                                                                          (A.3)
                                             Fitted value      Residual

and naturally we have similar decompositions for each other index. Panel A of Table A.2
reports the coefficients from regressions of industrial production growth, employment growth,
and the Fed funds rate on their own lags and the fitted and residual uncertainty for the four
indexes. That is, for industrial production and JLN financial uncertainty, we estimate the
regression

        log IPt = a + b1  log IPt-1 + b2 JLN UtFinancial + b3 JLN
                                                              t
                                                                  Financial
                                                                            + µIP,t       (A.4)

where a and the bj are estimated coefficients and µIP,t is a residual. Each column of the
table corresponds to a different uncertainty index for this regression, and each set of two
rows corresponds to a different macroeconomic variable. For example, the top left of the
panel corresponds to a regression of IP growth onto the fitted and residual components of
the financial uncertainty index of JLN.
    The relative values of b1 and b2 give a measure of the relative importance of the spanned
part of uncertainty versus the residual. Furthermore, since the fitted values and residuals
are uncorrelated, the variance of the part of IP growth explained by the uncertainty index is

                                   b2           Financial
                                    2 V ar JLN Ut
                                                                                          (A.5)
                       b2           Financial
                        2 V ar JLN Ut         + b2      JLN Financial
                                                 3 V ar t


This variance decomposition is reported in Panel B of Table A.2.
     Table A.2 shows that the fitted part of uncertainty is consistently associated with lower
growth in employment and IP and lower interest rates across the various specifications.
Moreover, the coefficient on fitted uncertainty (b2 ) is almost always substantially larger than
that on the unexplained residual (b3 ). That has the consequence that when we examine
the variance decompositions, across the various specifications, the part of the uncertainty
indexes that is spanned generates on average 87 percent of the total fitted variance. That
is, the options explain 87 percent of the relationship between the EPU and JLN uncertainty
indexes with these three aggregate outcomes.
     Recall that the R2 s in the regressions for fitting the JLN and EPU uncertainty indexes
in figure 2 are all less than 1. Table A.2 shows that the unexplained residual parts of those
indexes is largely not significantly associated with macro outcomes, while the fitted part is.
So while the option-implied volatilities do not perfectly span the uncertainty indexes, they
do span the economically relevant part ­ what is left does not appear to have a meaningful
link to the aggregate economy and may simply represent measurement error.




                                              A.4
A.3.2      Realized volatility
While implied volatility is measured based on option prices at a point in time, realized
volatility must be measured over some time period. In our main analysis of option returns
below, realized volatility is measured over the two-week period over which the return is
computed. In this section ­ and this section only ­ since the uncertainty indexes are measured
at the monthly frequency, we also construct realized volatility at the monthly frequency. In
general, realized volatility for market m in some period t is defined as
                                                        2
                                        RVm,t =        rm,n                                 (A.6)
                                                  nt

where rm,n is the log futures return in market m in subperiod n. For the case of this section
with monthly time periods, t corresponds to months and we calculate realized volatility
based on daily returns, so that each n represents a day.
    Realized volatility is a squared realization (or sum of squared realizations) of a random
variable, which means that it is itself random and appears to be "noisy" relative to implied
volatility. The key difference between implied and realized volatility is that realized volatility
isolates realizations of extreme events ­ price jumps ­ whereas implied volatility measures
expectations of the probability or size of future extreme events.
    Table 2 reports the correlation matrix for realized volatility across the 19 markets. The
correlations are generally smaller than for implied volatility, and the largest principal com-
ponent now accounts for 34 percent of the total variation, compared to 43 percent for IV,
implying there is less common and more idiosyncratic variation. However, that is still larger
than the 19 percent in the case of futures returns themselves. So the realizations of extreme
returns have a stronger factor structure than the realizations of returns themselves, which
can help explain why realized volatility might be a priced risk factor.
    Figure A.1 replicates figure 2, spanning the JLN indexes, but using realized instead of
implied volatility. The R2 s in this case are smaller than for IV, which is consistent with the
result from the correlation matrices that there is more common variation in IV than RV.
Interestingly, S&P 500 realized volatility appears to fit better to the JLN RV indexes than in
the IV case. It remains the case that for fitting real and price RV, the nonfinancial markets,
including in particular the energies and copper, are especially important.


A.4       Approximating straddle return sensitivities
This section describes the approximation of option returns used to obtain the rv and iv
portfolios. P denotes the price of an at-the-money straddle.  is the Black­Scholes volatility,
n is the time to maturity, F is the forward price, and K is the strike. N denotes the standard
Normal cumulative distribution function.
    The general formula for the price of a straddle is
                                                                                      
                              1              2                1              2
                     F  N    
                             n
                                  log F/K  +  2
                                                n   -  KN     
                                                              n
                                                                   log F/K -  2
                                                                                n
 P (F,  ) = e-rn                                2                               2
                                                                                       (A.7)
                              -                               -
                     -F N n log F/K + 2 n + KN n log F/K - 2 n
                                1                               1



                                               A.5
We calculate the straddles at the strike such that d1 = 0, which is

                                                    2
                                      K = F exp       n                               (A.8)
                                                    2

The price is then

                                       2                  
                     P = e-rn F exp      n     -N - n + N  n                          (A.9)
                                       2

The derivative of the price with respect to the underlying at that point is zero. The second
derivative of the straddle's price is

                                                           N (0)
                                 PF F (Ft , t ) = 2e-rn                              (A.10)
                                                          Ft t n

   The sensitivity to volatility is
                                                            
                                P (Ft , t ) = 2e-rn Ft N (0) n                       (A.11)


   The local approximation for returns that we use is

                                 rt+1     P (Ft+1 , t+1 )
                                      =                                              (A.12)
                                 xt+1   xt+1 P (Ft , t )

and we evaluate the derivatives at the point Ft+1 = Ft , t+1 = t .
   We have
            2 rt+1   PF F
                   =                                                                 (A.13)
           Ft2  +1    P
                               N (0)                          1
                    = 2e-rn                         2                                (A.14)
                              Ft t n e-rn F exp     2
                                                      n    (-N (- n) + N ( n))

We then use the approximation
                                              
                        N  n - N - n  2N (0) t n                                     (A.15)

              2
and use exp   2
                n    1, yielding
                                        2 rt+1    1
                                           2
                                                2 2                                  (A.16)
                                       Ft+1    Ft t n
                              2
Since Ft2     2 2
        +1 /Ft t =  (ft+1 /t ) , where ft is the log futures return, we have

                                          2 rt+1      1
                                                   2                                 (A.17)
                                        (ft+1 /t )    n


                                              A.6
   For the sensitivity to  , we have, following similar steps,

                                        rt+1   P (Ft , t )
                                             =                                          (A.18)
                                        t+1    P (Ft , t )
                                               1
                                                                                        (A.19)
                                               t
                                  rt+1
                                            1                                           (A.20)
                                 (t+1 /t )



A.4.1     Accuracy
To study how effective the above approximation is, we examine a simple simulation. We
assume that options are priced according to the Black­Scholes model. We set the initial
futures price to 1 and the initial volatility to 30 percent per year. We then examine instan-
taneous returns (i.e. through shifts in  and S ) on the IV and rv portfolios defined exactly
as in the main text, allowing the futures return to vary between between +/ - 23.53 percent,
which corresponds to variation out to four two-week standard deviations. We allow volatility
to move between 15 and 60 percent ­ falling by half or doubling.
    The top two panels of figure A.3 plot contours of returns on the rv and iv portfolios
defined in the main text, while the middle panels plot the contours predicted by the approx-
imations for the partial derivatives. For the iv portfolio, except for very large instantaneous
returns ­ 15­20 percent ­ the approximation lies very close to the truth. The bottom-right
panel plots the error ­ the middle panel minus the top panel ­ and except for cases where the
underlying has an extreme movement and the implied volatility falls ­ the exact opposite of
typical behavior ­ the errors are all quantitatively small, especially compared to the overall
return.
    For the rv portfolio, the errors are somewhat larger. This is due to the fact that we
approximate the rv portfolio using a quadratic function, but its payoff has a shape closer to
a hyperbola. Again, for underlying futures returns within two standard deviations (where
the two-week standard deviation here is 5.88 percent), the errors are relatively small quan-
titatively, especially when  does not move far. Towards the corners of the figure, though,
the errors grow somewhat large.
    These results therefore underscore the discussion in the text. The approximations used
to construct the iv and rv portfolios are qualitatively accurate, and except in more extreme
cases also hold reasonably well quantitatively. But they are obviously not fully robust to all
events, so the factor model estimation, which does not rely on any approximations, should
be used in situations where the nonlinearities are a concern.

A.4.2     Empirical return exposures
To check empirically the accuracy of the expressions for the risk exposures of the straddles,
figure A.2 plots estimated factor loadings for straddles at maturities from one to five months

                                             A.7
for each market from time series regressions of the form
                                                                2
                              f      fi,t     f2 1     fi,t           IV    IVi,t
              ri,n,t = ai,n + i,n           + i,n                   + i,n           + i,n,t   (A.21)
                                    IVi,t-1       2   IVi,t-1               IVi,t-1
                                                  f        f    2
                                                                          IV
The prediction of the analysis above is that i,n     = 0, i,n = 1/n, and i,n   = 1.
    Across the panels, the predictions hold surprisingly accurately. The loadings on fi,t are all
near zero, if also generally slightly positive. The loadings on the change in implied volatility
are all close to 1, with little systematic variation across maturities. And the loadings on the
squared futures return tend to begin near 1 (though sometimes biased down somewhat) and
then decline monotonically, consistent with the predicted n-1 scaling.
    Table A.1 reports results of similar regressions for each underlying of the returns on the
rv and iv portfolios on the underlying futures return, the squared futures return, and the
change in implied volatility. The table shows that while the Black­Scholes predictions do not
hold perfectly, it is true that the rv portfolio is much more strongly exposed to realized than
implied volatility, and the opposite holds for the iv portfolio. The coefficients on (ft /t-1 )2
average 0.78 for the rv portfolio and 0.12 for the iv portfolio (though that average masks
some variation across markets). Conversely, the coefficients on t /t-1 average 0.03 for
the rv portfolio and 0.81 for the iv portfolio Furthermore, the R2 s are large, averaging 70
percent across the various portfolios, implying that their returns are well described by the
approximation (1).

A.4.3      Volume
Figure A.11 reports the average daily volume of all of the option contracts across maturities
1 to 6 months. For crude oil, which we use here as a reference contract, the figure reports
average daily volume in dollars; for all other contracts, it reports the average daily volume
relative to crude oil. Empirically, crude oil options have volume numbers of the same order
of magnitude as the S&P 500, while there is more heterogeneity across the other markets.
Looking across maturities, the general pattern is that dollar volume declines by about a
factor of three in almost all the markets between the 1- and 6-month maturities ­ so the
6-month maturity has less volume, but far from zero.

A.4.4       Alternative scaling for returns
Because returns have a price in the denominator, if that price is measured with error, returns
can be biased upwards. The iv portfolio is net long the straddles, while the rv portfolio has
a total weight of zero, so measurement error in prices would bias iv returns up but not rv
returns. To account for that possibility, this section examines results when all the straddle
returns are scaled by the price of the one-month straddle, instead of the price of a straddle
with the same maturity.
   Specifically, denoting Pn,t the price of a straddle of maturity n on date t, the return on




                                                  A.8
an n-month straddle used in the main results is
                                                Pn-1,t+1 - Pn,t
                                       Rn,t =                                                 (A.22)
                                                      Pn,t
                                                            Pn,t
We consider returns on a portfolio that puts weight         P1,t
                                                                   on the n-month straddle and weight
     Pn,t
1-   P1,t
            on the risk-free asset (which is a tradable portfolio), which is

                          rescaled  Pn-1,t+1 - Pn,t Pn,t        Pn,t
                         rn,t+1    =                     + 1-         rf,t                    (A.23)
                                          Pn,t      P1,t        P1,t
                                    Pn-1,t+1 - Pn,t        Pn,t
                                  =                 + 1-         rf,t                         (A.24)
                                          P1,t             P1,t

This portfolio is useful for two reasons. First, the one-month maturity has the highest volume
in most markets we study, and it is typically considered to be the most accurate. Second, this
eliminates differences in bias across maturities since in this specification, the denominator is
the same for all n.
         rescaled
    For rn,t +1 , similar calculations to those above yield the results that


                                          2 rn,t
                                             rescaled
                                                 +1          1
                                                        2                                     (A.25)
                                        (ft+1 /t )            n
                                          rescaled
                                        rn,t +1     
                                                     n                                        (A.26)
                                        (t+1 /t )

We then calculate alternative rv and iv portfolios as

                          rescaled  3             rescaled               rescaled
                        ivt        =         5/12r5 ,t     -        1/12r1 ,t                 (A.27)
                                    12

                           rescaled   5/48  rescaled                    rescaled
                         rvt        =      12r1,t    -             12/5r5 ,t                  (A.28)
                                        12

    Figure A.12 replicates figure 3 with the rescaled returns. The results are nearly identical
to the baseline for both the Sharpe ratios on the iv and rv portfolios and the estimated
factor risk premia. These results show that when we correct for the potential bias induced
by low liquidity and measurement error at longer maturities, the estimates are essentially
unchanged.


A.5           Random effects models
Denote the vector of true Sharpe ratios for the straddles in market i as sri . Our goal is
to estimate the distribution of sri across the various underlyings. A natural benchmark




                                                  A.9
distribution for the means is the normal distribution,

                                            sri  N (µsr , sr )                                       (A.29)

This section estimates the parameters µsr and sr . µsr represents the high-level mean of
Sharpe ratios across all the markets, and sr describes how the market-specific means vary.
The estimates of the market-specific Sharpe ratios differ noticeably across markets, but much
of that is variation is likely driven by sampling error. sr is an estimate of how much the
true Sharpe ratios vary, as opposed to the sample estimates.
    Denote the sample estimate of the Sharpe ratio in each market as sri , and the stacked
vector of sample Sharpe ratios as sr  sr1 , sr2 , ... . Similarly, denote the vector of true
Sharpe ratios as sr  [sr1 , sr2 , ...] . Under the central limit theorem,

                                            sr  N (sr, sr )                                          (A.30)

where  denotes convergence in distribution and the covariance matrix sr depends on the
covariance between all the returns, across both maturities and underlyings, along with the
lengths of the various samples.1 Appendix A.6 describes how we construct sr .
    The combination of (A.29) and (A.30) represents a fully specified distribution for the
data as a function of µsr and sr . It is then straightforward to construct point estimates
and confidence intervals for µsr and sr with standard methods.
    To allow for the possibility that average returns differ between the financial and nonfi-
nancial underlyings, the mean in the likelihood can be replaced by µsr + µD IF , where µD
is the difference in Sharpe ratios and IF is a 0/1 indicator for whether the associated un-
derlying is financial. We calculate the sampling distribution for the estimated parameters
through Bayesian methods, treating the parameters as though they are drawn from a uni-
form prior. The point estimates are therefore identical to MLE, and the confidence bands
represent samples from the likelihood.2


A.6         Calculating the covariance of the sample mean
           returns
There are two features of our data that make calculating covariance matrix of sample means
difficult: we have an unbalanced panel and the covariance matrix is either singular or nearly
so. We deal with those issues through the following steps.
     1. For each market, we estimate the two largest principal components, therefore modeling
   1
      More formally, we would say that sr properly scaled by the square root of the sample size converges to
a normal distribution. The expression (A.30) implicitly puts the sample size in sr . The derivation of this
result is a straightforward application of the continuous mapping theorem, nearly identical to the proof that
a sample t-statistic is asymptotically Normally distributed.
    2
      We use Bayesian methods to calculate the sampling intervals because likelihood-based methods require
inverting large second derivative matrices, which can be numerically unstable. The estimation in this section
is performed using the Bayesian computation engine Stan, which provides functions that both maximize the
likelihood and rapidly sample from the posterior distribution. Code is available on request.



                                                   A.10
straddle returns for underlying i and maturity n on date t as

                            ri,n,t = 1,i,n f1,i,t + 2,i,n f2,i,t + i,n,t              (A.31)

where the  are factor loadings, the f are estimated factors, and  is a residual that we take
to be uncorrelated across maturities and markets (it is also in general extremely small).
    2. We calculate the long-run covariance matrix of all J × 2 estimated factors. The
covariance matrix is calculated using the Hansen­Hodrick method to account for the fact that
the returns are overlapping (we use daily observations of 2-week returns). The elements of
the covariance matrix are estimated based on the available nonmissing data for the associated
pair of factors. That means that the covariance matrix need not be positive semidefinite.
To account for that fact, we set all negative eigenvalues of the estimated covariance matrix
to zero.
    Given the estimated long-run covariance matrix of the factors, denoted f , and given the
(diagonal) long-run variance matrix of the residuals , denoted  , the long-run covariance
matrix of the returns is then
                                       r  f  +                                         (A.32)
where  is a matrix containing the factor loadings .
   3. Finally, it is straightforward to show that the covariance matrix of the sample mean
returns is
                                         r^ = M    r                                 (A.33)
where denotes the elementwise product and M is a matrix where the element for a given
return pair is equal to the ratio of the number of observations in which both returns are
available to the product of the number of observations in which each return is available
individually (if all returns had the same number of observations T , then we would obtain
the usual T -1 scaling). We then have the asymptotic approximation that

                                         ^  N (¯
                                         r     r, r
                                                  ^)                                  (A.34)

where r^ is a vector that stacks the r
                                     ^i and r
                                            ¯ stacks the r¯i and  denotes convergence in
distribution.
    To construct sr , we simply divide the i, j element of r ^ by the product of the sample
standard deviations of ri and rj .


A.7       Calculating risk prices with unbalanced panels
         and correlations across markets
In estimating the factor models, we have two complications to deal with: the sample length
for each underlying is different, and returns are correlated across underlyings. This section
discusses how we deal with those issues.
    We have the model
                                     ETi [Ri ] = i i + i                               (A.35)


                                               A.11
where ETi denotes the sample mean in the set of dates for which we have data for underlying
i, Ri is the vector of returns of the straddles, i is a vector of risk prices, i is a vector of risk
prices, and i is a vector of pricing errors. Note that these objects are all population values,
rather than estimates. In order to calculate the sampling distribution for the estimated
counterparts, we need to know the covariance of the pricing errors. Note that there is also
a population cross-sectional regression with

                               ETi [Ri ] = ai + i ETi [fi ] + ETi [i ]                      (A.36)

where i is a vector of residuals and fi is a vector of pricing factors. That formula can be
used to substitute out returns and obtain

                               i = ai + i ETi [fi ] + ETi [i ] - i i                        (A.37)

Since ai , i , and i are fixed in the true model, the distribution of i depends only on the
distributions of the sample means ETi [fi ] and ETi [i ]. Denoting the long-run (i.e. Hansen­
Hodrick) covariance matrix of fi as fi and that of i as i , we have

                                 var (i ) = i Ti-1 f i + Ti-1 i                             (A.38)

Since the i are estimated from a regression, if we denote their estimates as ^ i , we obtain
                                      ^
the usual formula for the variance of i - i

                           ^ i - i                 -1                      -1
                       var              = (i i )        i var (i ) i (i i )                 (A.39)
                                                           -1                  -1
                                        = f + (i i )            i i i (i i )                (A.40)

Beyond the variance of   ^ i , we also need to know the covariance of any pair of estimates, ^i
and ^ j . Using standard OLS formulas, we have


                     ^ i - i
                                         (i i )-1 i i
                     ^ j - j      =            -1                                           (A.41)
                                          j j     j j
                                         (i i )-1 i (i ETi [ft ] + ETi [j,t ])
                                  =            -1                                           (A.42)
                                         j j      j 2 ETj [ft ] + ETj [j,t ]

The covariance between ^ i and ^ j is then

                           T12                -1              -1
                                f,i,j + (1 1 ) 1 ,i,j 2 (2 2 )                              (A.43)
                          T1 T2
where f,i,j and ,i,j are now long-run covariance matrices (again from the Hansen­Hodrick
method). Using these formulas, we then have estimates of risk prices in each market indi-
vidually along with a full covariance matrix of all the estimates.



                                               A.12
A.8        SDF-based analysis
The marginal effects of realized and implied volatility can be estimated using the stochastic
discount factor representation of the factor model estimated in the previous section. Specif-
ically, given the set of straddle returns in each market, one can construct a pricing kernel
Mt of the form
                                                                    2
                          ¯ - mf fi,t - mf 2
                     Mt = M
                                                           fi,t
                                                                        - m  IV   IVi,t
                                                                                                    (A.44)
                               i         i                                 i
                                 IVi,t-1                  IVi,t-1                 IVi,t-1

where Mt represents state prices (or marginal utility) and 1 = Et-1 Mt Rt for any return priced
by M . The difference between this specification and that in the previous section is that the
coefficients m... represent the marginal impact of each term on marginal utility, whereas the
 ... coefficients represent the premium for total exposure to the factors. Cochrane (2001)
discusses the distinction extensively.
     Denoting the covariance matrix of the factors in market i by i , the m coefficients can
be recovered as
                                    f2                       2
                             mf          IV
                               i , mi , mi   = - i
                                                   1
                                                      if , if , iIV                     (A.45)
The m's now represent Sharpe ratios on portfolios with exposure to each of the individual
factors, orthogonalized to the other two. That is, mi
                                                      IV
                                                         is the Sharpe ratio for a portfolio
                                                                                      2
                           IV i,t                          i,tf         i,t   f
exposed to the part of IVi,t-   1
                                  that is orthogonal to IVi,t -1
                                                                 and IVi,t -1
                                                                              .
    Figure A.9 reports the results of this exercise. The findings are qualitatively consistent
with the main results in figure 3 and in fact even stronger quantitatively. The marginal
effect of an increase in uncertainty on marginal utility, holding realized volatility fixed, is
consistently negative, while an increase in realized volatility increases marginal utility. The
fact that these results are close to the benchmark case is a consequence of the weak correlation
between innovations in realized and implied volatility, so that the rotation by -  i
                                                                                     1
                                                                                       has small
effects.
    Figure A.9 also reports premia on orthogonalized versions of the rv and iv portfolios.3
Again, the results are similar to the main analysis.


A.9         Robustness: ETF options
This section provides an alternative check on the results for crude oil options by examining
returns on straddles for options on two exchange traded funds. The first is the United States
Oil Fund (USO), which invests in short-term oil futures. USO has existed since 2006, and
Optionmetrics reports quotes for options beginning in May, 2007. The second fund is the
Energy Select Sector SPDR fund (XLE), which tracks the energy sector of the S&P 500.
XLE has existed since 1998 and Optionmetrics reports data since December, 1998.
   3
    These are constructed simply through a rotation. The rv portfolio has a positive correlation with rv
and zero correlation with iv , whie the iv portfolio has zero correlation with rv and a positive correlation
with iv .



                                                   A.13
    We eliminate observations using the following filters:
    1. Volume less than 10 contracts
    2. Time to maturity less than 15 days
    3. Bid-ask spread greater than 20 percent of bid/ask midpoint
    4. Initial log moneyness ­ log strike divided by the futures price ­ greater than 0.75
implied volatility units in absolute value (where implied volatility is scaled by he square root
of time to maturity).
    We then calculate straddle returns as in the main text over two-week periods and average
across the two straddles nearest to the money for each maturity, weighting them by the
inverse of their absolute moneyness.
    The top section of table A.9.1 reports the number of (potentially overlapping) two-week
straddle return observations across maturities for USO, XLE, and the CME Group futures
options used in the main analysis. Since the CME data goes back to 1983, there are far more
observations for that series than the other two. More interestingly, though, the number
of observations only declines by about 10 percent between the 1- and 6-month maturities,
while it falls by more than 2/3 for the XLE and USO samples. The CME data therefore has
superior coverage at longer horizons, which justifies its use in our main analysis.
    The bottom section of table A.9.1 reports the correlations of the USO and XLE straddle
returns with those for the CME on the days where they overlap. The correlations are
approximately 90 percent at all maturities for USO and 50 percent for XLE. The 90-percent
correlations for USO and the CME sample provide a general confirmation of the accuracy of
the CME straddle returns, since we would expect the USO and CME options to be highly
similar as USO literally holds futures. The lower correlation for XLE is not surprising given
that it holds energy sector stocks rather than crude oil futures.
   Table A.9.1.
             Maturity:       1      2      3    4    5           6
    # obs.   USO             1640   1616   1721 1679 1118        525
             XLE             2612   2545   2454 1928 1134        369
             CME             6762   6645   6817 6801 6606        5998
    Corr. w/ USO             0.93   0.96   0.95 0.92 0.89        0.83
    CME      XLE             0.43   0.48   0.50 0.49 0.50        0.53
    In the main text, the RV and IV portfolio returns are calculated using 5- and 1-month
straddles. Since the number of observations drops off substantially between 4 and 5 months
for both XLE and USO, though, here we examine returns on RV and IV portfolios using
both 5- and 4-month straddles for the long-maturity side.
    Figure A.13 plots estimated annualized Sharpe ratios along with 95-percent confidence
bands for the RV and IV portfolios using 4- and 5-month straddles for the three sets of
options. In all four cases, the three confidence intervals always overlap substantially. The
fact that the sample for the CME options is far larger is evident in its confidence bands
being much narrower than those for the other two sources. For the IV portfolios, USO has
returns that are close to zero, but its confidence bands range from -1 to greater than 0.5,
indicating that it is not particularly informative about the Sharpe ratio.
    Table A.9.2 reports confidence bands for the difference between the IV and RV average
returns constructed with the CME data and the same portfolios constructed using USO

                                             A.14
and XLE. The top panel shows that the differences for the IV portfolios are negative for
USO and positive for XLE, but only the difference for USO constructed with the 4-month
straddle is statistically significant. The bottom panel similarly shows mixed results for the
point estimates for the differences for the RV portfolios, with none of the differences being
statistically significant.
   Table A.9.2. Differences between CME and USO, XLE mean returns
                USO - CME, 4mo.     USO - CME, 5mo.    XLE - CME, 4mo.    XLE - CME, 5mo.
    IV return   -2.2                -2.2               -0.8               -1.4
                [-3.9,-0.2]         [-4.8,0.4]         [-2.5,4.1]         [-4.1,6.3]
    RV return   0.43                0.47               -0.27              0.67
                [-0.6,1.4]          [-0.6,1.4]         [-1.8,1.3]         [-1.5,2.6]
  Notes: the table reports percentage (two-week) returns on USO and XLE minus returns on
CME RV and IV portfolios. 95-percent confidence intervals are reported in brackets.
     The fact that the USO and CME straddle returns are highly correlated does not neces-
sarily mean that the CME data is accurate for the mean return on the straddles. To check
whether the difference in the means observed in the USO and XLE data would affect out
main results, we ask how the Sharpe ratios of the RV and IV portfolios in the CME data
would change if we shifted their means by the average differences reported in table A.9.2.
The bars labeled "CME, USO adj." and CME, XLE adj." show how the confidence bands
would change if we shifted them by exactly the point estimates from table A.9.2. Note that
this is not the same as shifting the Sharpe ratio for the CME data to match that for the
XLE or USO data. The reason is that the difference in table A.9.2 is calculated only for the
returns on matching dates, whereas the Sharpe ratio calculated in figure A.13 is calculated
using the full sample for the CME data. So the two adjusted bands take the full-sample
band and then shift it by the mean difference calculated on the dates that overlap between
the CME data and XLE or USO.
     Figure A.13 shows that the economic conclusions drawn for the crude oil straddles are not
changed if the mean returns are shifted by the differences observed in table A.9.1. The RV
portfolio returns remain statistically significantly negative in all four cases, the changes in
the point estimates are well inside the original confidence intervals. The top panel shows that
the IV returns using 5-month straddles are similarly unaffected. For the 4-month straddles,
the only difference is that with the USO options, the estimated Sharpe ratio falls by about
half and is no longer statistically significantly greater than zero. So, again, out of eight cases
­ IV and RV with 4- and 5-month straddles ­ in only one is there a nontrivial change in the
conclusions, and even there the Sharpe ratio on the IV portfolio does not become negative,
it is simply less positive.
     Overall, the period in which the USO and XLE options are traded is too short to use
them for our main analysis. This section shows that the USO straddle returns are highly
correlated with the CME returns. The mean returns on the XLE and CME straddles are
highly similar, while they differ somewhat more for CME and USO. However, shifting the
means used for the CME options in the main analysis by the observed difference between
the CME and USO options does not substantially change any of the conclusions.



                                              A.15
A.10       Model
A.10.1      Dynamics
Consumption growth follows

                                         2        2
                      ct = xt-1 +        B,t -1 + G,t-1 t + Jbt                        (A.46)
                      xt = x xt-1 + x x,t + x,G ,G,t - x,B ,B,t                        (A.47)
                      2
                      j,t = (1 -  ) ¯2      2
                                     j +  j,t-1 + j ,j,t                               (A.48)

for j  {G, B }. The shocks , x , G , B are independent and Gaussian with unit variances.
The  coefficients are all assumed to be positive. bt is a Poisson random variable with
intensity .
    The dynamics can also be written as
                                                                            
                                                                        x,t
              xt            x 0           xt-1        x x,G 0 
            2      2  =                 2        2 +                    G,t  (A.49)
            t -  ¯           0          t-1 -  ¯       0 G  B
                                                                        B,t
                               2
                  ct = xt-1 + t -1 t + Jbt                                             (A.50)
                  Yt = F Yt-1 + Gt                                                     (A.51)
                 2
where Yt = [xt , t -  ¯ 2 ] , etc. The fact that the model can be rewritten with only a single
variance process follows from the linearity of the two processes, the fact that they have the
same rate of mean reversion, and the fact that they appear additively. We can then write
consumption and dividend growth as

                   ct = cY Yt-1 +        ¯ 2 + gY Yt-1 t + Jbt
                                                                                       (A.52)
                   dt =  cY Yt-1 +          ¯ 2 + gY Yt-1 t + Jbt + d d,t
                                                                                       (A.53)

for vectors cY and gY . dt is log dividend growth, which we will use for modeling equities.
It satisfies dt =  ct + d d,t (d,t  N (0, 1)), where  determines the leverage of equities.

A.10.2      Preferences
We assume agents have Epstein­Zin preferences with a unit IES,
                                           
                      vt = (1 -  ) ct +      log Et exp ((1 - ) vt+1 )                 (A.54)
                                          1-
                              
                    vct =       log Et exp ((1 - ) (vct+1 + ct+1 ))                    (A.55)
                             1-
where vct is the log utility/consumption ratio, vct = vt - ct . We look for a solution to the
model of the form
                                      vct = v
                                            ¯ + vY Yt                                  (A.56)


                                            A.16
Inserting into the recursion for vc,
        
vct =       log Et exp (1 - ) v    ¯ + vY Yt+1 + cY Yt + gY Yt t+1 + Jbt+1                  (A.57)
       1-
        
     =      log Et exp (1 - ) v    ¯ + vY (F Yt + Gt+1 ) + cY Yt +    ¯ 2 + gY Yt t+1 + Jbt+1
                                                                                            (A.58)
       1-
                                  1-                                  
     =  (¯
         v + (vY F + cY ) Yt ) +         vY GG vY +    ¯ 2 + gY Yt +        (exp ((1 - ) J(A.59)
                                                                                             ) - 1)
                                    2                                1-
Matching coefficients,
                                                       1-
                             vY   =  (vY F + cY ) +       g                             (A.60)
                                                        2 Y
                                              1-
                             vY   =  cY +        g      (I - F )-1                      (A.61)
                                               2 Y

                      1-                  1
         v
         ¯=              vY GG vY + ¯2 +     (exp ((1 - ) J ) - 1)                      (A.62)
              1-       2                 1-
The pricing kernel is then

                       exp ((1 - ) (vct+1 ))
     Mt+1 =                                      exp (-ct+1 )                    (A.63)
                 Et exp ((1 - ) (vct+1 + ct+1 ))
     mt+1     = - log  + (1 - ) vct+1 - ct+1 - log Et exp ((1 - ) (vct+1 + ct+1 ))
                                                                                 (A.64)

Or, equivalently,

                 mt+1 = m0 + mY Yt + m t+1 -           ¯ 2 + gY Yt t+1 - Jbt+1
                                                                                        (A.65)


                             (1 - )2
            m0 = - log  -             vY GG vY + ¯ 2 -  (exp ((1 - ) J ) - 1)           (A.66)
                                 2
                         (1 - )2
            mY   = -cY -           gY                                                   (A.67)
                              2
            m    = (1 - ) vY G                                                          (A.68)

A.10.3      Pricing equities
We have the usual Campbell­Shiller approximation for the return on equities, rt+1 , with

                                  rt+1 = 0 + 1 zt+1 - zt + dt+1                         (A.69)




                                              A.17
where zt is the log price/dividend ratio of equities. We look for a solution of the form
zt = z0 + zY Yt , which leads to the pricing equation
                                                                                
                          m0 + mY Yt + m t+1 -          ¯ 2 + gY Yt t+1 - Jbt+1
       0 = log Et exp  +0 + (1 - 1) z0 + 1 zY (F Yt + Gt+1 ) - zY Yt              (A.70)
                            + cY Yt +      ¯ 2 + gY Yt t+1 + Jbt+1 + d d,t+1

The solution satisfies
                                 m0 + 0 +  (exp (( - ) J ) - 1)
     z0 = (1 - 1 )-1                                                                     (A.71)
                           1
                          +2 (m + 1 zY G) (m + 1 zY G) + ( - )2 ¯ 2 + d
                                                                      2


                                              1
                         zY =   mY + cY +       ( - )2 gY        (I - 1 F )-1            (A.72)
                                              2

A.10.3.1     Average excess returns
To get average returns, on equities, first note that
                                                                                            
                                              0 + (1 - 1) z0 + 1 zY (F Yt + Gt+1 ) - zY Yt
log Et [exp (rt+1 - rf,t )] = log Et exp  + cY Yt +      ¯ 2 + gY Yt t+1 + Jbt+1 + d d,t+1(A.73)
                                                                                            
                                                             -rf,0 - rf,1 Yt
                           = 0 + (1 - 1) z0 - rf,0 + 1 zY F - zY         + cY - rf,1 Yt     (A.74)
                              1                                          1 2
                             + 2  z GG zY +  2     ¯ 2 + gY Yt +           +  (exp (J ) - 1)(A.75)
                              2 1 Y                                      2 d
The risk-free rate is of the form rf,t = rf,0 + rf,1 Yt , with

                                  (1 - 2) 2
                rf,0 = log  +            ¯ +  (exp ((1 - ) J ) - exp (-J ))
                                                                                         (A.76)
                                      2
                           1
                rf,1 = cY - 2 gY                                                         (A.77)
                           2
which allows for the calculation of the average excess return on equities. The conditional
standard deviation of equity returns is

                                    2            2 ¯2 +  2J 2
                                    1 zY GG zY +                                         (A.78)

A.10.4       Pricing realized volatility
Since our empirical work estimates premia for realized and implied volatility for macro
variables, we examine here the pricing of realized and implied volatility for ct+1 . The
cumulative innovation in consumption between dates t and t + 1 is
                                             2
                            ct+1 - Et ct+1 = t t+1 + J (bt+1 - )



                                                A.18
The first part is typically thought of as a diffusive component. That is, we can think of
t+1 = Bt+1 - Bt , for a standard (continuous-time) Brownian motion Bt . Similarly, bt+1 is
the innovation in a pure jump process, bt+1 = Nt+1 - Nt , where Nt is a (continuous-time)
Poisson counting process. Now consider measuring the total quadratic variation in those two
processes (i.e. as though we were measuring realized volatility from daily futures returns, as
in our empirical analysis). The quadratic variation in B between dates t and t + 1 is exactly
1, while the quadratic variation in N is exactly Nt+1 - Nt = bt+1 . We then say that the
realized volatility in consumption growth between period t and t + 1 is
                                                2
                                        RVt+1 = t + J 2 bt+1                           (A.79)

In this case, the diffusive part of the realized volatility is entirely predetermined. This is
a typical result. It is only the jumps that contribute an unexpected component to realized
volatility. The pricing of realized volatility will therefore depend on the pricing of jumps.
    The price of a forward claim on RVt+1 is

                 exp (mt+1 )
PRV,t = Et                     RVt+1
                Et exp (mt+1 )
                                    (1 - ) vY Gt+1 -     ¯ 2 + gY Yt t+1 + Jbt+1
                                                                                           2
       = Et exp              1           2           2 2                                   t + J 2 bt+1
                         -   2
                                 (1 - ) vY GG vY +  (¯  + gY Yt ) +  (exp (-J ) - 1)
           2      2
       =   t   + J  exp (-J )

The average excess return on that forward is then
                                              2
                      Et [RVt+1 - PRV,t ] = t   + J 2  - t2
                                                            - J 2  exp (-J )           (A.80)
                                          = J 2  (1 - exp (-J ))                       (A.81)

The sign of this object is equal to the sign of J . Note also that this is the sign of the
conditional skewness of consumption growth.

A.10.5      Pricing uncertainty
We define uncertainty on date t as expected realized volatility on date t + 1. That is, it is
the conditional variance for ct+1 . So we say
                                               2
                                          IVt  t + J 2                                 (A.82)




                                               A.19
We now consider the price and excess return for a forward claim to IVt+1 .

                        exp (mt+1 )
        PIV,t = Et                    IVt+1
                       Et exp (mt+1 )
                                                  (1 - ) vY Gt+1
               = J 2 + ¯ 2 +  ^2
                               t + Et exp                                       gY t+1
                                                   (1 - )2 vY GG vY
                                                      1
                                                     -2
                                   Et [exp ((1 - ) vY Gt+1 ) gY Gt+1 ]
               = J 2 + ¯ 2 +  ^2
                               t +
                                       exp 12
                                               (1 - )2 vY GG vY
                                                      G (vY,x x,G + vY, G )
               = J 2 + ¯ 2 +  ^2
                               t + (1 - )
                                                     +B (vY, B - vY,x x,B )

where the last line follows from straightforward but tedious algebra. The average return on
the claim on uncertainty is then

                                                                               G (vY,x x,G + vY, G )
E [IVt+1 ] - PIV,t = J 2  + ¯ 2 +  ^2    2
                                    t - J +¯ 2 +  ^2
                                                   t + (1 - )                                      (A.83)
                                                                              +B (vY, B - vY,x x,B )
                                    G (vY,x x,G + vY, G )
                  = - (1 - )                                                                       (A.84)
                                   +B (vY, B - vY,x x,B )

In the standard case from Bansal and Yaron (2004), we would have x,G = x,B = 0, so this
would be
                                                         2   2
                         E [IVt+1 ] - PIV,t = ( - 1) vY, G + B                  (A.85)
Since vY, < 0, the premium for IV will be negative in that case. Now when x,G can be
positive, we have
                                                                2   2
        E [IVt+1 ] - PIV,t = ( - 1) vY,x (x,G G - x,B B ) + vY, G + B                    (A.86)

Since vY,x > 0, if x,G is sufficiently large relatively to x,B , the premium can be positive.
    The Sharpe ratio on this object depends on the standard deviation of IVt+1 - PIV,t , which
              2     2
is exactly G     + B  .

A.10.6      Calibration
The calibration is relatively close to Bansal and Yaron's (BY; 2004) choices, with a few
changes. For the preferences, we set  = 0.998 and  = 15.  is as in BY, while  is
set somewhat higher to help match the equity premium. We study post-war data here, in
which the volatility of consumption growth is lower, thus necessitating higher risk aversion
to match the equity premium. Leverage,  , is set to 3.5, on the upper end of the range of
values studied by BY.
    The jump intensity is 1/18, implying jumps occur on average once every 18 months, while
the jump size J = -0.015.
    The persistence of x and  2 are 0.979 and 0.987, as in BY.
    ¯ = 0.0039, which is half the value used in BY in order to match the lower consumption


                                              A.20
volatility noted above. The standard deviation of innovations to x is set to 0.06× , which is
somewhat higher than the value of 0.044 in BY. Of that, x = x,G = 0.0129 and x,B = 0.
Similarly, G = B = 1.62 × 10-6 , so that the standard deviation of innovations to  2 is
0.23×10-5 , as in BY. Finally, d = 0.01.

A.10.7      Results
The table below lists key moments from the model along with analogs from the data. The
model moments are based on a monthly simulation of the model that is aggregated to the
quarterly frequency to match quarterly data observed empirically (see also BY).
    The first three rows on the left show that the model is able to generate realistic values
for mean, standard deviation, and Sharpe ratio for equity returns. The top row on the
right shows that the volatility of consumption growth is somewhat higher than in the data.
However, this value is still smaller than that used by Bansal and Yaron (2004) by 40 percent.
Our calibration of 0.87 percent is the midpoint between Bansal and Yaron's (2004) original
value and the value in the post-war data. Using a smaller volatility would require either
increasing some other form of risk (e.g. long-run risk or stochastic volatility) or risk aversion
in order to generate a realistic equity premium.
    Next, the table shows that the Sharpe ratios for claims on RV and IV are approximately
-0.21 and 0.19, respectively, which agree well with the empirical values (which are calculated
as the overall means across all 19 markets we study; see figure 3). These are the key moments
that the model was designed to match. They show that it is able to generate quantitatively
realistic premia for uncertainty and realized volatility shocks.
    As discussed in the main text, the economic mechanism behind the negative premium on
RV is negative conditional skewness in consumption growth, while the mechanism behind
the positive premium for IV ­ the good volatility shocks that raise future consumption
growth ­ pushes in the direction of positive skewness. That implies that the skewness of
the conditional expectation of consumption growth should be less negative than conditional
skewness. To test that idea, we examine skewness in the model and data. The information
set used for conditioning here is lagged consumption growth. That is, we look at results
involving regressions of consumption growth on three of its own lags in both the model and
the data.
    The table shows that the data and model both share the feature that the conditional
expectation of consumption growth is much less negatively skewed than the surprise in
consumption growth, consistent with the main mechanism in the model. This is not a
moment that the model was explicitly designed to match. The model was meant to match
the premia on RV and IV, so this represents an additional test of the proposed mechanism.
    To be clear, the main contribution of the paper is not meant to be this model, but
nevertheless this section shows that the empirical results can be rationalized in a standard
structural asset pricing model.




                                              A.21
Summary statistics from the model and empirical data, 1947­2018
                    Model Data                  Model Data
 E [rm - rf ]       0.077 0.056 std (c)         0.0087 0.0052
 std (rm - rf )     0.14  0.11  skewt (ct+1 )   -0.32  -0.15
  E [rm -rf ]
 std(rm -rf )
                    0.53  0.52  skew (Et ct+1 ) -0.10  -0.07
  E [RVt+1 -PRV,t ]
 std[RVt+1 -PRV,t ]
                    -0.21 -0.32
  E [RVt+1 -PRV,t ]
 std[RVt+1 -PRV,t ]
                    0.19  0.26




                                A.22
                           Figure A.1: Fit to realized volatility indexes




Note: See figure 2. This figure uses the JLN realized volatility series instead of uncertainty.
                                                   A.23
                                   Figure A.2: Factor loadings




Note: Loadings of two-week straddle returns on the three risk factors. The factors are all scaled by
current IV , as in equation 13. The loadings are scaled so that if the Black-Scholes approximation was
exact, the loading on IV would be 1 at all maturities, the loading on fi,t would be 0 at all maturities,
                     2
and the loading on fi,t would be 1/n where n is the maturity in months.




                                                 A.24
                                 Figure A.3: rv and iv portfolio approximation errors




                                        RV portfolio return                                                                                   IV portfolio return
            0.6                                                                                                      0.6     0.6
                                                                                                                                                       0.6                                   0.8
                                                                                               1
                                                                   0.2

                                                                           0.4




                                                                                                    1. 1.6 1.4
                                                                                             1.2
                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                       0.8




                                                                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                                             0.4                       0.4
            0.4                                                                                                      0.4                                                          0.4
        <




                                                                                                                 <
                                                                                                                                0.2                    0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.2
                                                                                                      8



                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                            0.2




                                                                                                           2
                   1.2




                                      0.4
                            0.8
                            0.6
                   1.4




            0.2                                                                                                      0.2                                             -0.2
                              1




                                                     0




                                                                                                                                       -0.2




                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                              -0.4
                  0.8            0.9                 1               1.1                     1.2                           0.8         0.9          1                 1.1         1.2
                                              Futures price                                                                                     Futures price
                                            RV approximation                                                                                  IV approximation
            0.6                                                                                                      0.6     0.8                       0.8                        0.8
                                                                                 1




                                                                                               2




                                                                                                                             0.6                       0.6                        0.6
                                                             0.2

                                                                     0.4
                                                                           0.6
                                                                           0.8

                                                                                       1.2
                                                                                       1.4
                                                                                       1.6
                                                                                       1.8
                                                                                                   2.2
                                                                                                   2.4




                                                                                                                             0.4                       0.4                        0.4
            0.4                                                                                                      0.4
        <




                                                                                                                 <




                                                                                                                             0.2                       0.2                        0.2
                                                                                                                            0                       0                             0
                   2.4
                   2.2
                   1.8
                   1.6
                   1.4
                   1.2
                             0.8
                             0.6
                             0.4
                                            0.2




            0.2                                                                                                      0.2        -0.2                   -0.2                           -0.2
                        2


                             1




                  0.8            0.9                 1               1.1                     1.2                           0.8         0.9          1                 1.1         1.2
                                                  Futures price                                                                                 Futures price
                                                    RV error                                                                                      IV error
            0.6                                                                                                      0.6    0.1
                                                         0




                                                                                                    1.2
                                                                                               1
                                                                                       0.8
                                                                                       0.6
                                                                                 0.4
                                                                         0.2




                                                                                                                                0.05
            0.4                                                                                                      0.4    0
        <




                                                                                                                 <
                  1.2 1.4




                                                                                                                              -0.0
                                                                                                                             -0.1 5                0
                                                                                                                                                                             05
                                                                                                                             -0.1
                  0.8
                  0.6
                  0.4




                                                                                 0
                  0.2




                                                                                                                            -0 .2 5                                         -0.     .1 15
            0.2                                                                                                      0.2
                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                  -0 -0.-0.2
                  1




                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                  0

                  0.8            0.9                 1               1.1                     1.2                           0.8         0.9          1                 1.1         1.2
                                                  Futures price                                                                                 Futures price



Note: The initial futures price is 1 and the initial volatility,  , is 0.3. The top panels calculate the return
on the rv and iv portfolios given an instantaneous shift in the futures price and volatility to the values
reported on the axes under the assumption that the Black­Scholes formula holds. The middle panels plot
returns under the approximations used in the text. The bottom panels are equal to the middle minus the
top panels. All returns and errors are reported as decimals.




                                                                                                          A.25
                            Figure A.4: Imposing a filter on volume




                                             $iv_$ portfolio Sharpe ratios




Note: Same as figure 3, but using only options for which volume is neither zero nor missing.


                                                  A.26
Figure A.5: RV and IV portfolio Sharpe ratios and factor risk premia, one-week holding
period




Note: Same as figure 3, but using one-week holding periods.
                                                A.27
Figure A.6: RV and IV portfolio Sharpe ratios and factor risk premia (first half of the sample)




Note: Same as Figure 3, but only using the first half of the sample (up to June 2000).

                                                 A.28
Figure A.7: RV and IV portfolio Sharpe ratios and factor risk premia (second half of the
sample)




Note: Same as Figure 3, but only using the second half of the sample (after June 2000).
                                                A.29
                                            Figure A.8: Rolling Sharpe ratios of RV and IV portfolios




A.30
       Note: 5-year rolling Sharpe ratios for RV portfolios (solid line) and IV portfolios (dotted lines). The bottom-right panel reports the rolling
       Sharpe ratio for RV and IV portfolio of all available markets.
                   Figure A.9: SDF loadings on RV and IV (Sharpe ratios)




Note: The figure reports the stochastic discount factor (SDF) loadings on IV and RV. The loadings are
scaled to correspond to Sharpe ratios of orthogonalized RV and IV portfolios, whose risk premia is equal
to the corresponding SDF loading.
                                                 A.31
                                   Figure A.10: Bid-ask spreads




                                      (a) Implied bid-ask spreads




                               (b) Observed bid-ask spreads on 8/4/2017

Note: The top panel plots for each market the effective bid-ask spread computed from observed option
returns, calculated as in Roll (1984). The spread reported for the CBOE S&P 500 options is based on the
historical mean available from Optionmetrics covering the period 1996­2015. The bottom panel reports
posted bid-ask spreads for at-the-money straddles obtained from Bloomberg on of August 4, 2017 (the
CBOE S&P 500 spreads on that date are also obtained from Optionmetrics).

                                                 A.32
                      Figure A.11: Volume across markets and maturities




Note: Average daily volume of options in different markets. The panel corresponding to crude oil reports
values in dollars. All other panels show values relative to the volume in the crude oil market, matched by
maturity.




                                                  A.33
Figure A.12: RV and IV portfolio Sharpe ratios and factor risk premia (robust to measure-
ment error)




Note: Same as Figure 3, but returns are computed using the same denominator at all maturities, to
provide robustness with respect to measurement error
                                                A.34 in the prices (see section A.4.4).
                        Figure A.13: Options on crude futures vs ETFs




Note: Sharpe ratios on rv and iv portfolios using straddles for CME crude oil futures and the XLE and
USO exchange traded funds. "4-month" and "5-month" refers to the longer of the two maturities used to
construct each portfolio (the short maturity is always one month). The squares are point estimates based
on the full sample available for each series. The lines are 95-percent confidence bands constructed with a
50-day block bootstrap. "CME, USO adj." and "CME, XLE adj." are identical to the "CME" numbers
but with the mean return in the denominator of the Sharpe ratio shifted by the point estimate for the
mean difference from table A.6.2.




                                                  A.35
                             Table A.1: Risk exposures of rv and iv portfolios


    rv portfolio                                    iv portfolio
                         f      f2     IV      R2                        f       f2    IV      R2   Corr(rv,iv)
    S&P 500         -0.07    1.40     0.05   0.69   S&P 500         -0.17     1.24    0.84   0.69      0.53
    T-bonds         -0.01    0.78     0.00   0.74   T-bonds         -0.01     0.26    0.91   0.68      0.22
    GBP             -0.02    0.78     0.04   0.82   GBP             -0.02     0.35    0.76   0.78      0.49
    CHF              0.00    0.72     0.06   0.74   CHF              0.05     0.46    0.78   0.69      0.55
    JPY             -0.02    0.71     0.06   0.81   JPY              0.02     0.51    0.75   0.83      0.62
    Copper          -0.01    0.73     0.00   0.60   Copper          -0.01     0.18    0.90   0.71      0.10
    Corn            -0.02    0.63     0.04   0.70   Corn             0.07     0.30    0.69   0.62      0.10
    Crude oil       -0.03    0.96     0.01   0.74   Crude oil        0.02    -0.19    0.82   0.66      0.03
    Feeder cattle   -0.03    0.93     0.03   0.66   Feeder cattle   -0.03    -0.35    0.84   0.68      0.04
    Gold             0.00    0.64     0.05   0.69   Gold             0.08     0.31    0.81   0.63      0.48
    Heating oil     -0.02    0.85     0.01   0.75   Heating oil      0.03    -0.25    0.87   0.63     -0.05
    Lean hog        -0.02    0.87     0.01   0.74   Lean hog         0.05    -0.59    0.88   0.49     -0.21
    Live cattle     -0.03    0.99     0.02   0.72   Live cattle     -0.01    -0.54    0.80   0.63     -0.14
    Natural gas     -0.02    0.83     0.03   0.79   Natural gas      0.02    -0.42    0.79   0.48     -0.13
    Silver           0.00    0.59     0.07   0.73   Silver           0.02     0.15    0.77   0.78      0.42
    Soybeans        -0.02    0.64     0.03   0.72   Soybeans         0.05     0.21    0.76   0.70      0.21
    Soybean meal    -0.02    0.58     0.03   0.74   Soybean meal     0.06     0.23    0.78   0.61      0.21
    Soybean oil     -0.01    0.61     0.02   0.73   Soybean oil      0.05     0.21    0.80   0.66      0.16
    Wheat           -0.01    0.62    -0.01   0.75   Wheat            0.06     0.20    0.84   0.65      0.19
    Average         -0.02    0.78     0.03   0.73   Average          0.02     0.12    0.81   0.66


Note: The table reports regression coefficients of the rv and iv portfolios for each market onto three
market-specific factors: the futures return, the squared futures return, and the change in IV. The column
on the right reports the correlation between the rv and iv portfolio returns.




                                                            A.36
             Table A.2: Economic activity and option-fitted uncertainty indexes

            Panel A: regression coefficients
            Uncertainty measure:            Financial           Real      Price           EPU
               FFR Empl.




                           Fitted           -0.206 ***      -0.317 ***   -0.276   ***   -0.129   **
                           Residual         -0.092          -0.065       -0.191   ***   -0.037
                           Fitted           -0.020 ***      -0.023 ***   -0.012   *     -0.023   ***
                           Residual         -0.015          -0.010       -0.019   *     -0.021   ***
                           Fitted           -0.319 ***      -0.455 ***   -0.442   ***   -0.268   **
               IP




                           Residual          0.080           0.023       -0.262   **     0.039

            Panel B: variance decomposition
            Uncertainty measure:        Financial             Real        Price           EPU
               FFR Empl.




                        Fitted             0.953            0.972        0.853          0.949
                        Residual           0.047            0.028        0.147          0.051
                        Fitted             0.877            0.879        0.525          0.641
                        Residual           0.123            0.121        0.475          0.359
                        Fitted             0.985            0.998        0.887          0.986
               IP




                        Residual           0.015            0.002        0.113          0.014


Note: Panel A reports the coefficients from regressions of industrial production growth, employment
growth, and the Fed funds rate on their own lags and the fitted and residual uncertainty for the four
indexes. * indicates significance at the 10-percent level, ** 5-percent, and *** 1-percent. Fitted uncertainty
is obtained by projecting each uncertainty index on the 19 IVs. Panel B reports the corresponding variance
decomposition.




                                                         A.37
         Table A.3: Economic activity and option-fitted realized volatility indexes

            Panel A: regression coefficients
            Uncertainty measure:            Financial        Real         Price
                FFR Empl.




                            Fitted            -0.179 ***    -0.432 ***   -0.394   ***
                            Residual          -0.076        -0.010       -0.108   ***
                            Fitted            -0.027 ***    -0.040 ***   -0.026   ***
                            Residual          -0.006        -0.003        0.000
                            Fitted            -0.267 **     -0.598 ***   -0.608   ***
                IP




                            Residual           0.019         0.000       -0.157

            Panel B: variance decomposition
            Uncertainty measure:        Financial             Real        Price
                FFR Empl.




                        Fitted             0.882            0.999        0.858
                        Residual           0.118            0.001        0.142
                        Fitted             0.968            0.989        0.999
                        Residual           0.032            0.011        0.001
                        Fitted             0.996            1.000        0.873
                IP




                        Residual           0.004            0.000        0.127


Note: Same as table A.2, but using realized volatilities.




                                                  A.38
