                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          DEMOGRAPHIC EFFECTS ON THE IMPACT OF MONETARY POLICY

                                         John V. Leahy
                                          Aditi Thapar

                                      Working Paper 26324
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26324


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2019




We would like to thank V.V. Chari, Jordi Gali, Simon Gilchrist, Christopher House, Pablo
Ottonello, Lasse Pedersen, Morton Ravn, Nick Sly, Chris Waller, Jonathan Willis, and Arlene
Wong for helpful comments and discussions, and Jessica Meadows and Amanda West for
valuable research assistance. Portions of this paper were completed while Dr. Thapar was visiting
the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City as part of CSWEP's Summer Economic Fellows
Program. We are grateful to the National Science Foundation for their support under grant
SES-1919362. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by John V. Leahy and Aditi Thapar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Demographic Effects on the Impact of Monetary Policy
John V. Leahy and Aditi Thapar
NBER Working Paper No. 26324
September 2019
JEL No. E32,E52,J11

                                          ABSTRACT

We study whether the effects of monetary policy are dependent on the demographic structure of
the population. We exploit cross-sectional variation in the response of US states to an identified
monetary policy shock. We find that there are three distinct age groups. In response to an increase
in interest rates, the responses of private employment and personal income are weaker the greater
the share of population under 35 years of age, are stronger the greater the share between 40 and
65 years of age, and are relatively unaffected by the share older than 65 years. We find that all
age groups become more responsive to monetary policy shocks when the proportion of middle
aged increases. We provide evidence consistent with middle aged entrepreneurs starting and
expanding businesses in response to an expansionary monetary shock.


John V. Leahy
Department of Economics and
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
3308 Weill Hall
735 S. State St. #3308
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
jvleahy@umich.edu

Aditi Thapar
Dept. of Economics
Univ. of Michigan
611 Tappan Ave
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
athapar@umich.edu
1        Introduction

The world is undergoing a period of demographic change. Populations are aging in much of the

developed world, especially Japan and Continental Europe. On the other extreme, over 50% of

the population of India is below the age of 25.1 In China, the on-again-off-again one child policy

is likely to bring large fluctuations in the age distribution. Given the life-cycle patterns in many

economic activities such as saving, home purchases, education, and retirement, it is of interest to

understand how changes in the age distribution affect the performance of the tools of economic

policy. In this paper we focus on the relationship between the age structure of the economy and

monetary policy.

        To understand how demographics affect monetary policy, we need a sample of economies with

differing demographic structures and we need a measure of monetary policy. We use the US states

as our laboratory. The states differ in their age structure, and data is available on a consistent

basis for a wide range of variables. Since the states share a single monetary policy, we do not

have to control for policy differences across states or worry that policy might be responding to the

demographic structure of a given state. This allows us to focus on how changes in the age structure

influence the response to this common policy. Of course, states differ in other ways, some of which

may be correlated with age structure, and we will attempt to control for these differences in what

follows. Heterogeneity, however, is present, more or less, in nations as well.

        For monetary policy, we follow the high-frequency approach to the identification of monetary

policy shocks and consider changes in the Federal Funds rate over a short window around policy

announcements.2 We ask how the age distribution in a state affects the response of state income

and employment to a monetary policy shock. We find that monetary policy is more effective ­ in

the sense that income and employment respond more to a given change in the interest rate ­ the

greater the share of the middle-aged population, defined as those aged 40 to 65, and less effective

the greater the share of the young, defined as those aged 20 to 40. The share of the population

over 65 has no discernible effect on the effectiveness of monetary policy.
    1
   2011 Census, http://www.censusindia.gov.in/2011-Common/CensusData2011.html
    2
   See G¨urkaynak, et al. (2005), Gertler and Karadi (2015), and Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) for prominent
examples of this approach.



                                                     1
   These effects of demography appear sizable, and comparable in size to the effects of a monetary

policy shock on aggregate income. In the baseline analysis, a one standard deviation increase in the

fraction of 30-34 year olds reduces the impact of a monetary policy shock by approximately 40%,

whereas an increase in the fraction of 50-54 year olds increases the impact by a similar magnitude.

   The basic pattern in which the middle aged amplify and the young dampen the effects of mone-

tary policy appears robust. It holds for a variety of definitions of the monetary policy shocks and for

a variety of empirical specifications. We investigate altering the start and end dates of the sample,

the removal of small states, and aggregation to census regions.

   Having established the robustness of our results we turn our attention to potential mechanisms.

We begin by asking whether our results reflect demographics or some other state characteristic cor-

related with demographics. We investigate two possibilities in detail: state industrial composition

and state income. If a large middle age population were correlated with a large manufacturing

sector, the greater response of manufacturing to monetary policy shocks could explain the greater

sensitivity to interest rates. Alternatively, Cravino, Lan and Levchenko (2018) have argued that

richer individuals consume a greater share of sticky price goods. If a large middle age population

were correlated with high income, stickier prices could then explain the greater response of mid-

dle aged states to monetary shocks. We find no such correlations and therefore no evidence that

either industrial composition or state income is driving our results. We also consider a number of

other potential correlates including demographic variables such as gender, race, and education and

housing variables such as home ownership and house prices. Again the basic pattern survives.

   We then investigate whether the response of employment to a monetary policy shock is due to

hiring within the state or migration between states. If the response were due mainly to migration,

then this would suggest caution in applying the results to sovereign nations as migration between

states is likely easier than migration between nations. We find that the response of unemployment

mirrors the response of employment, suggesting an important role for internal adjustment. We

look at the response of state population and find some evidence that the age structure of the state

affects the response of migration to a monetary policy shock. The response of migration to the age

structure, however, appears to be largely orthogonal to the responses of income and employment.



                                                  2
Outflows in response to tight policy are larger in states with more 35-40 year olds and inflows are

larger in states with more elderly. Both are age groups that do not greatly affect the response of

income or employment.

   A greater proportion of middle aged residents could amplify the effects of monetary policy in

a number of ways. On one hand, the income and employment of middle aged residents could

respond more to monetary policy shocks. Having more middle aged residents would then explain

the greater aggregate response. On the other hand, having more middle aged residents could

increase the responsiveness of the income and employment of all age groups. We find evidence for

the second channel. We look at the response of income and employment broken down by age. We

find that the incomes and employment of all age groups follow the same basic pattern: dampened

if there are more young in the state and amplified if there are more middle aged. It is not so much

being middle aged that matters as being surrounded by middle aged people.

   Finally we suggest a mechanism by which a greater number of middle aged residents amplifies

the effects of monetary policy on all age groups. The mechanism is motivated by the fact that the

middle aged are more likely to be entrepreneurs. Selgado (2018) documents that entrepreneurs

tend to be older than workers and that the share of entrepreneurs in the 35-60 age group is larger

than the share of entrepreneurs in the 22-25 age group. Azoulay, Jones, Kim and Miranda (2019)

argue that successful entrepreneurs are middle-aged not young. If a larger share of middle aged

residents implies a larger number of potential entrepreneurs, then the elasticity of business for-

mation with respect to a decline in interest rates is likely larger in states with a greater share of

the middle aged population. We find that business formation does in fact respond more strongly

the greater the share of the middle aged. We find evidence for a multiplier, by which the initial

expansion increases business income furthering the incentive to invest. We also find evidence of

financial frictions. A greater fraction of middle aged increases the response of small business em-

ployment to a monetary policy shock. The hypothesis is then that a monetary expansion increases

the returns to starting a small business both by lowering the cost of borrowing and by increasing

the profitability of a business once it is started. The greater the proportion of the middle aged the

greater the response to these incentives. All income groups then benefit from this expansion.



                                                 3
        In Section 2 we describe recent background literature that is relevant to our investigation. In

Section 3 we introduce our empirical strategy. We present our main results in Section 4. We discuss

interpretations of our results in Sections 5 and 6. Section 7 concludes.


2        Related Literature

This paper contributes to the small, but growing, literature on the relationship between monetary

policy and the demographic structure of the economy.3 Several recent papers study how monetary

policy shocks impact the consumption of different age groups. Sterk and Tenreyro (2018) find that

monetary policy shocks have greater effects on the durable consumption of the young than they do

on the middle aged and old. Wong (2018) also finds that the consumption of the young is more

sensitive to monetary policy shocks and argues that young homeowners, who either obtain a new

loan or refinance, are the primary drivers of this response. Cloyne, Ferreira and Surico (2018) argue

that consumption of households with mortgages and those who are renters rise after expansionary

shocks, while outright owners don't respond. They argue that the first group (households with

mortgages and renters) are typically younger, while the second group (outright homeowners) are

typically older. These studies all focus on household responses. Using aggregated data, Berg, et al.

(2019) argue instead that older households as a group have a higher consumption response than

younger households.

        We find something very different, namely that monetary policy is more effective the greater the

number of middle aged and less effective the greater the number of young. One potential reason

for this difference is that we look at a different outcome variable. In their household level analysis,

Sterk and Tenreyro, Wong, and Cloyne, Ferreira and Surico, all look at the effects of monetary policy

on consumption. In our state level analysis, we look at the effects on income and employment since

quarterly US state consumption data is only available after 2005. It is very likely that consumption

and income respond in different ways to monetary policy. The relationship between an individual's

consumption and income depends to a large extent on the individual's position in the life cycle.
    3
    There is a related literature considering the distributional effects of monetary policy. Prominent examples include
Doepke and Schneider (2006), Coibion, Gorodnichenko, Kueng and Silvia (2017), Kaplan, Moll, and Violante (2018),
Cravino, Lan and Levchenko (2018), and Auclert (2019). Most of this literature focuses on how monetary policy affects
income inequality.



                                                          4
Liquidity constraints are more likely to affect the young, and the middle aged are generally in

a better position to smooth consumption (Gourinchas and Parker (2002)). It is therefore likely

that the consumption of the young responds more to monetary policy shocks, while income and

employment depend on the proportion of the middle aged.

   Another potential reason that our results differ from the previous literature is that our question

is somewhat different. Rather than ask how monetary policy affects different age groups, we ask

how changes in the age-composition of the economy alter the impact of monetary policy shocks

on aggregate economic performance. If aggregate responses are merely the sum of individual

responses, then the answers to these two questions would be the same. One of our principle

findings, however, is that the effects of age composition appear to work through general equilibrium

effects, and that these general equilibrium affects hit all age groups in a similar manner. What

matters for the response of the income of the young in Idaho is the overall age distribution in Idaho

and not the fact that the group is young. For both of these reasons we see our findings as consistent

with and complementary to the existing literature.

   One paper that considers how the age-composition of the economy alters the impact of mone-

tary policy is Imam (2015). Imam assesses the impact of monetary policy on unemployment and

inflation as economies age. He first estimates a time-varying coefficient Bayesian VAR with stochas-

tic volatility for a panel of the large OECD economies, Canada, Germany, Japan, U.K., and U.S.

Monetary policy shocks are identified by a Cholesky decomposition with money ordered last. Us-

ing the estimated impact of monetary policy on unemployment and inflation, he then proceeds to

estimate the impact of aging on the variables of interest. He uses the old-age dependency ratio, the

ratio of the number of people older than 65 years to those aged 15 to 64 years, as his demographic

variable. He therefore has only two age groups. He finds that policy has become less potent as the

fraction older than 65 has risen. He does not consider how the middle aged might differ from the

young.

   Several papers, including Fujiwara, Ippei, and Yuki Teranishi (2006), Kantur (2013), Carvahlo,

Fererro, and Nechio (2016), Kara and von Thadden (2016), and Sterk and Tenreyro (2018) cali-

brate dynamic general equilibrium models to study the effects of demographic change on monetary



                                                 5
policy. Most of these papers build on the model of Gertler (1999) in which individuals progress

through two life stages: the young work and the old are retired. Our results suggest the need for a

richer demographic structure. At a minimum one needs to distinguish between young and middle

aged workers, in addition to the retired.4

        Our paper contributes to a literature that uses a panel of US states to answer aggregate ques-

tions. Most of these papers study fiscal policy. Shoag (2010), Nakamura and Steinsson (2014),

and Chodorow-Reich (2018) analyze fiscal policy multipliers at the state level. In concurrent work,

Basso and Rachedi (2018) study the effects of fiscal shocks interacted with the proportion of the

state population in three age bins, and find that the fiscal multiplier is larger the greater the number

of young people in the state.

        We are not the first to argue that the share of middle aged might have important consequences

for economic activity. Freyer (2007) finds that an increase in the proportion of workers between 40

and 49 increases productivity growth in a cross section of OECD countries. Azoulay, et al. (2019)

show that founders of successful businesses tend to be middle-aged. Selgado (2018) argues that

entrepreneurs tend to be middle aged.


3        Empirical Implementation

We treat the US states as a panel of economies. There are several advantages to using the states as

a laboratory. The primary advantage is that the US is a monetary union so that all states are subject

to the same monetary policy. This means that we can remove the first-order effect of monetary

policy using time fixed-effects and focus on the interaction of monetary policy shocks with local

demography. A common monetary policy also removes many sources of heterogeneity. We do

not have to worry about heterogeneity across states in monetary policy rules. We do not have to

worry about monetary policy responding to the demographic makeup of each state. We do not

have to worry about differences that might arise from differences in the identification of monetary

policy shocks across different nations. The states also have a homogeneous legal and institutional
    4
   A couple of recent papers, Gagnon, Johanssen and Lopez-Salido (2016) and Eggertsson, Mehrotra and Robbins
(2017), use a richer demographic structures to understand the decline in output growth and the real interest rate. These
papers do not study the economy's response to monetary policy.




                                                           6
structure. The problems that remain, such as immigration, trade, and heterogeneity of industrial

structure are present, more or less, in nations as well, and we will attempt to control for some of

these influences in what follows.

   In the remainder of this section we discuss the empirical implementation of our approach.

We begin by describing the empirical specification, followed by a discussion of how we identify

monetary policy shocks, and a description of the data used in this paper.


3.1   Specification

We use variation across U.S. states and across time in the share of population in different age

groups to estimate how the population structure affects the response of income and employment

to monetary policy shocks. We consider the following specification:

                                                                J
                 log [Xs,t+i ] = i,a   m a
                                       t ps,t   + a p a
                                                      s,t +            j Zs,t-j + s + t + us,t .               (1)
                                                               j =0


Here s indexes the U.S. states, a indexes the age-bins, and t indexes time. In our baseline spec-

ification we consider all 50 US states plus the District of Columbia. The age bins run every five

years from age 20 to age 69 and then we group the population over 70 into an additional bin. By

considering five year age bins we do not place any a priori restrictions on what age groups matter

for monetary policy and how these age groups matter. The unit of time is a quarter.

   The dependent variable is the log change in Xs between period t - 1 and period t + i. Our main

results take X to be either nominal personal income or private employment.                    m    is an exogenous
                                                                                              t

shock to U.S. monetary policy. pa
                                s,t is the percentage of the population of state s that belongs to

age-group a at time t. Zs,t-j is a vector of additional control variables. We include the four quarter

growth rate in the population in the state in most specifications to control for trends in population

growth. The state effects s capture persistent differences in age or industrial structure across

states, and time fixed-effects t account for factors that are common to all states such as interest

rates, the exchange rate and aggregate inflation. us,t is the error term. Note that since we include

time effects, we do not include the money shock           m   separately in the regression.
                                                          t

   All percentages such as income growth, the monetary shock, and the population shares are


                                                      7
expressed in basis points.

    We run this panel regression separately for each horizon i and each age-bin a. The coefficients

of interest are the i,a which capture how the effect of a shock to monetary policy in period t on

Xt+i varies with the proportion of the population in age-group a. Since our monetary policy shocks

represent shocks to interest rates, positive shocks reflect contractionary monetary policy. Positive

values of i,a therefore imply that an increase in the proportion of the population in age-group a

reduces the effect of a shock to monetary policy on X. Negative values of i,a , on the other hand,

imply that as the population in age-group a increases the contractionary effects of an increase in

interest rates become stronger.

    For any given age-group a
                            ¯, estimating equation (1) for each i = 1, 2, ...H indicates how an

increase in the proportion of the population in group a
                                                      ¯ affects the response of X to a monetary

policy shock over time. Alternatively, for any given horizon ¯
                                                             i, estimating equation (1) indicates

how an increase in the proportion of the population in group a affects the response of monetary

policy on X at horizon ¯
                       i for different age groups.


3.2    Monetary policy shocks

In our baseline specification, we follow the high-frequency approach to the identification of mon-

etary policy shocks employed by G¨
                                 urkaynak, et al. (2005), Gertler and Karadi (2015), and Naka-

mura and Steinsson (2018).5 As highlighted by Nakamura and Steinsson (2018), there are some

concerns regarding the interpretation of these high-frequency shocks. We therefore consider the

robustness of our results to other shocks in Section 4.2.1. We provide a detailed explanation of

how we construct our shocks in Appendix B. Here we provide a brief overview.

    There are two steps in the construction. First, we obtain raw shocks from the movement in the

federal funds rate implied by the current month federal funds futures contract in a relatively short

window of time around the FOMC announcements. We consider the change in the futures rate

from 15 minutes before the announcement to 45 minutes after the announcement. By considering

a narrow window around the FOMC announcement, one can be reasonably certain that no other
  5
    Interest rate futures have been used to identify monetary policy shocks by Rudebusch (1998), Kuttner (2001),
Soderstrom (2001), and Thapar (2008).




                                                       8
news caused the change in the futures rates.

       Second, following Ottonello and Winberry (2018), we aggregate the high-frequency shocks to

a quarterly frequency using a weighted moving average of the shocks in the current quarter and

the previous quarter. These weights take into consideration the fact that employment and personal

income are the result of outcomes and decisions that accumulate over the entire quarter and that

the monetary policy shock can only affect the subset of these decisions that are made subsequent to

the shock. The weights are chosen so that an announcement at the end of quarter t - 1 is essentially

the same as an announcement at the beginning of quarter t.6

       The shocks are illustrated in Figure 11 in Appendix B. The identified shocks are small but not

insignificant. The average high-frequency shock over the 1990-2008 sample is close to zero (-5

basis points) with a standard deviation of 11 basis points. Approximately 40% of shocks were

contractionary while 60% are expansionary, and there are 70% more shocks than actual changes in

the federal funds rate. Very often the absence of a change in interest rates is itself a shock.

       Since our shocks only represent the unanticipated component of monetary policy at the time of

the meetings, they may reflect only a fraction of exogenous monetary policy changes. This makes

it difficult to judge the quantitative significance of the coefficients i,a . To establish a benchmark

we look at the effects of monetary shocks on the aggregate economy. We follow Ramey (2016) and

estimate,
                                                J                   J                        J
                  log [Xt+i ] =    i
                                       t   +           j hf
                                                         t-j   +           j
                                                                           f f rt-j + s +           j Zt-j + ut .            (2)
                                               j =1                j =1                     j =1

where, i = 1, 2, ...., H represents the horizon, X is aggregate US real GDP,                           t   is our monetary policy

shock, f f r represents the level of the federal funds rate, and Z (following Ramey) includes lags

of X , current and lagged real GDP, the GDP deflator, and the unemployment rate. To account for

serial correlation in the residuals, we estimate Newey-West standard errors. Note that all of these

controls would be subsumed into the time effects in our baseline specification (1).

       Figure 1 depicts the response of U.S. real GDP, real personal income, and private employment

to a one percentage point shock to monetary policy over a horizon of four years. We normalized the
   6
    Note that this second step introduces some serial correlation in the shocks which we will have to control for in the
estimation.




                                                                     9
                                      Figure 1: Response to a Monetary Policy Shock


                                                           US Real GDP




                                                      US Personal Income




                                                   US Private Employment




The solid line represents the response to a positive one-standard deviation increase in the federal funds rate. The dashed line represents
the 95% confidence intervals given Newey-West standard errors.




                                                                   10
shock to one percentage point because the units are easy to interpret and relate to the discussion

that follows. It should be noted that this scaling greatly magnifies the effects of monetary policy

shocks relative to the data. The standard deviation of shocks in our sample is an order of magnitude

smaller at 0.11.

    The impulse responses in Figure 1 look like the effects of a monetary policy shock. As antic-

ipated, this shock leads all three variables to decline. The decline in real GDP and real personal

income become statistically significant 5 quarters after the shocks. The reduction in GDP reaches

a maximum two to three years after the shock. We will compare the i,a in (1) to the  j in (2)

as a means of judging the quantitative significance of the interaction between demographics and

monetary policy.


3.3    Data

The federal funds futures market began in late 1988. Given that there was likely a learning period,

we begin our sample in 1990. To avoid the zero lower bound on interest rates, we end in 2008. We

consider alternative start and end dates in the robustness section.

    We require state-level data on various macroeconomic variables, population estimates by state,

and monetary policy shocks to the US economy. We describe each of these in turn below.

    In an ideal world, we would have quarterly state-level GDP and consumption data. Unfortu-

nately, this data is available only from 2005 on. We use the next best alternative, namely, state

personal income. Total state personal income, wages and salaries, dividends interest, and rental

income, and non-farm proprietors' income are obtained from the Regional Economic Accounts pro-

gram at the Bureau of Economic Analysis. We use nominal personal income since there are no

state-level price indices available for our sample period.7 Deflating the nominal personal income of

each state by a national price index would not alter our results as the aggregate price index would

simply get soaked up by the time fixed effects in the estimation.

    All state level employment data used in this paper is from the Current Employment Statistics

program conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. State level employment data is available
   7
     Since 2008, the BEA has begun publishing annual Regional Price Parities which compare prices in states relative to
overall prices for the U.S.




                                                         11
beginning in 1990. The data is published at a monthly frequency, which we average to a quarterly

frequency. Annually, the monthly estimates are revised based on a complete count of jobs derived

from tax filings of employers. The data we use is thus not affected by any sampling issues. We

use data on private employment, as well as employment in three main industries: manufacturing,

construction, and financial activities. For employment in the construction industry, data is available

for only 44 states.8

    State population data is obtained from the Census Bureau. Over our sample period, the data

is available on an annual frequency.9 We do not interpolate the data and assume that population

remains constant within the calendar year. pa
                                            s,t is defined as the number of individuals in the age-bin

a in state s at date t, divided by the total population in the state at that time, times 100.

    The monetary policy shocks were provided to us by Ottonello and Winberry.


4     Results

4.1    Baseline Results

Our baseline specification takes X to be either state personal income or private employment and Z

to be the change in state population between t and t - 4. The monetary policy shocks are the high

frequency shocks discussed in section 3.2.

    Figure 2 presents estimates of i,a for i = 6 in equation (1), when X is state personal income

and state private employment, respectively. Coefficients and p-values may be found in Appendix

Table 1. The various five-year bins for a are on the horizontal axis. The vertical axis represents i,6

in percentage points. The solid line represents the (smoothed) point estimates. For a one percent-

age point unexpected increase in the federal funds rate, the point estimate (6,a ) represents the

effect of an increase in the population share of group a by one percentage point on the growth rate

of the variable of interest. The vertical bars depict the 95% confidence intervals for the estimated

coefficients. These confidence intervals are estimated using the approach in Driscoll and Kraay
    8
      Construction industry employment is not included for Delaware, Washington DC, Hawaii, Maryland, Nebraska,
South Dakota, Tennessee.
    9
      In 2015, the BEA began publishing quarterly state population estimates which are based on unpublished beginning
of the month state population estimates from the Census Bureau.




                                                        12
(1998) which is robust to general forms of spatial and temporal correlation in the error terms.

       The top panel presents results for personal income. The coefficients are positive for the young

aged 20 to 39, and statistically significant at the one percent level for the 25-29 and 30-34 year olds.

The coefficients are negative for the middle-aged 40 to 64-year olds, and statistically significant at

the one percent level for all but the 40-44 and 60-64 year old group. The coefficients are small and

insignificant for the old aged 65 and above. The positive coefficients for the young imply that if

the fraction of the population in this age group increases, then an unanticipated increase in interest

rates raises personal income after six quarters relative to the effect that monetary policy has on the

US economy as a whole. Note that this does not mean that personal income raises, as the total

effect of the money shock on state income is a combination of the first-order effect subsumed into

the time effect and the interaction effect considered here. Since we typically expect an increase

in interest rates to reduce personal income, a positive coefficient implies a weaker negative effect

of monetary tightening. Similarly the negative coefficients for the middle-aged imply a stronger

impact of monetary policy on personal income the larger is this age group.

       The absolute size of the 6,a have very little meaning. The magnitude of the coefficients depends

on the size of our estimated monetary policy shocks, as well as the relationship between these

shocks and the overall path for interest rates. We have normalized the size of the monetary policy

shock to 1% for convenience. A one percentage point shock is not only very large relative to

the shocks that we observe in our sample, but could be associated with a very different change

in interest rates, especially after six quarters. While we cannot interpret the magnitude of the

coefficients, we can get some sense of how large the effects are by comparing the 6,a to the

effects of monetary policy shocks on the US economy that we estimated in Appendix Section B.

This comparison keeps the magnitude of the monetary shocks fixed. In Figure 1, we see that a

one percent increase in the Federal Funds rate reduces personal income by almost five percentage

points after six quarters. Now consider a one standard deviation change in the percentage of

the population that is 30-34. This is an increase in p30-34 of 0.64 percentage points.10 Given

6,30-34 = 3.13, a one standard deviation increase in the share of 30-34 year olds reduces the impact
  10
    This is the standard deviation of p30-34 after removing time effects. This is the relevant variation as discussed in
Section 5.1.



                                                          13
                            Figure 2: Effects by age-bin (6-quarters after monetary shock)


                                                      Personal Income




                                                   Private Employment




The horizontal axis represents the age groups a. The vertical axis represents the effect on the dependent variable of a positive one
percentage point shock to the federal funds rate interacted with a one percentage point increase in the population share of group a.
The solid line represents the point estimates. The vertical bars represent the 95% confidence intervals given Driscoll-Kraay standard
errors.




                                                                14
of a one percentage point increase in the Federal Funds rate by approximately two percentage

points or 40% of the aggregate effect. Similarly, a one standard deviation increase in the share

of 50-54 year olds equal to 0.39 percentage points together with 6,50-54 = -4.74 implies that

a one standard deviation increase in the share of 50-54 year olds increases the negative effects

of a one percentage point increase in the Federal Funds rate by 1.85 percentage points. Again,

approximately 40% of the aggregate effect. Hence the variation in the effects of a monetary policy

shock induced by demography appear to be of a magnitude similar to the direct effects of monetary

policy on the economy as a whole.

       It appears that the sum of the coefficients in Figure 2 is approximately zero. Given that an

increase in one age group must show up as a decrease in another age group, it is tempting to argue

that the coefficients must sum to zero. This is not necessary, however, for three reasons. First we

have omitted the 0-19 year old age group. Second, theoretically it is the variance weighted sum of

coefficients that sums to zero.11 Finally, since we run the regressions separately for each age group,

variation in the coefficients on the other variables may affect this homogeneity property.

       The bottom panel of Figure 2 illustrates the effects on private employment. The pattern closely

mimics the results for personal income, but with some small differences in the turning points and a

more moderate response for the middle age groups. The effects of monetary policy on private em-

ployment are dampened if there are more 20-34 year olds in the economy; the effects of monetary

policy are strengthened if there are more 40-59 year olds in the economy; and are largely neutral

if there is a change in the population over 60 years of age.

       The pattern that we see in Figure 2 with positive coefficients for the young, negative coefficients

for the middle-aged and small and statistically insignificant coefficients for the old is a pattern that

we will see often in what follows. Generally, estimates will be stronger and statistically more sig-

nificant for income than employment, reflecting the fact that both wages and employment respond

in similar ways to the shock, so that the response of the product of the two components is stronger

than the response of each component separately. Results for the young and the middle-aged are

remarkably stable across alternative specifications. Results for the old are generally statistically
  11
   If all of the age groups are included in a single regression then the OLS coefficient is (X X )-1 (X Y ). It is X Y that
must sum to zero.



                                                           15
                                Figure 3: Impulse Response Functions of Personal Income




Each figure depicts the effects over time of a one percentage point increase in the share of the population in a specific age group on the
responsiveness of the growth rate of state personal income to a positive one percentage point shock to the federal funds rate. Solid
lines represent point estimates. Dashed lines represent 95 percent confidence intervals based on Driscoll-Kraay standard errors.




                                                                   16
insignificant but a bit less stable. There are a few specifications in which a greater share of old

reduce the impact of monetary policy and a few specifications in which a greater share of the old

increase the impact of monetary policy.

   We presented the results for i = 6 because this is the horizon for which the effects of age appear

strongest. We get qualitatively similar effects at other horizons over the first three to four years

following a monetary shock. Figure 3 presents the i,a for personal income as functions of the

horizon i for each age bin a. The effects of age tend to grow over the first six quarters, positive for

the young and negative for the middle-aged. The maximal impact is at about six quarters. After

six quarters the coefficients remain elevated for some age groups, especially the young, and die

out for others, primarily those between 40 and 54. The effects are always small and statistically

insignificant for the old.


4.2     Robustness

4.2.1    Monetary shocks

One obvious question is whether our results are driven by our choice of monetary policy shocks.

Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) have raised questions regarding the interpretation of shocks iden-

tified though the high frequency movements of asset markets around policy announcements. These

shocks may reflect unanticipated moments in policy that are orthogonal to current economic condi-

tions, or they may reflect the communication of the Federal Reserve's information regarding current

economic conditions.

   We consider two alternative identification schemes. First, we consider the shocks that Romer

and Romer (2004) construct from the minutes of Federal Open Market's Committee meetings and

the Federal Reserve Board's Greenbook forecasts. These are extended through the end of 2007

by Wieland and Yang (2017). Second, we consider shocks estimated from a Structural VAR that

includes US real GDP, the GDP deflator, the CRB spot commodity price index, and the quarterly av-

erage federal funds rate. The VAR is estimated over the 1960 to 2008 sample period and monetary

policy shocks are identified via a Cholesky decomposition with the interest rate ordered last.

   Figure 4 compares the effects on personal income and employment for the various shock speci-



                                                  17
fications. In the top three rows, the sample is the same as in our baseline specification: 1990-2008.

Given that different shocks have different scales, we normalize by the standard deviation of the

shocks. The vertical axis is i,a  sd(   m ).
                                        t      For ease of comparison, all the figures are on the same

scale. The first row reproduces the results from our baseline specification. Regardless of shocks, the

effectiveness of monetary policy is dampened for the younger age groups, is strengthened for the

middle age groups, and is about the same as the aggregate effect for the older age groups. While,

there are slight differences in the boundaries between the three groups and differences in which

bins are statistically significant, the basic shape and magnitude of the response is similar across the

shock series.

   With these alternative shock series, we can expand the sample period. The last two rows in

Figure 4 shows the results for the 1980-2008 sample. The results for the VAR shocks become more

significant and look much more like the baseline results. The results for the Romer-Romer shocks

are largely unaffected by the sample period.


4.2.2    Other robustness checks

We tried a number of alternative specifications. These results are discussed in detail in Appendix

C. Here we provide a brief overview of our findings.


        In the baseline specification we run separate regressions for each age group. We tried running

        a single regression with all of the age groups. To avoid a proliferation of regressors, we

        aggregated the age bins into three age groups: 20-390, 40-59, and 60+.

        We aggregated population and personal income by BEA regions.

        We dropped the five smallest states by population: Alaska, North Dakota, Vermont, Washing-

        ton D.C., and Wyoming.

        We do not have a long enough sample to properly analyze subsample stability. We do, how-

        ever, investigate whether our results are sensitive to altering the beginning and the end of

        the sample. First, we truncated all data at the end of 2006 to avoid any contamination with

        the housing market crash and the Great Recession. Second, we began our sample in 1995,


                                                    18
                                          Figure 4: Alternative monetary shocks

                    Personal Income                                               Private employment
                           Baseline                                                         Baseline




                       Romer-Romer                                                      Romer-Romer




                       Structural VAR                                                   Structural VAR




               Romer-Romer (1980-2007)                                          Romer-Romer (1980-2007)




              Structural VAR (1980-2008)                                       Structural VAR (1980-2008)




The horizontal axis represents the age groups a. The vertical axis represents the effect on the dependent variable of a positive one
percentage point shock to the federal funds rate interacted with a one percentage point increase in the population share of group a.
The solid line represents the point estimates. The vertical bars represent the 95% confidence intervals given Driscoll-Kraay standard
errors. The baseline and VAR specifications are estimated through 2008; Romer and Romer data ends in 2007.




                                                                19
      after the FOMC began issuing press releases following every FOMC meeting. If anything,

      beginning in 1995 strengthened the economic and statistically significance of the estimates.


    The bottom line as detailed in Appendix C is that the basic pattern seen in Figure 2 in which the

young dampen the effects of monetary policy and the middle aged amplify the effects of monetary

policy survives all of these modifications.


5    Inspecting the Mechanism

Given the robustness of the basic results, we turn our attention to potential mechanisms. We

begin by addressing a couple of relatively uninteresting possibilities. First, it is possible that age

structure is proxying for some other state characteristic, and that it is this characteristic that is

driving the results. Second, it is possible that our results reflect migration between states rather

than the expansion of opportunities within a state. While this second mechanism is not necessarily

uninteresting, it would call for care in applying our results for US states to nation states. Migration

is likely to be a more important margin of adjustment for US states where the borders are porous,

than for nation states which may monitor and control entry and exit.

    Next we ask whether the greater share of middle aged amplify the effects of monetary policy

because the middle aged themselves respond more to the shock and so a greater number of middle

aged increases the response, or because all age groups respond more to monetary policy shocks

when the proportion of middle aged is larger. The evidence favors the second story. All age groups

respond more. This points toward a general equilibrium mechanism by which the greater number

of middle aged increases income for all age groups.

    In the next section, we suggest such a mechanism. We show that proprietors income responds

strongly to the age structure of the state and that greater share of middle aged increases the re-

sponse of proprietors' income. This points to a mechanism by which profits drive business expansion

which raises incomes of all groups in the state.




                                                   20
5.1   State Characteristics

One might be concerned that our results are driven by some correlation between the population

structure of a state and some other state characteristics. We include time and state effects in the

baseline specification (1). These effects absorb common trends and some state differences but not

all. Since the money shock is common across states, the time effects control for trends in population

growth that are common across states. To see this, consider adding a constant ct to pa
                                                                                     s,t for all s at

a given date t, then the interaction term becomes (pa         m          m
                                                    s,t + ct )t , and ct t is absorbed by the time

effect. Given that the money shock varies over time, however, the state fixed effects do not absorb

average population differences across states. To see this, consider adding a constant cs to pa
                                                                                             s,t for

a given state s for all t. The interaction term becomes (pa         m          m
                                                          s,t + cs )t , and cs t is not absorbed by

either the time or state fixed effect. The relevant variation in (1) is therefore the population shares

in a given age bin across states and time net of common time trends.

   To illustrate this variation, Figure 5 represents the demographic composition of 50-54 year olds

across states in 1990 and 2000. To construct the figure we first removed time fixed effects from the

population share of this age group. We then sorted the residuals into five quintiles. Lighter colors

represent states with higher residuals. For example, Hawaii shifted from the population share

of 50-54 year olds being 0.3 percentage points below average in 1990 to 0.3 percentage points

above average in 2000. Indiana, on the other hand, shifted from the population share being 0.2

percentage points above average in 1990 to 0.1 percentage points below average in 2000. Although

there is substantial variation in the rankings across the two time periods, given that the state effects

do not fully control for state characteristics, it is of interest to investigate whether our results are

driven by some state characteristics that are correlated with the population shares.

   Our first experiment is to include the interaction between the state fixed effect and the monetary

policy shock as an additional regressor. This will soak up cs m
                                                              t and control for level differences in

population across states that might be correlated with fixed state characteristics. For example,

Southern states may have more old and young but less industry. The results are presented in

Appendix Section D and in particular Figure 15. The basic pattern is the same as in our baseline

specification. There are a few notable differences. The response of personal income is amplified.



                                                  21
                          Figure 5: Changing demographic makeup of the U.S.: Ages 50-54

                                                                1990




                                                                2000




The figures represent the residuals of the share of population aged 50-54 years, after removing time fixed effects.



For both personal income and employment statistical significance improves for the 25-34 and 40-49

age groups, while worsening for those over 50. There is also weak evidence that a greater fraction

of older people may reduce the effects of monetary policy on employment. Given that including

these interaction terms does not affect the general pattern of the baseline results, in what follows

we will report the results for our baseline specification that does not include the shock interacted

with the state fixed effects and comment whenever including these interaction terms qualitatively

alters the results.

    Interacting the shock with state fixed effects controls for a correlation between average pop-

ulation in the state and average characteristics of the state. The possibility remains that some



                                                                  22
characteristics may change over time in ways correlated with the change in demographic structure.

To investigate this issue we consider whether the population structure of a state is correlated with

certain characteristics. We begin with the industrial composition of the state. We consider three

industries which have been tied to monetary policy: manufacturing, financial services and construc-

tion. We consider manufacturing and construction because these industries tend to be more cyclical

than other industries. A state with a large manufacturing or construction share would be expected

to respond more strongly to a monetary policy shock. We consider financial services because of the

effects of monetary policy through bank lending could explain a state's greater response.

       We include the fraction of employment in manufacturing, construction and financial services

both as additional regressors and interacted with the monetary policy shock. The addition of these

additional regressors has no effect on the estimates of 6,a . We therefore present the results in

Figure 16 in Appendix Section D. To understand why there is no effect, we consider the correlation

between the share of employment in these industries and the proportion of the population between

40 and 64 years (both net of time effects). The correlation is -0.04 for manufacturing, -0.08 for

financial activities, and -0.14 for construction.12 All three correlations are small and negative.

None of these sectors vary positively with the share of the middle aged as would be expected if

these sectors were driving the results.

       Industrial structure is not the only state characteristic that may confound our results. Cravino,

Lan, and Levchenko (2018) argue that households with higher incomes tend to purchase goods

with stickier prices. Since middle aged households tend to have high incomes and since stickier

prices tend to be correlated with the response to monetary policy shocks, our results could reflect

this mechanism. We therefore add state income interacted with the monetary policy shock as an

additional regressor. Regression results appear in Figure 17 in Appendix Section D. Again we find

no evidence that this mechanism is driving the results. The correlation between state personal

income and the proportion of the population between 40 and 64 years of age (both net of time

effects) is -0.11. Again the correlation is small and negative.

       For completeness we considered other variables related to the demographic structure of the
  12
    Using the level of industry employment instead of the fraction of industry employment to total private employment
gives similar correlations.



                                                        23
economy, such as the percentage of employees who have college degrees, or are white, or are male,

as well as some other state-level features of the economy that age might proxy for such as housing

prices and homeownership rates. These results are presented in Figures 18 and 19 in Appendix

Section D. We included each variable as well as the variable interacted with the monetary policy

shock. None of these variables had a qualitative effect on the estimates of 6,a .

       While we cannot conclude with certainty that the results of Section 4.1 are not due to the

correlation of population structure with some other state characteristic, we find no evidence that

this is the case.


5.2      Migration

One of the margins by which states adjust to shocks is through migration (Blanchard and Katz,

1992). This raises the question of whether the responses in Figure 2 result from hiring within the

state or from migration between states. It also raises the question as to whether our results for

US states can be applied to nations, since migration between states is likely easier than migration

between nations.

       To investigate this question we consider the responses of population and unemployment to mon-

etary policy shocks interacted with the age bins. The idea is that migration should be reflected in

the response of population, whereas hiring from within the state should show up in unemployment.

       In the left panel of Figure 6, we take X to be the log change in population over six quarters,

ln Ps,t+6 -ln Ps,t-1 , where Ps,t is the population of state s at data t. The response of population looks

very different than the response of employment in Figure 2. Whereas the response of employment

and personal income partitioned the population into three three distinct age groups, the response

of population partitions the population into only two. Population is more responsive in states with

a greater share of the population younger than 50 and less responsive the greater the share over

50. This likely reflects the fact that the young are more mobile than the old.13 The response

of population is strongest for those 35-45 and those older than 60. The response of income and

employment is generally the weakest for these age bins. Moreover, the response of population is
  13
    As might be expected the magnitude of the response is muted if we drop the five States with the smallest population.
The basic shape remains the same.




                                                          24
less than half the response of employment. We therefore conclude that migration, while potentially

important, is not the main factor behind our results.
                                                Figure 6: Effects of Migration

                         Population                                                  Unemployment Rate




The horizontal axis represents the age groups a. The vertical axis represents the effect on the dependent variable of a positive one
percentage point shock to the federal funds rate interacted with a one percentage point increase in the population share of group a.
The solid line represents the point estimates. The vertical bars represent the 95% confidence intervals given Driscoll-Kraay standard
errors.


     In the right panel, we take the dependent variable to be the change in the unemployment rate,

Us,t+6 - Us,t-1 . This figure looks very similar to Figure 2. The sign of the response is flipped as

an increase in unemployment tends to coincide with a decline in employment. Together these two

figures point to the importance of internal adjustment mechanisms and increase our confidence

that conclusions that we draw for the US states should apply to nation states.


5.3       Aggregate or Individual Channels

Our next experiment is to replace X with X a
                                           ¯ , the income of age group a
                                                                       ¯, to investigate whether

the mechanism works at the level of the individual or in the aggregate. Let i,a (¯
                                                                                 a) denote the

response of X a
              ¯ to m pa . If i,a (¯
                                  a) is the same for all a, then the response of each age group a
                                                                                                ¯ is

independent of the age distribution in the state. In this case, the mechanism likely operates at the

individual level, and the aggregate response reflects the cumulated individual responses. If, on the

other hand, i,a (¯
                 a) is the same for all a
                                        ¯, then all age groups a
                                                               ¯ respond similarly to an increase in the

proportion of the population in bin a. In this case the mechanism likely operates at the aggregate

level.


                                                                25
    We use data from the Census Bureau's Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD)

Program. The LEHD provides average monthly earnings, the number of jobs, and payroll for em-

ployees. The publicly available data is available for the following pre-defined age bins, 19-21 years,

22-24 years, and then 10-year bins from 25-34 years to 55-64 years, followed by one last 65-99

years age bin. We constuct the income age groups a
                                                 ¯ to match the LEHD age-bins.

    We find strong evidence for aggregate mechanisms. Figure 7 depicts 6,a (¯
                                                                            a) for different choices

   ¯ and for different choices of X . X a
of a                                    ¯ is either average earnings per worker, the number of jobs,


or total payroll in bin a
                        ¯. The overall picture remains similar to section 4.1 above. The response of

average earnings, jobs, and payrolls are independent of one's own age group and depend primarily

on the age structure of the state in which one lives. It is not so much being middle aged as living in

a state with lots of middle aged residents that explains the response of income to a monetary policy

shock.14

    As further evidence that the mechanism operates through an aggregate channel, Figure 7 shows

that the mechanism appears to work both through the extensive margin, the number of jobs, and

the intensive margin, earnings per worker. The combined effect on total payroll is the product of

the two. This combined effect is stronger and statistically more significant.


6    Middle-Aged Entrepreneurs and Monetary Policy

In this section, we suggest a mechanism by which the greater number of middle aged amplify

the impact of monetary policy on incomes and employment of all age groups. Our mechanism is

motivated by the observation that entrepreneurs, especially successful entrepreneurs, tend to be

middle aged (Selgado, 2018, Azoulay et al., 2019). Suppose that middle aged residents, due to

their experience and resources, have a comparative advantage in entrepreneurship. Then states

with more middle aged residents will likely have more entrepreneurs on the margin of entry. Busi-

ness formation will then respond more aggressively to a reduction in interest rates and income and

employment will follow. These first round effects will be followed by knock-on effects. The rela-

tively larger expansion in states with more potential entrepreneurs will tend to increase business
  14
     When we include the interaction between the monetary shock and the state fixed effect as an additional control,
Figure 7 is largely unchanged except that i,a is often positive and significant for the old, age 65 and over.



                                                        26
                                   Figure 7: Which Age Group's Income Matters Most?

                Earnings                                Employment                                      Payroll
                                                    All ages (14-99 years)




                                                          25-34 years




                                                          35-44 years




                                                          45-54 years




                                                          55-64 years




                                                          65-99 years




Each graph represents the response of earnings, employment, or payroll of all individuals in a specific age-group (listed in the row
titles) to a positive one percentage point shock to the federal funds rate interacted with a one percentage point increase in the
population share of group a (listed on the horizontal axis of each figure). The vertical bars represent the 95% confidence intervals
given Driscoll-Kraay standard errors.




                                                                27
income. The rise in business income will further increase the incentive to invest and will provide

entrepreneurs with the resources to take advantage of investment opportunities and expand em-

ployment. The result of all this investment will be a general rise in output and incomes that benefit

all age groups spurred by the entrepreneurial activities of the middle aged. Moreover, the increased

incentive to invest will tend to cause the middle-aged to substitute out of consumption, helping to

reconcile our results with the earlier literature that finds it is the consumption of the young that

responds more to monetary shocks.

    We find evidence for certain aspects of this story. We find that establishment births respond

more strongly to monetary policy the greater the share of middle aged (See Figure 8, left panel).

Establishment births slightly lead income and employment. They peak five quarters after the shock,

one quarter prior to the peak in income. Interestingly, we find no consistent response of establish-

ment deaths. The response of deaths is generally insignificant and the estimates are unstable over

time (See Figure 8, right panel).15 In some sense this is not surprising. There are two effects of

a monetary expansion. The first is to make existing firms more profitable. This effect tends to

reduce establishment deaths. The second is to increase the entry of new firms run by entrepreneurs

with marginal ability. This effect tends to increase the rate of business failure. The net effect on

establishment deaths is therefore ambiguous.

    We also find that business profits respond more the greater the share of middle aged. Figure 9

illustrates the response of different types of income to our interacted shock. The response of wages

and salaries and the response of dividend, interest, and rent look very similar in shape and mag-

nitude to our baseline specification. The main difference is in the response of proprietors' income.

Here the negative response of the middle-aged is much more pronounced, although imprecisely

estimated.16

    Consistent with the story that increased profits further drive business expansion, we find that

the share of small business employment rises more rapidly the larger the fraction of the middle
  15
     When we include the interaction between the monetary shock and the state fixed effect as an additional control,
Figure 8 is largely unchanged except that in the case of establishment deaths side the coefficient for the 40-44 year-old
bin becomes positive and significant.
  16
     The response of proprietors income in Figure 9 is large but imprecisely measured. If we include the monteary shock
interacted with State fixed effects the respone of proprietors income remains large and is statistically significant. Results
available from the authors upon request.




                                                            28
                                                Figure 8: Business Formation

                    Establishment Births                                                  Establishment Deaths
                    5-quarters after a shock                                               5-quarters after a shock




                    6-quarters after a shock                                               6-quarters after a shock




The horizontal axis represents the age groups a. The vertical axis represents the effect on the dependent variable of a positive one
percentage point shock to the federal funds rate interacted with a one percentage point increase in the population share of group a.
The solid line represents the point estimates. The vertical bars represent the 95% confidence intervals given Driscoll-Kraay standard
errors.


aged (See Figure 10). This effect is reminiscent of the effects found in Gertler and Gilchrist (1994)

in which monetary policy has a greater impact on small firms. Gertler and Gilchrist interpret this

as evidence of financial frictions. In Figures 20 and 21 Appendix Section E, we show the response

of firms by size and age. While firms of all types show the familiar pattern in which the impact of

monetary policy is lessened for the young and enhanced for the old, this pattern is more pronounced

in the young and small firms.17

       One might worry that the share for the middle-aged is simply proxying for firm size. It is true
  17
    In Figure 10 we define a small firm as any firm with fewer than 500 employees. The pattern illustrated in the figure
does not depend on the cutoff used to define a small firm. A similar pattern is visible if we take the cutoff to be 50 or
250 employees.




                                                                29
                                    Figure 9: Response of Different Types of Income


                                                 Personal Income (baseline)




                                                     Proprietors Income




                                                     Wages and Salaries




                                        Dividend, Interest, and Rental Income




The horizontal axis represents the age groups a. The vertical axis represents the effect on the dependent variable of a positive one
percentage point shock to the federal funds rate interacted with a one percentage point increase in the population share of group a.
The solid line represents the point estimates. The vertical bars represent the 95% confidence intervals given Driscoll-Kraay standard
errors.



                                                                30
                         Figure 10: Response of employment share of small firms to all firms




Small firms are defined as firms with 0-499 employees. The horizontal axis represents the age groups a. The vertical axis represents
the effect on the dependent variable of a positive one percentage point shock to the federal funds rate interacted with a one percentage
point increase in the population share of group a. The solid line represents the point estimates. The vertical bars represent the 95%
confidence intervals given Driscoll-Kraay standard errors.




that the share of the middle-aged is correlated with the share of small business employment, as

would be expected if the middle aged tended to be the ones to start businesses. The correlation

between the share of the population 40-64 and the share of employment in businesses with fewer

than 500 employees is 0.32 (after removing time effects). It does not appear, however, that the

middle-aged population is simply a proxy for small business. Appendix Figure 22 shows that the

pattern seen in Figure 2 survives the inclusion of the small business share interacted with the

monetary policy shock. The evidence is therefore consistent with a story in which a monetary

expansion prompts entrepreneurs to start and expand small businesses, and this expansion leads

to a rise in the incomes of all age groups.




                                                                  31
7    Conclusion

We consider the effects of monetary policy shocks on income and employment in U.S. states. We

find that there are three distinct age groups in each state. The young, who are under 35 years of

age, tend to dampen the effectiveness of monetary policy on personal income and employment.

The middle aged, who are between 40 and 64 years, tend to amplify the impact of monetary policy.

The old, who are over 65 years of age, do not affect the impact of monetary policy one way or

another. We find that these effects work through the aggregate, not the individual: what matters

for the income of a given age group is not the age group itself, but the age composition of the state.

We find that these results cannot be explained by the industry composition of a state. We propose

a mechanism by which a greater share of middle aged residents increases the elasticity of business

formation in response to monetary policy.

    Our results are complementary to the findings of Sterk and Tenreyro (2018), Wong (2018),

and Cloyne et al. (2018). These authors study the effect of monetary policy on the consumption

of different age groups. We study how the effect of monetary policy on aggregate income varies

with the age structure of the economy. An interesting direction for future research would be to

construct a model consistent with both sets of facts. In the model, liquidity constraints would cause

the consumption of the young to respond strongly to monetary policy shocks. The middle aged

would respond, not by consuming more but by investing, starting business, and hiring, all activities

which lead the economy to expand and increase the incomes of all groups.




                                                 32
References


 [1] Auclert, Adrien (2019), "Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel," American Economic
     Review, forthcoming.
 [2] Azoulay, Pierre, Benjamin Jones, Daniel Kim and Javier Miranda (2019), "Age and High-
     Growth Entrepreneurship," American Economic Review: Insights, forthcoming.
 [3] Basso, Henrique, and Omar Rachedi (2018), "The Young, the Old, and the Government:
     Demographics and Fiscal Multipliers," Bank of Spain working paper.
 [4] Berg, Kimberly, Chadwick Curtis, Steven Lugauer, and Nelson Mark (2019), "Demographis
     and Monetary Policy Shocks," working paper.
 [5] Blanchard, Olivier, Lawrance Katz (1992), "Regional Evolutions," Brookings Papers on Eco-
     nomic Activity, 1 :1-75.
 [6] Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel (2018), "Geographic Cross-Sectional Fiscal Multipliers: What Have
     We Learned?" American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming.
 [7] Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio (2016), "Demographic and Real In-
     terest Rates: Inspecting the Mechanism," European Economic Review 88, 208-226.
 [8] Carvino, Javier, Ting Lan, and Andrei Levchenko (2018), "Price Stickiness along the Income
     Distribution and the Effects of Monetary Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
 [9] Cloyne, James, Clodomiro Ferreira, and Paolo Surico (2018), "Monetary Policy when House-
     holds have Debt: New Evidence on the Transmission Mechanism," Banco de Espa~
                                                                                na Working
     Paper 1813.
[10] Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Lorenz Kueng and John Silvia (2017), "Innocent By-
     standers? Monetary Policy and Inequality in the U.S.," Journal of Monetary Economics 88,
     70-88.
[11] Doepke, Matthias, and Martin Schneider (2006), "Inflation and the Redistribution of Nominal
     Wealth," Journal of Political Economy, 114 (6), 1069-1097.
[12] Driscoll, John and Aart Kraay (1998), "Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimation with Spa-
     tially Dependent Panel Data," Review of Economics and Statistics 80, 549-560.
[13] Eggertsson, Gauti, Neil Mehrotra, and Jacob Robbins (2017), "A Model of Secular Stagnation:
     Theory and Quantitative Evidence," NBER Working Paper No. 23093.
[14] Freyer, James, "Demographics and Productivity," The Review of Economics and Statistics, Febru-
     ary 2007, 89, 100-109
[15] Fujiwara, Ippei, and Yuki Teranishi (2008), "A Dynamic New Keynesian Life-Cycle Model:
     Societal Aging, Demographics, and Monetary Policy," Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control
     32, 2398-2427.



                                                33
[16] Gertler, Mark (1999), "Government Debt and Social Security in a Life-cycle Model." Carnegie-
     Rochester Conference on Public Policy 50, 61-110.
[17] Gertler, Mark, and Simon Gilchrist (1994), "Monetary Policy, Business Cycles, and the Behav-
     ior of Small Manufacturing Firms," Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 309-340.
[18] Gertler, Mark and Peter Karadi (2015), "Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Eco-
     nomic Activity," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7, 44-76.
[19] Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016), "Understanding the
     New Normal: The Role of Demographics," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-
     080. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.).
[20] G¨
      urkaynak, Refet, Brian Sack, and Eric Swanson (2005), "Do Actions Speak Louder Than
     Words? The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements," Interna-
     tional Journal of Central Banking.
[21] Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, and Michael Weber (2015), "Are sticky prices costly? Evidence from
     the stock market," The American Economic Review, 106, 165-199.
[22] Gourinchas, Pierre Olivier and Jonathan Parker (2002), "Consumption over the Life-Cycle,"
     Econometrica 70, 47-89.
[23] Imam, Patrick (2015), "Shock from Graying: Is the Demographic Shift Weakening Monetary
     Policy Effectiveness," International Journal of Finance & Economics 20, 138­154.
[24] Kantur, Zeynep (2013), "Aging and Monetary Policy," working paper.
[25] Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Gianluca Violante (2018), "Monetary Policy According to
     HANK," American Economic Review, 108, 697?743.
[26] Kara, Engin, and Leopold von Thadden (2016), "Interest Rate Effects of Demographic
     Changes in a New Keynesian Life-Cycle Framework," Macroeconomic Dynamics 20, 120­164.
[27] Kuttner, Kenneth N. (2001), "Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: Evidence from the
     Fed funds futures market," Journal of Monetary Economics, 47 (3), 523-544.
[28] Nakamura, Emi, and Jon Steinsson (2014), "Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence
     from US Regions," American Economic Review 104, 753-92.
[29] Nakamura, Emi, and Jon Steinsson (2018), "High Frequency Identification of Monetary Non-
     Neutrality: The Information Effect," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(3), 1283-1330.
[30] Ottonello, Pablo, and Thomas Winberry (2018), "Financial Heterogeneity and the Investment
     Channel of Monetary Policy," NBER working paper No. 24221.
[31] Ramey, Valery (2016), "Macroeconomic Shocks and their Propagation," in John Taylor and
     Harald Uhlig eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Elsevier.
[32] Romer, Christina, and David Romer (2004), "A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation
     and Implications," American Economic Review, 94, 1055-1084.
[33] Rudebusch, Glenn (1998), "Do Measures of Monetary Policy in a VAR Make Sense?," Interna-



                                               34
     tional Economic Review, 39(4), 907-931.
[34] Selgado, Sergio (2018), "Technological Change and Entrepreneurship," working paper.
[35] Shoag, Daniel (2010), "The Impact of Government Spending Shocks: Evidence on the Multi-
     plier from State Pension Plan Returns." working paper.
[36] S¨
      oderstr¨
             om, Ulf (2001), "Predicting monetary policy with federal funds futures prices," Jour-
     nal of Futures Markets, 21(4), 377-391.
[37] Sterk, Vincent and Silvana Tenreyo (2018), "The Transmission of Monetary Policy through
     Redistribution and Durable Purchases," Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
[38] Thapar, Aditi (2008), "Using Private Forecasts to Estimate the Effects of Monetary Policy,"
     Journal of Monetary Economics, 55, 806-824.
[39] Wong, Arlene (2018), "Transmission of Monetary Policy to Consumption and Population Ag-
     ing," working paper.
[40] Wieland, Johannes, and Mu-Jeung Yang (2016), "Financial Dampening," NBER working pa-
     per No. 22141.




                                               35
                                                    Table 1: Baseline Results

                                      Personal Income                                          Private Employment
                                          Driscoll-Kray                                              Driscoll-Kray
                       Coefficient        Standard Error            P-Value       Coefficient        Standard Error            P-Value

 20-24 years                0.83                  0.74               0.265             0.93                  0.66               0.169
 25-29 years                2.30                  0.77               0.004             3.08                  0.82               0.000
 30-34 years                3.13                  1.17               0.010             3.63                  1.38               0.011
 35-39 years                0.54                  1.35               0.689             1.57                  1.39               0.266
 40-44 years               -2.66                  1.28               0.043            -0.76                  1.26               0.549
 45-49 years               -4.06                  1.52               0.010            -1.57                  2.15               0.468
 50-54 years               -4.74                  1.48               0.002            -2.70                  1.36               0.053
 55-59 years               -4.12                  1.18               0.001            -2.52                  0.94               0.010
 60-64 years               -2.46                  1.01               0.018            -1.40                  0.70               0.052
 65-69 years               -0.45                  0.67               0.506            -0.29                  0.61               0.642
 70-99 years               -0.15                  0.32               0.628            -0.53                  0.25               0.044


The first column contains the age groups, a. The coefficients represent the effect on the dependent variable of a positive one percentage
point shock to the federal funds rate interacted with a one percentage point increase in the population share of group a.



Appendix

A     Baseline Coefficient Estimates

Table 1 presents the coefficient estimates behind Figure 2.


B     Monetary Policy Shocks

This appendix explains the construction of our monetary policy shock series. This identification

method involves using intra-day data on federal funds futures contracts around the time of mon-

etary policy announcements. Monetary policy shocks are estimated as the change in the federal

funds rate implied by the current month federal funds futures contract in a relatively short window

of time around the FOMC announcement. By considering a sufficiently narrow window around the



                                                                  36
FOMC announcement, one can be reasonably certain that no other news caused the change in the

futures rates.

   We construct our shock series in two steps. First, we obtain raw shocks from the policy an-

nouncements. Second, we aggregate these shocks to a quarterly frequency.
                                                m,hf
   The raw shocks to monetary policy                     are defined as follows:


                                   m,hf          d
                                          =             × i +1 - i -0 ,                                      (3)
                                              d - d ( )

Here  is the date and time of a FOMC announcement, i +1 is the federal funds rate implied by

the current month federal funds futures contract 1 minutes after the FOMC announcement, while

i -0 is the rate implied by futures markets 0 minutes before the announcement. We consider a

one hour window around the announcements, from fifteen minutes prior to the announcement to
                                                                           m,hf
forty-five minutes after the announcement. Positive values of                     here imply unexpected increases

(monetary contractions) in the federal funds rate and vice-versa. The coefficient multiplying the

change in the interest rate, accounts for the fact that the settlement price of federal funds futures

contracts is based on the realized average effective federal funds rate for the calendar month of the

contract and the monetary policy shock implicit in the announcement only affects the federal funds

rate over the remainder of the month. Here d is the maximum number of days in the month and

d ( ) is the day of the month of the FOMC announcement.

   Following Ottonello and Winberry (2018), we aggregate the high-frequency shocks to a quar-

terly frequency using a weighted moving average of the raw shocks,


                      m            dt - d (t,  )       m,hf            d (t - 1,  )     m,hf
                      t   =                      ×            +                     ×        .               (4)
                               t
                                        dt                         t-1
                                                                            dt


Here t measures time in quarters and the         m     are the quarterly aggregated monetary policy shocks
                                                 t

that we use in our analysis. dt is the number days in quarter t, and d(t,  ) is the day in quarter t

of announcement  . This method of aggregating shocks implies that an announcement made on

the last day of a quarter will have a very small weight on the current quarter, but a relatively large

impact on the next quarter. It is based on the idea that shock at the very end of quarter t - 1 looks



                                                         37
much more like a shock at the very beginning of quarter t than a shock at the very beginning of

quarter t - 1.

    Trading in federal funds futures markets began in October 1988. Following G¨
                                                                               urkaynak, Sack,

and Swanson (2005), we begin our sample in 1990 and end in 2008 when interest rates hit the

zero lower bound. We use the federal funds futures shocks from G¨
                                                                urkaynak, et al. (2005) and

Gorodnichenko and Weber (2015). Over our baseline sample period of 1990-2008, there were

eight scheduled Federal Open Markets Committee (FOMC) meetings in every calendar year. As

discussed in detail in G¨
                        urkaynak, et al. (2005), the current practice of issuing a press release

after every FOMC meeting began in 1994. Over the 1990-94 period, financial markets inferred the

size and direction of the target federal funds rate based on open market operations conducted at

11:30am on the first business day after the FOMC meeting. In addition, on some occasions, a press

release regarding discount rate changes was issued prior to an FOMC meeting. In these situations,

financial market participants correctly inferred a change in the federal funds rate as well.

    Figure 11 shows the actual changes in the target federal funds rate as well as the exogenous

shocks used in our baseline representation in this paper. The dashed line depicts the actual change

in the target federal funds rate while the solid line represents the high-frequency shocks as de-

scribed above. The identified shocks are small but not insignificant. The average high-frequency

shock over the 1990-2008 sample is about zero with a standard deviation of 11 basis points. Ap-

proximately 40% of shocks were contractionary while 60% are expansionary, and there are 70%

more shocks than actual changes in the federal funds rate.


C     Robustness

We consider a number of robustness checks to our baseline specification in this section.


C.1   Wide Age Bins

In our baseline specification, we estimate separate regressions for each five-year age bin. This

allows the coefficients on the fixed effects and the other regressors to change with each specifica-

tion. It also does not take into account that an increase in the proportion of the population in one



                                                 38
                           Figure 11: Federal funds rate changes and shocks




age group is likely a reduction in another age group. For both of these reasons, it is of interest

to include all of the interaction terms in a single regression. As it is not practical to run a single

regression that includes all of the age bins as regressors, we instead aggregate the age bins into

three broad categories: 20-39, 40-59, and 60+. In this we are motivated by our finding that there

are in essence three important age groups.

   The results appear in Figure 12. The pattern is the same as in our baseline specification: A

greater proportion of the young dampens the effects of a monetary policy shock and a greater

proportion of the middle aged amplifies these effects. There is also weak evidence that a greater

proportion of the old dampens the effects of monetary policy.


C.2   Aggregation to BEA Regions and Elimination of Small States

We test the robustness of our results to borders and the level of aggregation. One of the main

differences between states and nations is that the borders of states tend to be more porous. It is

therefore of interest to see if reducing the importance of borders affects our results. We run two


                                                 39
                                 Figure 12: Wide Age Bins, Estimated Simultaneously

                       Personal Income                                                    Private employment




The horizontal axis represents the age groups a. The vertical axis represents the effect on the dependent variable of a positive one
percentage point shock to the federal funds rate interacted with a one percentage point increase in the population share of group a.
The solid line represents the point estimates. The vertical bars represent the 95% confidence intervals given Driscoll-Kraay standard
errors.



experiments. First, we aggregate states up to the level of BEA regions. This reduces the flow of

people and goods into and out of the region as much of what was interregional trade and migration

becomes intraregional. Second, we eliminate states with small populations, namely Alaska, North

Dakota, Vermont, Washington D.C., and Wyoming. Migration may have a larger effect on these

states.

     Figure 13 presents the results. Aggregating to the 8 BEA regions reduces the degrees of freedom

and hence the statistical significance of our results, but the basic pattern of young, middle aged

and old remains. Dropping the small states has little effect on either the economic or statistical

significance of our results.


C.3       Subsample stability

Federal funds futures markets began operating only in the late-1980's, which limits the extent of

subsample stability that we can conduct using the high-frequency shocks. In addition, quarterly

employment data is available at the state level beginning only in 1990. We compare our baseline

results to two subsamples. First, we truncate all data in 2006 to avoid any contamination with the

housing market crash and the Great Recession. Second, we begin our sample in 1995, after the

FOMC began issuing press releases following every FOMC meeting.


                                                                40
                                   Figure 13: BEA regions and Eliminate Small States

                       Personal Income                                                    Private employment
                             Baseline                                                              Baseline




                           BEA regions                                                           BEA regions




                   Drop Smallest Five States                                             Drop Smallest Five States




The horizontal axis represents the age groups a. The vertical axis represents the effect on the dependent variable of a positive one
percentage point shock to the federal funds rate interacted with a one percentage point increase in the population share of group a.
The solid line represents the point estimates. The vertical bars represent the 95% confidence intervals given Driscoll-Kraay standard
errors.




                                                                41
      Figure 14 illustrates the effects on personal income and private employment in each of the

subsamples. For ease of comparison, the first row contains our baseline results for the 1990-2008

sample period. The main story is largely unchanged for the different sample periods. Truncating

the data in 2006 implies slightly weaker effects on both personal income and private employment

than if we include the later period.

      Beginning the estimation in 1995 exaggerates (amplifies) the demographic cycle for personal

income. The dampening effect of the young and the stronger effect of the middle ages are both

amplified in the 1995-2008 sample period as compared to our baseline results. For private employ-

ment, the effects from the younger age groups is smaller, but the effects stemming from the middle

groups is even larger.


D       State Characteristics

It is possible that age is simply picking up the effect of some other state characteristics. To control

for state characteristics, we extend equation (1) by interacting control variables with the monetary

policy shock,



                    log [Xs,t+i ] = i,a      m a
                                             t ps,t   + a,0 pa     1
                                                             s,t +  Zs + 
                                                                          2     m
                                                                                t Zs   + s + t + us,t .                  (5)

where Zs refers to control variables, such as the fraction of manufacturing or construction em-

ployment, or percentage of employees with college degrees. We consider one additional control

variable at a time.

      Our first experiment is to take Zs to be the state fixed effect, this will control for level differences

in population across states that might be correlated with fixed state characteristics.                   18   For example,

Southern states may have more old and young but less industry. Figure 15, shows the results for

this specification. The basic pattern is the same, although there is weak evidence that a greater

fraction of older people may reduce the responsiveness of employment.

      Interacting the shock with state fixed effects controls for a correlation between average pop-

ulation in the state and average characteristics of the state. The possibility remains that some
 18
      Since we include state fixed effects (s ) in the regression, we only include Zs interacted with the shock in this case.




                                                             42
                                               Figure 14: Subsample Stability

                       Personal Income                                                    Private employment
                     1990-2008 (Baseline)                                                  1990-2008 (Baseline)




                            1990-2006                                                             1990-2006




                            1995-2008                                                             1995-2008




The horizontal axis represents the age groups a. The vertical axis represents the effect on the dependent variable of a positive one
percentage point shock to the federal funds rate interacted with a one percentage point increase in the population share of group a.
The solid line represents the point estimates. The vertical bars represent the 95% confidence intervals given Driscoll-Kraay standard
errors.




                                                                43
                                       Figure 15: Include Shock Interacted With State

                        Personal Income                                                        Private employment
                               Baseline                                                                 Baseline




              With Interacted Shock-State Term                                          With Interacted Shock-State Term




The horizontal axis represents the age groups. For a one-percentage point unexpected increase in the federal funds rate, the blue line
represents the point estimates of the effect of a one-percentage point increase in the population share of group a on the growth rate of
the variable of interest. Positive point estimates imply that, relative to the aggregate effects, the effects of monetary policy are weaker.
Negative estimates imply stronger effects of monetary policy, relative to the aggregate effect. The vertical lines represent the 95%
confidence intervals for the estimated coefficients.




                                                                    44
characteristics may change over time in ways correlated with the change in demographic structure.

We investigate a few possibilities. Figure 16 shows the results of including the fraction of sector em-
                                                                                      1 and Z 2 ,
ployment to total private employment for manufacturing, finance, and construction in Zs      s

that is both the fraction of employment and the fraction interacted with the monetary policy shock.

Figure 16 presents the results. These additional regressors have little impact on the coefficients

i,a . In the case of construction, the results become stronger.

    Next, we control for the income of the state by setting Zs to be state personal income in equation

(5). Interacting the shock with state personal income controls for differences in average income

levels across states that might be correlated with the population structure. For example, incomes

are lower for the young and old and higher for the middle aged. Figure 17 shows that controlling

for the differences in incomes across states has a negligible impact on our results.

    What else might age be proxying for? To separate out the effects of age from other demographic

characteristics of states, we consider the percentage of employees who have college degrees, or

are white, or are male. Interacting these characteristics with the monetary shocks allows us to

separate out the responsiveness of these groups in the population to monetary policy. For example,

if college educated workers are more informed about changes in and the effects of monetary policy,

these workers might respond more to shocks relative to workers without college degrees. After

controlling for this effect, the effects of the age distribution might disappear. Figure 18 presents

these results. The results are largely unchanged. We conclude that obtaining a college degree,

gender, and race are not driving our results.

    Wong (2018) finds that the consumption of young homeowners respond more strongly to mon-

etary policy shocks. To understand whether the housing market is driving our results, we control

for house prices and home ownership rates. The results of this estimation are shown in Figure 19.

The basic pattern survives.


E    Firm size and age

Figures 20 and 21 illustrate the effects on income and employment broken down by firm size and

age. Firm size in Figure 20 is measured by the number of employees. Firms of all types follow the



                                                  45
                            Figure 16: Control for Share of Employment in Other Sectors

                       Personal Income                                                    Private employment
                             Baseline                                                              Baseline




                     Manufacturing Share                                                   Manufacturing Share




             Share of Construction Employment                                      Share of Construction Employment




                 Share of Financial Activities                                         Share of Financial Activities




The horizontal axis represents the age groups a. The vertical axis represents the effect on the dependent variable of a positive one
percentage point shock to the federal funds rate interacted with a one percentage point increase in the population share of group a.
The solid line represents the point estimates. The vertical bars represent the 95% confidence intervals given Driscoll-Kraay standard
errors.




                                                                46
                     Figure 17: Control for State Personal Income (interacted with the Shock)

                    Private Employment                                                      Personal Income




The horizontal axis represents the age groups a. The vertical axis represents the effect on the dependent variable of a positive one
percentage point shock to the federal funds rate interacted with a one percentage point increase in the population share of group a.
The solid line represents the point estimates. The vertical bars represent the 95% confidence intervals given Driscoll-Kraay standard
errors.




pattern in which the impact of monetary policy is dampened the greater the share of the young and

amplified the greater the share of the middle aged. The effects are similar for employment, income

per worker and total payroll, although the effects on total payroll are stronger than the effects on

the number of jobs or earnings per worker. There is also some weak evidence that the pattern is

stronger for the extensive margin (the number of jobs) than the intensive margin (earnings per

worker) for young and small firms. There is weak evidence that the effects are exaggerated for

younger and smaller firms.

     Figure 22 depicts the results after we control for the share of small business. We include the

fraction of firms with 249 or fewer employees interacted with the shock in the estimation. The

pattern seen throughout the paper survives, indicating that correlation between the demographic

structure and small businesses is not driving our results. The share of middle aged does not appear

to be proxying for the share of small businesses in total employment.




                                                                47
                              Figure 18: Control for Other Demographic Characteristics

                       Personal Income                                                    Private employment
                             Baseline                                                              Baseline




                            Education                                                             Education




                               Race                                                                  Race




                              Gender                                                                Gender




The horizontal axis represents the age groups a. The vertical axis represents the effect on the dependent variable of a positive one
percentage point shock to the federal funds rate interacted with a one percentage point increase in the population share of group a.
The solid line represents the point estimates. The vertical bars represent the 95% confidence intervals given Driscoll-Kraay standard
errors.




                                                                48
                         Figure 19: Control for Housing Related State-Level Characteristics

                       Personal Income                                                    Private employment
                             Baseline                                                              Baseline




                           House Prices                                                         House Prices




                     Homeownership Rates                                                  Homeownership Rates




The horizontal axis represents the age groups a. The vertical axis represents the effect on the dependent variable of a positive one
percentage point shock to the federal funds rate interacted with a one percentage point increase in the population share of group a.
The solid line represents the point estimates. The vertical bars represent the 95% confidence intervals given Driscoll-Kraay standard
errors.




                                                                49
                                      Figure 20: Response of Different Sized Firms

               Earnings                                  Employment                                      Payroll
                                                            All Firms




                                                 Firms with 0-19 employees




                                                Firms with 20-49 employees




                                                Firms with 50-249 employees




                                               Firms with 250-499 employees




                                                 Firms with 500+ employees




The horizontal axis represents the age groups a. The vertical axis represents the effect on the dependent variable of a positive one
percentage point shock to the federal funds rate interacted with a one percentage point increase in the population share of group a.
The solid line represents the point estimates. The vertical bars represent the 95% confidence intervals given Driscoll-Kraay standard
errors.




                                                                50
                                           Figure 21: Response of Firms by Age

                 Earnings                                      Employment                                           Payroll
                                                                   All Firms




                                                             0-5 year old firms




                                                            6-10 year old firms




                                                            11+ year old firms




The horizontal axis represents the age groups a. The vertical axis represents the effect on the dependent variable of a positive one
percentage point shock to the federal funds rate interacted with a one percentage point increase in the population share of group a.
The solid line represents the point estimates. The vertical bars represent the 95% confidence intervals given Driscoll-Kraay standard
errors.



                                                                51
                                  Figure 22: Controlling for the Effect of Small Firms


             Response of Personal Income (interact shock with fraction of small firms)




           Response of Private employment (interact shock with fraction of small firms)




The horizontal axis represents the age groups a. The vertical axis represents the effect on the dependent variable of a positive one
percentage point shock to the federal funds rate interacted with a one percentage point increase in the population share of group a.
The solid line represents the point estimates. The vertical bars represent the 95% confidence intervals given Driscoll-Kraay standard
errors.




                                                                52
