Are Small Farms Really more Productive than Large Farms?
Fernando M. Aragon Sanchez, Diego Restuccia, and Juan Pablo Rud
NBER Working Paper No. 26331
September 2019, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. C33,C55,D24,E02,E13,O11,O12,O13,O4,O5,Q15,Q18

                                          ABSTRACT

In this paper we show that the study of the farm size-productivity relationship hinges on the
choice of productivity measure. Our main insight is that using yields, a partial measure of
productivity, may not be informative for the size-productivity relationship because, in addition to
total factor productivity, yields pick up input markets distortions and deviations from constant
returns to scale. We examine the empirical relevance of this insight using detailed microdata from
Uganda. We find an inverse relationship between yields and farm size. We show the relationship
turns positive when accounting for market distortions and returns to scale; or when using a farm-
specific component of total factor productivity.

Fernando M. Aragon Sanchez                       Juan Pablo Rud
SFU, Dep. Economics                              Dept of Economics, Royal Holloway
8888 University Drive, V5A 1S6, Burnaby, BC      Egham Hill, Egham
Canada                                           Surrey TW20 0EX, UK
faragons@sfu.ca                                  juan.rud@rhul.ac.uk

Diego Restuccia
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
diego.restuccia@utoronto.ca
      Are small farms really more productive than large
                            farms?
          Fernando Aragon                 Diego Restuccia              Juan Pablo Rud

                                         September 2020



                                               Abstract

          In this paper we show that the study of the farm size-productivity relationship
      hinges on the choice of productivity measure. Our main insight is that using yields,
      a partial measure of productivity, may not be informative for the size-productivity
      relationship because, in addition to total factor productivity, yields pick up input
      markets distortions and deviations from constant returns to scale. We examine the
      empirical relevance of this insight using detailed microdata from Uganda. We find
      an inverse relationship between yields and farm size. We show the relationship turns
      positive when accounting for market distortions and returns to scale; or when using a
      farm-specific component of total factor productivity.



JEL classification: O12, O13, Q12, Q15
Keywords: Farm size, productivity, yields, land markets, distortions, agriculture, policy.




   
    For useful comments, we are grateful to Tasso Adamopoulos, Christopher Barrett, Chad Jones, Yongs
Shin, and seminar participants at several institutions and conferences. All errors are our own. Restuccia
gratefully acknowledges the support from the Canada Research Chairs program and the Bank of Canada
Fellowship program. Aragon gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Social Sciences and Hu-
manities Research Council of Canada, grant 435-2018-0227. The views expressed herein are not necessarily
those of the Bank of Canada and are the authors alone. Contact Information: Aragon: Department of
Economics, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, V5A 1S6, Canada (e-mail: faragons@sfu.ca); Restuccia:
Department of Economics, University of Toronto, 150 St. George Street, Toronto, ON M5S 3G7, Canada (e-
mail: diego.restuccia@utoronto.ca); Rud: Department of Economics, Royal Holloway, University of London,
Egham, Surrey TW20 0EX, UK (e-mail: juan.rud@rhul.ac.uk).


                                                   1
1     Introduction

An important and established microeconomic literature has documented a robust inverse
relationship between yields (i.e., output per unit of land) and farm size. This finding has been
interpreted as evidence that small farms are more productive (Berry et al., 1979; Barrett,
1996; Barrett et al., 2010; Assuncao and Ghatak, 2003; Eswaran and Kotwal, 1986). These
results contrast with growing macroeconomic evidence of a positive relationship between
farm size and agricultural productivity, both across and within countries (Adamopoulos and
Restuccia, 2014; Chen et al., 2017; Restuccia and Santaeulàlia-Llopis, 2017; Adamopoulos
and Restuccia, 2020). A similar finding has been reported in microeconomic studies from
developed countries using measures of total factor productivity instead of yields (Sheng and
Chancellor, 2019; Key, 2019).
    What explains these divergent findings? Answering this question is important given its
consequential policy implications. If small farms are indeed more productive, then policies
that encourage small landholdings (such as land redistribution) could increase aggregate
productivity (see the discussion in Collier and Dercon, 2014).
    We propose a simple framework that allows to reconcile these different results. We
show, theoretically and empirically, why the choice of measure of productivity matters for
understanding the size-productivity relationship. Because yields is a partial measure of
productivity, it picks up not only total factor productivity, but also deviations from constant
returns to scale (CRS) and other phenomena that affect relative input use, such as input
markets' imperfections. We show that even with CRS technologies, estimates of the size-
productivity relationship using yields would be inconsistent in the presence of size-dependent
market distortions. These are plausible in many contexts, such as subsistence farming in
developing countries (Dillon and Barrett, 2017; Aggarwal et al., 2018; Dillon et al., 2019;
Julien et al., 2019). As a consequence, even if larger farms produce more output conditional



                                               2
on inputs used, their yields may be lower.
   To illustrate our main insight, consider the following simple example. Farmers have access
to identical CRS technology, the same total factor productivity and labor endowment but
differ only in the amount of land they can operate. There are no input markets so farmers
use all their endowment of inputs (both land and labor). In this scenario, small farms use,
by construction, relatively more labor per unit of land than large farms, and obtain higher
output per unit of land. We then observe an inverse relationship between yields and farm
size but this relationship, however, is simply reflecting the (inefficient) allocation of inputs
(land in this scenario), not differences in total factor productivity.
   We assess the empirical relevance of this issue using microdata from Ugandan farmers. We
construct two alternative measures of productivity: (1) yields, as is standard in the literature,
and (2) farm productivity. Farm productivity is the farm-specific component of total factor
productivity (TFP) obtained by estimating a farm-level production function. Then, we
evaluate the farm size-productivity relationship using these two alternative measures.
   We find that the results are highly sensitive to the measure of productivity we use,
despite both measures being strongly correlated (i.e., 0.86). We find a negative relationship
between yields and farm size, consistent with the broad findings documented in the literature.
Interestingly, the quantitative magnitude of the relationship for Uganda is quite close to that
reported for other countries. However, when using a measure of farm productivity instead
of yields, we find a positive relationship between farm size and productivity. We show that
these conflicting results reflect the inconsistent estimates obtained when using yields as a
measure of productivity in the presence of deviations from constant returns to scale and size-
dependent market distortions. We document a similar pattern of results using microdata
from Peru, Bangladesh and Tanzania.
   Recent studies have challenged the inverse relationship between yields and farm size by
identifying potential sources of statistical bias, such as non-classical measurement error or


                                               3
omitted soil characteristics (Carletto et al., 2013; Gourlay et al., 2017; Abay et al., 2019a).
In this paper, we take a step back and show that the use of yields in the regression analysis
has a more profound economic limitation. In particular, we find that technology and market
distortions may render yields uninformative of the size-productivity relationship and using
it can lead to wrong policy recommendations. We also point out an important limitation
of two strategies used to empirically address market imperfections: controlling for relative
input use (the so-called production function approach) and exploiting within-farm variation
in plot size (Assunção and Braido, 2007; Barrett et al., 2010). While these strategies account
for size-dependent distortions, they do not address possible deviations from CRS and could
still deliver inconsistent estimates.
   We evaluate the validity of this interpretation in several ways. First, we show that
our results are robust to using GPS measures of farm size and other proxies for output
measurement error and to including a rich set of soil and farmer characteristics. These
are standard fixes to measurement error and omitted variable problems discussed in the
literature. Second, we revisit our estimates of the size-productivity relationship and show
that, after correcting for market distortions and returns to scale, the negative correlation
between yields and farm size goes away (and in our case, becomes positive). Third, we
show that our conclusions hold when controlling for relative input use or when using plot
level yield regressions. Fourth, we exploit unique variation in land tenure regimes in Uganda
to examine in more detail the role of market distortions. We find that the yield-farm size
relationship becomes less negative in areas with better-defined private property rights. We
interpret this finding as suggestive evidence of the role of market distortions in driving the
negative yield-farm size result.
   Our results point out to a broader limitation of the size-productivity relationship as a
policy tool. This relationship promises a tractable mechanism for policy implementation:
if farm size is correlated with productivity then size can easily be used to target farmers


                                              4
and enhance efficiency. However, we show that in several contexts farm size a poor proxy
for productivity for at least two reasons. First, the relationship between farm size and
productivity can be wrongly estimated (as it is the case when using yields). Second, there is
substantial dispersion in productivity across farms of similar size, sometimes as large as the
productivity dispersion between land size classes, which arise for example from restrictive
land institutions and other market distortions prevalent in poor and developing countries.
Thus, even if the relationship is correctly estimated, in our context, the size of a farm is not
very informative about its productivity.
   Our paper is not the first to raise concerns on the use of yields when evaluating the
size-productivity relationship. Some early reviews of the literature acknowledged that the
use of yields as a measure of productivity was "flawed by methodological shortcomings"
(Binswanger et al., 1995, p. 2706). Recent papers also recognize this limitation. For example,
in their study of farm size classes in Brazilian municipalities Helfand and Taylor (2018)
discuss the importance of the CRS assumption and propose a regression of yields controlling
for a land-adjusted measure of inputs, similar to the production function approach. Other
recent papers have also used a measure of total factor productivity to look into the farm
size-productivity relationship, using aggregate or micro-data and different methodologies
(Gautam and Ahmed, 2019; Julien et al., 2019; Rada et al., 2019). In this paper, we show
under which specific circumstances using yields would be appropriate, highlighting the role
of size-dependent market distortions and deviations from CRS as key sources of endogeneity,
and illustrate their empirical relevance using data from Uganda and other countries.
   The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss under which conditions yields
is an appropriate measure to capture farm productivity. Section 3 presents the empirical
evidence from Uganda and show that using alternative measures of productivity produces
different estimates of the farm size-productivity relationship. In Section 4 we present ro-
bustness checks and evidence for other countries. In Section 5, we examine, theoretically


                                               5
and empirically, the reasons for these conflicting results and provide direct empirical evi-
dence about the role of land markets on the farm size-productivity relationship. Section 6
concludes.



2         Using yields to estimate the size-productivity rela-

          tionship

The study of the relationship between farm size and productivity occupies a central place in
the agrarian and development economics literature. The interest on this relationship stems,
in part, from its profound normative implications. In the presence of heterogeneous farmers,
the efficient factor allocation that maximizes aggregate output requires that farm size is
proportional to productivity (Lucas, 1978; Adamopoulos and Restuccia, 2014; Restuccia
and Santaeulàlia-Llopis, 2017). Thus, if small farms are more productive, then policies that
redistribute land into smaller farms would increase aggregate productivity.
        A large literature using micro-data from small-scale traditional farmers in developing
countries has indeed found an inverse relationship between farm size and productivity mea-
sured by yields (output per unit of land). This result has been documented in several coun-
tries in Asia, Africa, and Latin-America and has been interpreted as evidence that small
farms are more productive (Berry et al., 1979; Barrett, 1996; Barrett et al., 2010).
        There are two common econometric specifications used to estimate the farm size-productivity
relationship: the yield approach and the production function approach (Carter, 1984; As-
sunção and Braido, 2007; Ali et al., 2015). The yield approach regresses yields on farm size
(usually cultivated area) and a set of control variables. The production approach adds to
the previous specification the input ratios (usually land and labor).1
    1
    These are not the only approaches used in the literature. For example, some studies regress profits
or labor demand on farm size (Benjamin, 1995; Lamb, 2003), while others use estimates of total factor
productivity, e.g., Key (2019); Julien et al. (2019); Sheng and Chancellor (2019).


                                                  6
       To examine the validity of these approaches, we derive the relationship between yields
and farm size starting from the farm's production function. Consider a farmer who produces
a single, homogeneous, good Y according to the following Cobb-Douglas technology:2


                                                       1-  it
                                       Yit = si At (Tit Lit ) e ,                                       (1)


where Tit and Lit stand for the amounts of land and labor used by farmer i in period t.3
Note that parameter  measures the contribution of land to total output, while  captures
returns to scale at the farm level.
       In this specification, total factor productivity (TFP) is equal to si At e it , where At is
a common productivity driver (such as weather or local public goods),                  it   is an unantici-
pated productivity shock, and si is a farm-specific output shifter, such as farming ability or
entrepreneurship. Henceforth, we call si farm productivity.
       Consider the `true' relationship between farm productivity and size:


                                                      ¯i + Xi ,
                                          ln si =  ln T                                                 (2)


      ¯i is a measure of farm size (such as average cultivated land or size of land holdings),
where T
and Xi is a set of observable farm characteristics (such as soil quality or farmer's education).
       Note that a researcher interested in the relationship between farm size and productivity
would need to estimate  . If a measure of farm productivity si is available, then the researcher
could directly estimate equation (2). Instead, we consider the case where the resercher uses
yields as a proxy for productivity.
       Dividing (1) by Tit , taking logs, and using (2), we obtain a expression linking yields to
   2
     We use a Cobb-Douglas functional form in land and labor inputs for ease of exposition. We relax
this assumption in our empirical analysis to check the robustness of our results to using more flexible
specifications.
   3
     Consistent with our empirical analysis, our discussion assumes that the researcher uses panel data. The
implications are identical, however, if we assume cross sectional data and drop the subscript t.


                                                     7
farm size:

                     Yit       ¯i + Xi + ln At +  (1 - ) ln Lit + ( - 1) ln Tit +
                ln       =  ln T                                                            it ,         (3)
                     Tit                                    Tit

       We can further simplify this expression using standard results linking input ratios to
relative input prices. We consider a general case in which farmers face (potentially) imperfect
input markets. Following Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) and Hsieh and Klenow (2009), we
model market distortions as `wedges' or taxes on input prices. Without loss of generality,
we assume that the price of labor is w while the price of land is r(1 + i ).4 The wedge i
measures the relative distortion in input markets. Thus, we are implicitly normalizing the
distortion in labor prices equal to one. We allow for these distortions to be different across
farms.
       Profit maximization implies that farmer i chooses the following input ratio:

                                              Lit   1- r
                                                  =      (1 + i ).
                                              Tit     w

       Using this result, we can re-write expression (3) as:

                    Yit       ¯i + Xi +  (1 - ) ln(1 + i ) + ( - 1) ln Tit +c +
               ln       =  ln T                                                              it ,        (4)
                    Tit
                          farm productivity     market distortions   deviations from CRS


where c is a constant that is a function of common prices and parameters (w, r, ,  , A).
       Equation (4) summarizes the main insight of our paper. It shows that yields pick up
not only farm productivity, but also factors that affect input ratios (such as market distor-
tions), and deviations from constant returns to scale. These issues could lead to inconsistent
(wrong) estimates of the farm size-productivity relation ( ) when using yields as a measure
   4
   Note that i has a broad interpretation. It can be interpreted as subsidies or taxes, but also as any other
market imperfection or institutional feature that distorts effective relative input prices.



                                                         8
of productivity.


The yield approach Consider a researcher who uses the yield approach and estimates
the following model
                                       Yit
                                  ln       =  ln Tit + Xi + µit ,                                 (5)
                                       Tit
                                                                   ¯i - Tit ) + ( - 1) ln Tit +
By construction, the error term is: µit =  (1 - ) ln(1 + i ) +  ln(T                               it .

   There are two reasons why estimating this model would lead to inconsistent estimates of
 : (1) presence of size-dependent market distortions (i.e., a correlation between i and farm
size), and (2) deviations from constant returns to scale (CRS). In either case, the error term
µ would be, by construction, correlated with farm size and OLS estimates of  would be
inconsistent.
   This problem cannot be solved by adding better controls of soil quality or other determi-
nants of farm productivity, nor by reducing measurement error on land or output. Similarly,
in the presence of decreasing or increasing returns to scale, the problem would persist even
after using instruments or even randomizing farm size. The source of the problem is more
profound: it arises from using yields, a proxy of land productivity, instead of measures of
productivity of the production unit, i.e., farm productivity.


The production function approach and plot-level regressions The potential prob-
lems associated with decreasing input ratios and imperfect markets have been recognized
in the literature as early as Sen (1962). There have also been important work examining
whether imperfect markets could explain the inverse yield-size relationship (Barrett et al.,
2010; Eswaran and Kotwal, 1986; Feder, 1985).
   There are two main approaches used to account for imperfect markets. First, researchers
add input ratios to the yield regression. This is called the production function approach since,
under the assumption of a Cobb-Douglas technology with CRS, it is equivalent to estimating


                                                 9
the production function. The validity of this approach, however, crucially depends on the
CRS assumption. To see this, re-write expression (3) as follows:

                                 Yit       ¯i + Xi +  (1 - ) ln Lit + it ,
                            ln       =  ln T                                                             (6)
                                 Tit                            Tit

where the error term is:  = ( - 1) ln Tit + . Given that in most applications the measure of
           ¯i ) is correlated with land used (Tit ), this specification does not identify  except
farm size (T
in the special case of CRS.5
       A second strategy estimates the yield-size relationship comparing different plots within
the same farm holding. This approach exploits within-farm variation and involves estimating
a yield regression using plot-level data and including farm fixed effects (in the case of cross-
sectional data) or farm-period fixed effects (in the case of panel data).
       The key idea is that markets are not involved in the allocation of inputs within the farm.
Thus, imperfect markets (and other farm-level factors) could not affect the yield-plot size
relationship. This view has important implications: findings of an inverse yield-plot size
relationship have led some researchers to reject imperfect markets as an explanation of the
farm size-productivity results (Assunção and Braido, 2007; Kagin et al., 2016).
       This approach, however, also relies on the assumption of CRS to identify the size-
productivity relationship. To see this, let us modify expression (3) in two ways. First, we
change the levels so that the unit of observation is plot p in farm i. Second, profit maximiza-
                                                                                           Lip
tion and the Cobb-Douglas assumption imply that the plot-level input ratio                 Tip
                                                                                                 is equalized
across plots. Let us denote this unobserved input ratio as i . With these modifications, we
   5
    For instance, in studies using cross-sectional data and using cultivated land (crop area) as a measure of
farm size, by construction T¯i = Tit .




                                                     10
can represent the relationship between plot-level yields and size as:

                  Yip        ¯
             ln       =  ln T ip + Xi +  (1 - ) ln i + ln A + ( - 1) ln Tip +   ip .       (7)
                  Tip
                                     farm fixed effect


   Note that, conditional on farm fixed effects, yields would no longer pick up market dis-
tortions. However, it would still capture deviations from CRS. Thus, a yield regression using
plot-level data would still produce inconsistent estimates of the size-productivity relation-
ship, except in the special case of constant returns to scale.
   This discussion does not imply that yields would always produce inconsistent estimates of
the size-productivity relationship. If the technology exhibits CRS, then either the production
function approach or plot-level regressions are informative. If, in addition, input markets
are well-functioning or distortions are not size-dependent, then regressing yields on farm size
would be enough.
   We argue, however, that these conditions may not be met in several applications, es-
pecially in the context of subsistence farmers in developing countries. For instance, Dillon
and Barrett (2017), Aggarwal et al. (2018) and Dillon et al. (2019) document quantitatively
important distortions in agricultural input markets in Africa. Recent work by Julien et al.
(2019) documents distortions in input markets (measured using shadow prices) correlated
with farm size in Malawi, Tanzania, and Uganda.
   In these cases, using yields (instead of farm productivity) would lead to inconsistent
estimates of the farm size-productivity relationship, and erroneous policy recommendations.
Whether this issue is quantitatively relevant or not remains an empirical question. Below,
we examine this issue using data from Ugandan farmers.




                                                  11
3     Empirical evidence

Our main analysis uses detailed microdata from Ugandan households to examine whether
the choice of measure of productivity affects the estimates of the farm size- productivity
relationship. We use two measures: yields and an estimate of farm productivity (si ). We
also replicate the main findings using comparable data from Peru, Tanzania, and Bangladesh.


3.1    The Ugandan case

We use data from the Uganda Panel National Survey (UPNS), a household-level panel dataset
collected with support from the World Bank, as part of the LSMS-ISA project. This survey
is representative at the urban/rural and regional level and covers the entire country. We
use the four available rounds: 2009-10, 2010-11, 2011-12, and 2013-14. Every round collects
agricultural information for each of the two cropping seasons (i.e., January to June and July
to December), potentially providing 8 observations per household.
    We focus on the household farm as the production unit. A farmer may operate one or
several parcels or plots of land, hence we aggregate any information at the parcel level to
the household-farm level. Our dataset contains a panel of around 3,400 farming households
observed, on average, for four periods. Figure A.1 in the Appendix displays the map of
Uganda and sample coverage.


Output and inputs We construct measures of agricultural output and input use (land
and labor) for each farm in a given period. To measure real agricultural output at the farm
level, we construct a Laspeyres index of production that aggregates the quantity produced
of each crop by the household farm using proxies of prices in 2009 as weights. We use unit
values as proxies of prices. To calculate these proxies, we divide the value of sales by the
quantity sold of each crop. Then, we obtain the median unit value of each crop at the



                                             12
national level.6
       We measure the area of land cultivated by adding up the size of parcels planted by the
household. Similar to previous studies, we use this variable as our main measure of land input
and farm size. We also obtain measures of available land from self-reported information and
GPS data. The available land corresponds to all the parcels of land the farmer has access
to either because the farmer owns the land or has user rights, for instance, due to rental
agreements. We use these variables as measures of land endowment and as alternative proxies
of farm size.
       Our measure of labor input is the total number of person-days used on the farm. The
survey distinguishes between work done by household members and by hired workers. We
use this information to construct measures of family and hired labor.


Other variables The survey also provides information on agricultural practices (such as
the use of fertilizers, pesticides, or intercropping), and soil characteristics. The survey asks
farmers to classify each parcel according to soil type, quality and topography. We aggregate
these parcel-level indicators to the farm level to obtain a share of farmland in each category.
We also obtain indicators of the share of land (at the farm and district level) under different
tenure regimes.
       We complement the household survey with weather data on temperature and precipita-
tion. These variables are relevant determinants of agricultural productivity (Auffhammer
et al., 2013; Hsiang, 2016; Carleton and Hsiang, 2016). We use high-frequency satellite im-
agery and gridded data to obtain measures of cumulative exposure to heat and water. For
temperature, we use the MOD11C1 product provided by NASA. The satellite data provides
daily estimates of land surface temperature (LST). Precipitation data comes from the Cli-
mate Hazards Group InfraRed Precipitation with Station data (CHIRPS) product (Funk et
   6
    The main results are qualitatively similar when using prices at regional and local level (see Tables A.3
and A.4 in the Appendix).


                                                    13
al., 2015). We combine the weather and survey data using the location of the sub-county
(n=967) of residence of the household.
      Our approach to model exposure to weather is similar to previous work (Schlenker and
Roberts, 2006, 2009; Aragón et al., 2019). In particular, we obtain average precipitation,
degree days, and harmful degree days during the last cropping season for each farmer. Degree
days (DD) measures the cumulative exposure to temperatures between 8 and 26 while
harmful degree days (HDD) capture exposure to temperatures above 26. The inclusion of
HDD allows for potentially different, non-linear, effects of extreme heat. Results, available
upon request, are robust to using alternative temperature thresholds for HDD.
      Table 1 presents summary statistics of our main variables. There are several relevant
observations. First, farmers have small scale operations (the average cultivated area is
2.3 hectares). Second, farmers use practices akin to subsistence agriculture such as inter-
cropping (i.e, cultivation of several crops in the same plot) and reliance on family instead
of hired labor. Third, there is limited use of capital inputs (such as oxen) and productivity-
enhancing inputs such as fertilizers, pesticides, and improved seeds. Finally, there is a
substantial variation on land tenure regimes: around 27% of the land is held under non-
customary, modern, regimes (like freehold, leasehold, and Mailo) while the rest is held under
customary, communal, property rights.


Measures of productivity We construct two alternative measures of productivity: land
productivity (or yields) and farm productivity.7 First, we calculate yields (Y /T ) by dividing
real farm agricultural output, at 2009 prices, by the area of land cultivated. This variable is
similar to measures of crop yields used in previous work. The key distinction is that we use
the value of total agricultural farm output (using time-invariant and common prices across
farms) instead of the quantity produced of a single crop. This distinction arises because of
  7
    We refer to our measure of real farm output per unit of operated land as land productivity or yield
interchangeably.


                                                  14
                      Table 1: Summary statistics (UPNS 2009-2014)

                 Variable                                   Mean      Std. Dev.

                 HoH age                                     47.2         15.2
                 HoH can read and write                      0.657       0.475
                 HoH is female                               0.222       0.416
                 Household size                               6.1          2.9

                 Total output (in 2009 Ush, 000s)           2854.4      6118.0
                 Yields (output per ha.)                    5013.6      7510.0

                 Land cultivated (has)                       2.300       2.136
                 Land available (has)                        4.247      10.713
                 Land available GPS (has)                    2.606      17.015

                 Total labor (person-day)                    125.5        97.0
                 Domestic labor (person-day)                 124.0       119.4
                 Hired labor (person-day)                     14.1       170.6

                 %   hire workers                            28.0        44.9
                 %   have bulls or oxen                      19.1        39.3
                 %   use org. fertilizer                      6.6        24.9
                 %   use inorg. fertilizer                    1.8        13.3
                 %   use pesticides                           6.4        24.4
                 %   use improved seeds                       9.1        28.7

                 % farm land intercropped                    35.3        42.0
                 % farm land non-customary tenure            27.3        38.8

                 Average degree days ()                       15.1        1.8
                 Average harmful degree days ()               1.0         1.0
                 Precipitation (mm/month)                    105.8       50.7
                 Notes: Sample restricted to farming households. HoH = Head of
                household. Non-customary land tenure includes freehold, leasehold,
                and Mailo. Average degree days are calculated by dividing the total
                degree days by the number of days in the growing season.


our focus on the farm rather than the plot as the main production unit and the presence
of multi- and inter-cropping: farmers usually cultivate several crops, sometimes even in the
same plot. These features make it difficult to attribute inputs (either land or labor) to


                                                15
individual crops.
       Second, we obtain estimates of farm productivity si . We use the same functional assump-
tions as in Section 2 but modify it so that the unit of observation is a household farm i, in
location j , and period (season-year) t. In addition, we parametrize the common productivity
shock Ajt = exp( · weatherjt + jt ) where weatherjt is a set of weather (temperature and
precipitation) variables, and jt is a region-season-year fixed effect. Taking logs, we obtain:


                 ln Yit = ln si +  ln Tit + (1 - ) ln Lit +  weatherjt + jt +          it .          (8)


       We estimate equation (8) using panel data methods with household fixed effects. Our pre-
ferred specification is a Cobb-Douglas production function in land and labor inputs and with
the same parameters for all regions (see Column 1 in Table A.1). We check the robustness of
our results using estimates of farm productivity si obtained from alternative specifications
(see Columns 2 to 6 in Table 3). In particular, we (1) include as additional controls indicators
of using other inputs such as oxen, fertilizers, pesticides and improved seeds, (2) decompose
labor into family and hired workers, (3) allow for heterogeneous parameters (,  ) by region,
(4) use input endowments (available land and household size) as instruments for land and
labor, and (5) estimate a more flexible translog production function.
       The estimated production function parameters are ^ = 0.526 and ^ = 0.708, which are
close to the values calibrated in the context of similar economies, such as Restuccia and
Santaeulàlia-Llopis (2017) for Malawi and Adamopoulos et al. (2017) for China.8 We use
the estimated fixed effects of our baseline specification as measures of ln si , the log of farm
productivity.
       There is a strong positive correlation between land productivity and farm productiv-
   8
    Table A.1 in the Appendix presents detailed results of the production function estimation. Figure A.2
in the Appendix reports the resulting distribution of the estimated household-farm fixed effects.




                                                   16
ity of 0.86.9 Despite this strong correlation, we show below that both measures produce
qualitatively different estimates of the farm size-productivity relationship.


3.2      Conflicting findings depending on the measure of productivity

Figure 1 displays the relationship between the log of cultivated area, our baseline measure
of farm size, and the two measures of productivity. An important observation is that the
relationship is qualitatively different, depending on the measure of productivity used. Using
yields (panel A), we observe a negative relationship. This finding is consistent with pre-
vious results of an inverse farm size-productivity relationship. However, when using farm
productivity (panel B), the relationship is positive.
      Table 2 presents a formal analysis of the inverse relationship between yields and farm size.
We employ two specifications commonly used in the farm size-productivity literature: the
yield approach and the production function approach. The yield approach regresses log of
yields on the log of land cultivated and includes a rich set of control variables such as soil and
farmer characteristics, weather, region-by-period and district fixed effects. The production
function approach adds to the previous specification the log of the labor-land ratio. Assuming
a Cobb-Douglas technology with constant returns to scale, this specification is equivalent to
estimating the production function.
      We present results using both specifications and varying the set of covariates. We also
check the robustness of our results to using (self-reported) available land as a measure of
farm size, and to collapsing the panel data by taking the average for each household (see
Table A.2 in the Appendix). In all cases, we find a negative and significant relationship
between farm size and yields. Interestingly, the estimated coefficient (around -0.27 in our
preferred specification in column 2 in Table 2) is similar in magnitude to previous estimates
  9
    See Figure A.3 in the Appendix for documentation of the relationship between our two measures of
productivity.



                                                 17
Figure 1: Farm size and productivity




  (a) Land productivity (ln(Y /T ))




    (b) Farm productivity (ln si )




                 18
using data from other countries (Barrett et al., 2010; Desiere and Jolliffe, 2018).
   We replicate the analysis using farm productivity (ln si ) instead of yields and report the
results in Table 3. The results confirm the conflicting patterns observed in Figure 1: there
is a robust and significant positive relationship between farm size and farm productivity
(see results in columns 1 and 3 in Table 3 for specifications without and with controls).
One potential concern with these last results is that we are artificially obtaining statistically
significant results by duplicating the time-invariant measure of farm productivity in the panel
data. However, this turns out not to be an issue as we obtain qualitatively similar results
collapsing the panel data at the household level (column 2 in Table 3).
   Our baseline specification uses estimates of si obtained from a production function that
is Cobb-Douglas in land and labor. However, this choice of functional form does not drive
our results. We obtain similar results using estimates of si obtained with more flexible
specifications, such as translog production function, a Cobb-Douglas with heterogeneous
parameters by region or estimating the production function using endowments as instruments
for input used (columns 4 to 6 in Table 3). Our findings are also robust to using land available
as a measure of farm size (see Table A.2 in the Appendix.)


3.3    Substantial dispersion in productivity measures

To the extent that policy makers do not observe productivity (either land or farm produc-
tivity), but instead can easily observe farm size, the inverse size-productivity relationship
promises a tractable mechanism for policy implementation that has been highly influential.
   Our previous results, however, point to an important limitation: there is substantial
dispersion in both measures of productivity across farms of similar size (see Figure 1). This
feature renders farm size a poor proxy of productivity and an ineffective instrument for
policy. This conclusion is general because it applies to both measures of productivity. To
illustrate this point, Table 4 documents the mean and dispersion of the two measures of

                                               19
                                      Table 2: Yields and farm size

                                         Outcome variable: ln(output per ha)
                                  Yield approach              Production function approach
                          (1)           (2)      (3)            (4)       (5)        (6)

  ln(land              -0.239***      -0.257***    -0.487***        -0.035**     -0.064***     -0.295***
  cultivated)           (0.015)        (0.014)      (0.019)          (0.016)      (0.016)       (0.021)

  ln(labor/land)                                                    0.422***     0.390***       0.336***
                                                                     (0.016)      (0.017)        (0.017)

  Controls                No            Yes           Yes              No            Yes           Yes
  Household FE            No            No            Yes              No            No            Yes

  No. obs.              16,063         14,578        15,788          15,806        14,335        15,533
  R-squared              0.029         0.176          0.110           0.087         0.217         0.145
  Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. *
 denotes significant at 10%, ** significant at 5% and *** significant at 1%. All regressions (except in
 column 1) include district and region-by-year fixed effects as well as soil, farmer, and weather controls.
 Soil controls= % of farmland of different types, quality, and topography. Farmer controls = age, literacy,
 gender, ethnic group. Weather controls: DD, HDD, and log of precipitation. Columns 3 and 6 also
 include household fixed effects.

                             Table 3: Farm productivity and farm size

                                        Outcome variable = farm productivity (ln si )
                                (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)                     (6)

 ln(land                   0.198***     0.295***       0.179***       0.181***      0.160***      0.175***
 cultivated)                (0.011)      (0.022)        (0.010)        (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.010)

 Prod. function               CD           CD        CD + agric.        CD by       CD + IV       Translog
 used to estimate si                                  practices         region

 No. obs.                   15,363        3,249           15,332        15,332       15,251        15,332
 R-squared                  0.399         0.352           0.348          0.333       0.831         0.352
 Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. *
denotes significant at 10%, ** significant at 5% and *** significant at 1%. All regressions include soil and
farmer controls similar to Table 2, as well as district fixed effects. CD=Cobb-Douglas in land and labor
inputs. Column 2 uses a cross-section of farmers obtained by collapsing the panel data at the household
level. Column 3 estimates a CD specification adding indicators of agricultural practices such as the use of
bulls/oxen, fertilizers, pesticides, improved seeds, and intercropping. Column 4 estimates si using a flexible
CD specification with different parameters by region, column 5 uses a CD specification that instruments input
use with input endowments (land available and household size), while column 6 uses a translog production
function.


                                                     20
productivity (farm productivity and yields) across farms within farm-size bins for different
farm size categories.10 To characterize dispersion, we use the ratio of the 90th and 10th
percentiles.
      The main observation is that the within-class dispersion is similar to, or even greater,
than the dispersion of the overall distribution. For instance, within very small farms (0 to 1
ha), the ratio of productivity between farms in the 90th and 10th percentiles is 11.2, whereas
the ratio for the whole distribution is 8.9. We observe a similar pattern using yields. In that
case, the ratio of productivity between the 90th and 10th percentile is around 12.6 for the
very small farms, but 8.8 for the whole distribution.

                             Table 4: Productivity dispersion by farm size

                                         Farm productivity (si )            Yields (Y/T)
              Farm size     % farms      Mean    90th / 10th              Mean 90th / 10th
              (has)                               percentile                      percentile

              0-1              28.8      1.348           11.2            3,185.6         12.6
              1-2              33.8      1.334            8.0            2,712.6         8.6
              2-5              32.6      1.624            6.7            2,386.0         6.5
              5+               4.8       2.296            6.4            2,274.0         8.4

              All farms       100.0      1.479           8.9             2,698.5          8.8
             Notes: Farm size classes are calculated using average area planted. Yields (Y/T) refer
            to average yields per farmer.




4       Robustness checks

4.1       Omitted soil characteristics and measurement error

Existing work suggests that the inverse yield-farm size relationship may be driven by omitted
variables, e.g. soil quality (Benjamin, 1995), or systematic measurement error (Carletto et
al., 2013; Gourlay et al., 2017; Desiere and Jolliffe, 2018; Abay et al., 2019a). This error
 10
      To facilitate comparison, we transform the farm productivity measure ln(si ) into si .

                                                       21
arises if small farmers over-report output or under-report land. The measurement error could
generate the inverse relationship between yields and farm size, even if the actual relationship
is insignificant.11 A relevant concern is that the pattern of results we observe may be a
statistical artifact of these identification problems.
       We examine this possible explanation in several ways. First, our regressions control for a
rich set of soil characteristics, and are robust to including district or household fixed effects.
These findings weaken the argument that our results are affected by omitted variables. Sec-
ond, we replicate our baseline results using, as proxies of farm size, the area of available land
measured using a GPS device. Arguably, this variable is less prone to have a systematic
measurement error than self-reported land.12 The results are, however, qualitatively similar
(see columns 1 and 2 in Table 5).
       Finally, we examine the role of systematic measurement error in the self-reported output.
In the absence of crop-cut measures or other variables to address measurement error in
output (as in Gourlay et al. (2017), for example), we use an indirect approach exploiting
the observation that, to affect the estimates of farm-size and productivity, the measurement
error needs to be correlated with farm size. Thus, we can proxy the measurement error using
a function of land and labor.
       In particular, we modify equation (8) by assuming that ijt = vijt + M (Ti , Li ), i.e., there
is systematic measurement error which is a function of farm size. Note that omitting M (·)
as a regressor would create an endogeneity problem and we would not obtain consistent
estimates of farm productivity (si ).
       We proxy M with a 4th degree polynomial of the GPS measures of available land and
total labor, and include these variables as additional regressors when estimating si . This
  11
     We check whether this is a potential issue and find evidence of a sizable and systematic measurement error
between self-reported and GPS measures of available land (see Figure A.4 and Table A.5 in the Appendix).
  12
     It is not clear, however, that GPS measures are always preferable to self-reported land size. As pointed
out by Abay et al. (2019a), in the presence of correlated measurement errors, using objective measures (such
as GPS) could aggravate the bias when estimating the size-productivity relationship.



                                                      22
                             Table 5: Addressing measurement error

                              ln(output per ha)                  farm productivity (ln si )
                                GPS measure
                                     (1)                 (2)            (3)              (4)

      ln(land available)           -0.628***         0.140***        0.139***         0.137***
      GPS measure                   (0.016)           (0.010)         (0.010)          (0.010)


      Prod. function                                     CD            CD +     CD + land and
      used to estimate si                                           land polyn.  labor polyn.

      No. obs.                      10,070              11,146        11,146           11,146
      R-squared                      0.392              0.423          0.428            0.430
     Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the household
    level. * denotes significant at 10%, ** significant at 5% and *** significant at 1%. Column 1 same
    controls as column 2 in Table 2. Columns 2 to 4 use same controls as column 1 in Table 3. Column
    3 uses a measure of si estimated from CD production function with a 4th degree polynomial of
    land cultivated while column 4 further adds a 4th degree polynomial of total labor.


approach is similar in flavor to using polynomials of inputs to account for unobservables
as in Levinsohn and Petrin (2003). Note that this approach also addresses biases due to
unobserved inputs (such as labor quality or capital) that could be correlated with farm size.
   Columns 3 and 4 in Table 5 show the results adding only the 4th degree polynomial of land
(column 3), and for land and labor (column 4). In both cases, we still observe the positive
relationship between farm productivity and farm size. Taken together, we interpret these
results as evidence that the conflicting findings on the farm size-productivity relationship
documented in Tables 2 and 3 are unlikely to be driven by omitted variables or systematic
measurement error.


4.2     Plot-level regressions

Several studies estimate the yield-size relationship using plot-level data and exploiting within-
farm variation. This approach effectively controls for all farm-specific variable and thus


                                                   23
reduce concerns of bias due to market distortions.13 However, as shown in Section 2, the
validity of this approach still relies on the assumption of constant returns to scale.
       How relevant is this issue in our context? Ideally, we would like to replicate the previous
analysis and compare the estimated size-productivity relationship using measures of yield
and si at the plot level or obtain measures of plot-level returns to scale. However, we cannot
perform this analysis due to data limitations. In particular, we have plot-level information
on output and land use, but lack data on other inputs, such as labor. Thus, we can calcu-
late yields at plot level but cannot obtain input ratios nor estimate a plot-level production
function.
       We can, however, indirectly assess the importance of the CRS assumption. To do so, we
estimate yield regressions using plot-level data and including household-period fixed effects
(see Table 6). Column 1 does not include any control except for the fixed effects, while column
2 adds indicators of plot characteristics (soil type, quality, and topography). According to
equation (7), the estimated parameter is equal to  +  - 1, where  measures economies
of scale and  is the size-productivity relation. We can use this expression to calculate the
implied value of  under different assumptions about economies of scale.
       Under the CRS assumption, the implied  = -0.271 is negative. However, if returns to
scale are sufficiently small (  0.72) the size-productivity relation would become weakly
positive. Interestingly, using our preferred farm-level estimates of  = 0.708, we cannot
reject the hypothesis that  is equal to zero.


4.3       Evidence from other countries

Are our results applicable in other contexts or are they specific to the Ugandan case? We
explore this issue by replicating our analysis using household panel data from three different
  13
    The use of farm fixed effect does not eliminate all relevant identification concerns. There is, for example,
suggestive evidence that plot-level regressions may be biased due to systematic measurement error (Desiere
and Jolliffe, 2018).


                                                      24
                                   Table 6: Plot-level yield regressions

                                                Outcome variable: ln(output per ha.)
                                                  (1)                 (2)

                   ln(land cultivated)          -0.271***               -0.272***
                                                 (0.018)                 (0.018)

                   Plot characteristics             No                      Yes
                   Household-period FE              Yes                     Yes

                   Assuming  = 0.708
                   Implied                         0.021                   0.020
                   p-value H0 : = 0                0.248                   0.285

                   No. obs.                       28,144                  27,804
                   R-squared                      0.021                   0.025
                   Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clus-
                  tered at the household-period level. * denotes significant at 10%, ** signifi-
                  cant at 5% and *** significant at 1%. Period refers to season-year pair. All
                  regressions include household-period fixed effects. Column 2 adds indicators
                  of plot characteristics (soil type, soil quality, and topography).


countries: Peru, Tanzania, and Bangladesh. These countries expand our analysis across
different regions in the world. For Peru, we use data from the National Household Survey
(ENAHO) years 2007 and 2011. For Tanzania, we use the National Panel Survey (TNPS)
which was carried out biannually from 2008 to 2012. For Bangladesh, we use data from the
2011 and 2015 Bangladesh Integrated Household Survey (BIHS).
      In all cases, we find similar results as in Uganda: a negative correlation between yields
and farm size, but a positive relationship between farm size and farm productivity (see Table
7). Similar to our main result, these findings are robust to alternative specifications of the
production function (see Tables B.2 and B.3 in the Appendix).14
      We also note that, although not directly comparable, since we do not have access to
the microdata, we find similar patterns for the United States. Using the 2017 US Census
 14
      Additional figures and estimated are available in Appendix B.




                                                       25
of Agriculture and the disaggregated information by farm size following the analysis in
Adamopoulos and Restuccia (2014), we find a negative relationship between yields and farm
size, whereas the relationship between labor productivity and farm size is strongly positive
(see Table B.4). The implied elasticities with respect to farm size are -0.37 for the yield
and 0.51 for labor productivity.
   While the analysis so far relies on a few different countries, these results indicate that
our findings may be broadly applicable to different developing countries, and highlight the
need to revisit the interpretation of the negative yield-farm size relationship and its policy
implications.




                                             26
                            Table 7: Replication of main results using data from other countries

                                            Peru                            Tanzania                            Bangladesh
                              ln(output          farm                ln(output     farm                  ln(output      farm
                               per ha)        productivity            per ha) productivity                per ha) productivity
                                 (1)              (2)                   (4)         (5)                     (4)          (5)

      ln(land                 -0.759***          0.197***             -0.403***       0.151***           -0.103***        0.081***
      cultivated)              (0.014)            (0.011)              (0.019)         (0.016)            (0.012)          (0.010)

      Soil controls              Yes           Yes                       Yes          Yes                    Yes           Yes
      Farmer controls            Yes           Yes                       Yes          Yes                    Yes           Yes
      Weather controls           Yes           Yes                       Yes          Yes                    No            No
      Fixed effects           Strata & region-by-growing                Season (short-long),                     District &




27
                               season & month of interv.              district & survey round                   survey round

      No. obs.                  11,359             11,364               7,899            7,894              6,506           6,525
      R-squared                 0.433              0.358                0.287            0.573              0.224           0.229
      Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. * denotes significant at
     10%, ** significant at 5% and *** significant at 1%. Columns 1, 3, and 5 replicate the yield approach of column 2 in Table 2.
     Columns 2, 4, and 5 replicate the regression in Column 1 of Table 3. This specification uses as dependent variable the farm
     productivity (ln si ) obtained from estimating a Cobb-Douglas production function. All regressions include a set of locations
     and time fixed effects. Soil controls: (Peru) indicators of soil quality from Fischer et al. (2008) (nutrient availability, nutrient
     retention, rooting conditions, oxygen availability, salinity, toxicity, and workability) and the share of irrigated land share of
     land. (Tanzania) share of loam soil, flat plot, and self-reported good soil. Indicators of whether the farm has irrigation, oxen,
     or tractor. (Bangladesh) share of arable land of different types (clay, loam, and sand). Farmer controls: age, age2 , gender,
     educational attainment (or literacy). Weather controls: degree days, harmful degree days, average monthly rainfall, and its
     square.
5     What explains the different results?

We show that, in several applications, using yields as a measure of productivity is not
informative of the farm size-productivity relationship. This occurs because yields pick up
not only farm productivity, but also market distortions and deviations from constant returns
to scale. These issues can lead, as in the case of Uganda, to wrongly inferring a negative
relationship between farm size and productivity.
    We explore the validity of this interpretation in two ways. First, we modify the yield
approach to account for market distortions and relax the CRS assumption. We show that,
when correcting for these issues, the original negative relationship between yields and farm
size is reversed. Second, we exploit variation in Ugandan land tenure regimes to indirectly
assess the role of market distortions on driving the negative yield-size relationship.


5.1    Correcting for market distortions and returns to scale

Equation 3, derived in section 2, provides the correct specification linking yields to farm size.
Using land cultivated (Ti ) as measure of farm size, we can rewrite this expression as:

                      Yi                                Li
                 ln      = ( +  - 1) ln Ti +  (1 - ) ln    + Xi + ln A + i .                 (9)
                      Ti                                Ti

    This specification is similar to the production function approach since it regresses yield
on farm size and the input ratio. It does not, however, impose constant returns to scale. This
implies that the estimate associated with farm size is equal to  +  - 1, where  captures
the farm size-productivity relationship and  measures economies of scale.
    Table 8 presents the estimates of equation (9) using two alternative measures of farm size:
(self-reported) area cultivated and GPS measures of available land. We start by replicating
the "yield approach" which suggests a negative relation between yields and farm size (columns



                                               28
                                                                          - 1) from the
1 and 4). Then, we relax the CRS assumption and recover  by subtracting (^
estimates associated with farm size (columns 2 and 5). We use a value of ^ = 0.708 obtained
from estimating the production function (see column 1 in Table A.1). Finally, we add the
input ratio, our proxy for market distortions (columns 3 and 6).
    The main result is that the initial negative estimate of  becomes less negative after
relaxing the assumption of CRS and eventually becomes positive when correcting for market
distortions. We obtain similar sign reversal of the yield-size relationship in the cases of Peru,
Tanzania, and Bangladesh (see Table B.1 in the Appendix).

                    Table 8: Correcting for market distortions and returns to scale

                                                            Outcome variable: ln(Y/T)
                                   (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)

 ln(T)                         -0.270***     -0.270***       -0.075***     -0.630***     -0.630***     -0.200***
 +-1                            (0.015)       (0.015)         (0.016)       (0.015)       (0.015)       (0.020)

 ln(L/T)                                                      0.390***                                 0.578***
  (1 - )                                                       (0.017)                                  (0.019)

 Measure of T                     area planted (self reported)               GPS measure of available land

 Relax CRS assumption                           Yes             Yes                          Yes           Yes
 Add input ratio L/T                                            Yes                                        Yes

 Assumed                         1.000         0.708           0.708         1.000          0.476        0.476
 Implied                         -0.257        0.035           0.228         -0.629        -0.105        0.343

 No. obs.                        14,578        14,578          14,335        10,256        10,256        10,060
 R-squared                        0.176        0.152            0.195        0.392         0.176         0.279
  Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. * denotes
significant at 10%, ** significant at 5% and *** significant at 1%. All regressions include district, region-by-year
fixed effects and soil, weather and farmer controls as column 2 in Table 2. ^ = 0.708 obtained from Column 1 Table
A.1.




                                                       29
5.2       Using land tenure regimes as proxies of market distortions

Our previous results implicitly use the input ratio L/T as a proxy for market distortions.
However, the validity of this proxy depends on the functional form assumption of the produc-
tion function.15 As a complementary approach, we proxy for market distortions by exploiting
variation in land tenure regimes. This approach is motivated by the Coase theorem and ex-
isting evidence suggesting that property rights play an important role in allocative efficiency
(Besley and Ghatak, 2010; De Janvry et al., 2015; Restuccia and Santaeulàlia-Llopis, 2017;
Chen, 2017).
       A word of caution is, however, needed. Property rights themselves are the outcome of
other factors that could affect productivity and input choices (such as access to infrastructure,
distance to markets, among others). Thus, the results in this section should not be given
a causal interpretation. Instead, we use property rights only as an indirect measure of the
severity of market distortions.


Land tenure regimes There are two types of land tenure in Uganda: customary and non-
customary land. Non-customary land includes tenure regimes such as freehold, leasehold,
and Mailo,a form of leasehold in which landowners hold their land in perpetuity a while
tenants have security of occupancy (Coldham, 2000). Non-customary tenure regimes offer
some degree of formal, secure, property rights. In contrast, customary systems are based
on communal ownership, are perceived as less secure and may face higher transaction costs
due to lack of formal land registries and community approval requirements (Coldham, 2000;
Place and Otsuka, 2002; Deininger and Castagnini, 2006).
       These tenure systems are spatially concentrated in Uganda (see Figure A.5 in the Ap-
                                                                                           
  15
     For example, consider an alternative CES specification f (Ti , Li ) = [Ai T  + Bi L ]  where Ai and Bi
are input-specific productivity shifters that can vary by farmer. In that case, the land-labor ratio would be
                1
 Ai     w
[Bi r (1+i )
             ] -rho . Thus, the input ratio would pick up not only the market distortion but also differences in
                              Bi
input-specific productivity   Ai .




                                                      30
pendix). Customary land is dominant in the Northern and Eastern regions, where more than
90% of land holdings are under this regime. In contrast, non-customary systems are mostly
found in the Western and Central regions. In these regions, less than 7% of the land is held
under customary systems. In our empirical analysis, we use regional indicators as the main
proxies for the quality of property rights and development of land markets.


Land tenure and market distortions We start by assessing whether land tenure regimes
capture meaningful differences in market distortions. To do so, we follow the literature
on factor misallocation and evaluate the correlation between input use (land and labor)
and farm productivity (Restuccia and Santaeulàlia-Llopis, 2017; Adamopoulos et al., 2017;
Adamopoulos and Restuccia, 2020). In an efficient allocation, these variables should be
positively correlated. A lower correlation in some areas would then be indicative of more
severe market distortions.
   A concern, however, is that the dispersion in productivity may be picking up not only mar-
ket distortions but also unobserved heterogeneity or measurement error (Abay et al., 2019b).
For that reason, we also examine this issue by testing for the separability of consumption
and production decisions in farming households (Benjamin, 1992; Dillon and Barrett, 2017).
This literature posits that, in the presence of perfect input markets, input use in production
should be independent of household endowments. In our context, this implies that in areas
with better functioning markets we should observe a weaker correlation between total labor
demand and household size. In the absence of market distortions, this correlation would be
zero, while stronger positive correlations would indicate more severe market failures.
   In both approaches, we allow for different estimates by type of land tenure by including
an interaction term with an indicator of being in the Western or Central region (regions with
a higher incidence of non-customary tenure regimes). We also check the robustness of our
findings to using a continuous variable: the share of farmland under non-customary regimes


                                             31
in the district (see Table A.6 in the Appendix).
   Table 9 displays the results. The main observation is that the relationship between farm
productivity and input use is larger (more positive) in places with modern rights, especially in
regards to land (columns 1 and 2). These results are consistent with market distortions being
less severe in places with modern property rights. This result is consistent with previous
studies documenting a negative relation between customary land and agricultural investment,
and more conflicts over land rights and fewer land purchases in areas with higher incidence
of customary tenure (Place and Otsuka, 2002; Deininger and Castagnini, 2006).
   Columns 3 and 4 confirm this finding. While there is a positive correlation between labor
demand and household size, this relationship is significantly weaker in places with modern
property rights. This finding rejects the separability hypothesis, a result consistent with the
presence of market distortions. Taken together, these results justify using measures of land
rights as proxies of market distortions.


Yield-size relationship under different land tenure regimes We re-examine the
farm size-yield relationship allowing for differences by land tenure. The key idea is that if
the negative size-yield relationship is driven by market distortions, then we would observe a
less negative relationship in places with modern land rights. Table 10 presents our findings
using both the yield (columns 1 and 2) and production function approach (columns 3 and
4). In both cases, we maintain the CRS assumption as in the existing literature.
   We find that the inverse relationship becomes less negative in regions with modern land
rights. This finding is robust to using alternative indicators of market distortions, such as
the presence of local market places (see Tables A.7 and A.8 in the Appendix). This evidence
is consistent with our interpretation that the negative relationship between yields and farm
size reflects, in part, market distortions.




                                              32
                            Table 9: Assessing market distortions

                                ln(land available) GPS                   ln(total labor)
                                          (1)                     (2)          (3)           (4)

 Farm productivity                       0.125**              0.166***
                                         (0.051)               (0.020)

 Farm productivity ×                     0.390***             0.100***
 Western/Central region                   (0.079)              (0.029)

 ln HH size                                                                 0.464***     0.393***
                                                                             (0.022)      (0.024)

 ln HH size ×                                                               -0.069**     -0.129***
 Western/Central region                                                      (0.031)      (0.034)

 ln(land available)                                                                      0.193***
 GPS measure                                                                              (0.009)

 No. obs.                                  1,968                15,235       15,331        10,524
 R-squared                                 0.366                 0.184       0.229         0.292
 Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the household level.
* denotes significant at 10%, ** significant at 5% and *** significant at 1%. All regressions include
soil and farmer controls, as well as region-by-period and district fixed effects. Farm productivity
(ln si ) is estimated using a flexible Cobb-Douglas in land and labor inputs with different parameters
by region. Differences in sample size are due to columns 1 and 2 collapsing the sample to one
observation per farmer. Western or Central is an indicator of being in one of the two regions.




                                                   33
                     Table 10: Farm size-yield relationship and land tenure

                                               ln(output per ha) GPS measure
                                       Yield approach          Production function approach
                                    (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)

 ln(land available) GPS         -0.702***         -0.679***            -0.251***           -0.214***
                                 (0.023)           (0.027)              (0.025)             (0.028)

 ln(land available) GPS         0.139***           0.110**              0.131***            0.075*
 × modern land rights            (0.030)           (0.043)               (0.026)            (0.039)

 ln(labor/land                                                          0.577***           0.579***
 available GPS)                                                          (0.019)            (0.019)

 Proxy of modern                 Western       % non-custom.            Western        % non-custom.
 land rights                    or Central     land in district        or Central      land in district

 No. obs.                         10,256            10,256               10,060              10,060
 R-squared                        0.395             0.393                0.471               0.470
 Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. *
denotes significant at 10%, ** significant at 5% and *** significant at 1%. All regressions use GPS measure
of available land as a proxy for farm size and include soil and farmer controls, as well as region-by-period
and district fixed effects. Columns 3 and 4 include the log of input ratio as an additional control variable.
Western or Central is an indicator of being in one of the two regions.




                                                     34
6     Conclusion

A prevalent view in development economics is that small farms are more productive than
large farms. This view is rooted in the widely-held empirical finding of an inverse relationship
between yields, as a measure of productivity, and farm size.
    We show, however, that using yields is not informative as to whether small farms are
more or less productive. This occurs because yields are affected by market distortions and
deviations from constant returns to scale. These issues limit the usefulness of the inverse
relationship to inform agricultural policies in developing countries and may lead to erroneous
policy recommendations. We illustrate this limitation using data from Uganda and show that
the use of yields (instead of measures of farm productivity) leads to qualitatively different
results.
    Our evidence also points to a more general limitation of the size-productivity relationship
as a policy tool. We show for the case of Uganda that there is substantial dispersion in
productivity across farms of similar size. This feature renders farm size a poor proxy of
productivity, even if the size-productivity relationship is correctly estimated.
    These results imply that there is not a simple instrument for policy. An effective policy
should facilitate better resource allocation by farm productivity, but productivity is difficult
to observe for the policymaker. Our results suggest that policy should focus on fostering
and improving markets, in particular, markets for land. Even with an egalitarian distribu-
tion of property rights, land ownership can be decoupled from farm operational scales via
rental markets or other decentralized mechanisms. Decoupling land use from land rights can
also have substantial effects on migration and occupation decisions, further contributing to
productivity growth in agriculture (De Janvry et al., 2015; Adamopoulos et al., 2017). How
to achieve these outcomes in poor and developing countries is a challenging endeavor that
merits the focus of future research.



                                              35
References

Abay, Kibrom A., Gashaw T. Abate, Christopher B. Barrett, and Tanguy
  Bernard, "Correlated non-classical measurement errors, âSecond bestâ policy inference,
  and the inverse size-productivity relationship in agriculture," Journal of Development Eco-
  nomics, 2019, 139, 171 ­ 184.

Abay, Kibrom A, Leah Bevis, and Christopher B Barrett, "Measurement Error
  Mechanisms Matter: Agricultural Intensification with Farmer Misperceptions and Misre-
  porting," Working Paper 26066, National Bureau of Economic Research July 2019.

Adamopoulos, Tasso and Diego Restuccia, "The size distribution of farms and inter-
  national productivity differences," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (6), 1667­97.

  and     , "Land reform and productivity: A quantitative analysis with micro data," Amer-
  ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2020, 12 (3), 1­39.

  , Loren Brandt, Jessica Leight, and Diego Restuccia, "Misallocation, selection and
  productivity: A quantitative analysis with panel data from China," Technical Report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.

Aggarwal, Shilpa, Brian Giera, Dahyeon Jeong, Jonathan Robinson, and Alan
  Spearot, "Market Access, Trade Costs, and Technology Adoption: Evidence from North-
  ern Tanzania," Working Paper 25253, National Bureau of Economic Research November
  2018.

Ali, Daniel Ayalew, Klaus Deininger et al., "Is There a Farm Size­Productivity Rela-
  tionship in African Agriculture? Evidence from Rwanda," Land Economics, 2015, 91 (2),
  317­343.




                                             36
Aragón, Fernando M., Francisco Oteiza, and Juan Pablo Rud, "Climate Change
  and Agriculture: Subsistence Farmers' Response to Extreme Heat," arXiv e-prints, Feb
  2019, p. arXiv:1902.09204.

Assunção, Juliano J and Luis HB Braido, "Testing household-specific explanations for
  the inverse productivity relationship," American journal of agricultural economics, 2007,
  89 (4), 980­990.

Assuncao, Juliano J and Maitreesh Ghatak, "Can unobserved heterogeneity in farmer
  ability explain the inverse relationship between farm size and productivity," Economics
  Letters, 2003, 80 (2), 189­194.

Auffhammer, M, SM Hsiang, W Schlenker, and A Sobel, "Using Weather Data and
  Climate Model Output in Economic Analyses of Climate Change," Review of Environ-
  mental Economics and Policy, June 2013, 7 (2), 181­198.

Barrett, Christopher B, "On price risk and the inverse farm size-productivity relation-
  ship," Journal of Development Economics, 1996, 51 (2), 193­215.

  , Marc F Bellemare, and Janet Y Hou, "Reconsidering conventional explanations of
  the inverse productivity­size relationship," World Development, 2010, 38 (1), 88­97.

Benjamin, Dwayne, "Household Composition, Labor Markets, and Labor Demand: Test-
  ing for Separation in Agricultural Household Models," Econometrica, 1992, 60 (2), 287­
  322.

  , "Can unobserved land quality explain the inverse productivity relationship?," Journal of
  Development Economics, 1995, 46 (1), 51­84.




                                            37
Berry, R Albert, William R Cline et al., Agrarian structure and productivity in devel-
  oping countries: a study prepared for the International Labour Office within the framework
  of the World Employment Programme., Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, 1979.

Besley, Timothy and Maitreesh Ghatak, "Property rights and economic development,"
  in "Handbook of development economics," Vol. 5, Elsevier, 2010, pp. 4525­4595.

Binswanger, Hans P, Klaus Deininger, and Gershon Feder, "Power, distortions,
  revolt and reform in agricultural land relations," Handbook of development economics,
  1995, 3, 2659­2772.

Carleton, Tamma A and Solomon M Hsiang, "Social and economic impacts of climate,"
  Science, 2016, 353 (6304), aad9837.

Carletto, Calogero, Sara Savastano, and Alberto Zezza, "Fact or artifact: The impact
  of measurement errors on the farm size­productivity relationship," Journal of Development
  Economics, 2013, 103, 254­261.

Carter, Michael R, "Identification of the inverse relationship between farm size and pro-
  ductivity: an empirical analysis of peasant agricultural production," Oxford Economic
  Papers, 1984, 36 (1), 131­145.

Chen, Chaoran, "Untitled land, occupational choice, and agricultural productivity," Amer-
  ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2017, 9 (4), 91­121.

  , Diego Restuccia, and Raül Santaeulàlia-Llopis, "Land markets, resource allo-
  cation, and agricultural productivity," Technical Report, working paper, University of
  Toronto 2017.

Coldham, Simon, "Land reform and customary rights: the case of Uganda," Journal of
  African Law, 2000, 44 (1), 65­77.

                                            38
Collier, Paul and Stefan Dercon, "African Agriculture in 50 Years: Smallholders in a
  Rapidly Changing World?," World Development, 2014, 63, 92 ­ 101. Economic Transfor-
  mation in Africa.

Deininger, Klaus and Raffaella Castagnini, "Incidence and impact of land conflict in
  Uganda," Journal of Economic Behavior Organization, 2006, 60 (3), 321 ­ 345.

Desiere, Sam and Dean Jolliffe, "Land productivity and plot size: Is measurement error
  driving the inverse relationship?," Journal of Development Economics, 2018, 130, 84­98.

Dillon, Brian and Christopher B. Barrett, "Agricultural factor markets in Sub-Saharan
  Africa: An updated view with formal tests for market failure," Food Policy, 2017, 67, 64
  ­ 77. Agriculture in Africa â Telling Myths from Facts.

  , Peter Brummund, and Germano Mwabu, "Asymmetric non-separation and rural
  labor markets," Journal of Development Economics, 2019, 139, 78­96.

Eswaran, Mukesh and Ashok Kotwal, "Access to capital and agrarian production or-
  ganisation," The Economic Journal, 1986, 96 (382), 482­498.

Feder, Gershon, "The relation between farm size and farm productivity: The role of family
  labor, supervision and credit constraints," Journal of development economics, 1985, 18 (2-
  3), 297­313.

Fischer, G., F. Nachtergaele, S. Prieler, H.T. van Velthuizen, L. Verelst, and
  D. Wiberg, "Global Agro-ecological Zones Assessment for Agriculture," Technical Re-
  port, IIASA 2008.

Funk, Chris, Pete Peterson, Martin Landsfeld, Diego Pedreros, James Verdin,
  Shraddhanand Shukla, Gregory Husak, James Rowland, Laura Harrison, An-



                                            39
  drew Hoell, and Joel Michaelsen, "The climate hazards infrared precipitation with
  stations: a new environmental record for monitoring extremes," Scientific Data, 2015, 2.

Gautam, Madhur and Mansur Ahmed, "Too small to be beautiful? The farm size and
  productivity relationship in Bangladesh," Food Policy, 2019, 84, 165­175.

Gourlay, Sydney, Talip Kilic, and David Lobell, Could the debate be over? errors in
  farmer-reported production and their implications for the inverse scale-productivity rela-
  tionship in Uganda, The World Bank, 2017.

Helfand, Steven and Matthew Taylor, "The Inverse Relationship between Farm Size
  and Productivity: Refocusing the Debate," Technical Report 2018.

Hsiang, Solomon, "Climate econometrics," Annual Review of Resource Economics, 2016,
  8, 43­75.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J Klenow, "Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in
  China and India," The Quarterly journal of economics, 2009, 124 (4), 1403­1448.

Janvry, Alain De, Kyle Emerick, Marco Gonzalez-Navarro, and Elisabeth
  Sadoulet, "Delinking land rights from land use: Certification and migration in Mexico,"
  American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (10), 3125­49.

Julien, Jacques C, Boris E Bravo-Ureta, and Nicholas E Rada, "Assessing farm
  performance by size in Malawi, Tanzania, and Uganda," Food Policy, 2019, 84, 153­164.

Kagin, Justin, J Edward Taylor, and Antonio Yúnez-Naude, "Inverse productivity
  or inverse efficiency? Evidence from Mexico," The Journal of Development Studies, 2016,
  52 (3), 396­411.

Key, Nigel, "Farm size and productivity growth in the United States Corn Belt," Food
  Policy, 2019, 84, 186­195.

                                            40
Lamb, Russell L, "Inverse productivity: Land quality, labor markets, and measurement
  error," Journal of Development Economics, 2003, 71 (1), 71­95.

Levinsohn, James and Amil Petrin, "Estimating production functions using inputs to
  control for unobservables," The review of economic studies, 2003, 70 (2), 317­341.

Lucas, Robert E, "On the size distribution of business firms," The Bell Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 1978, pp. 508­523.

Place, Frank and Keijiro Otsuka, "Land tenure systems and their impacts on agricultural
  investments and productivity in Uganda," Journal of Development Studies, 2002, 38 (6),
  105­128.

Rada, Nicholas, Steven Helfand, and Marcelo Magalhães, "Agricultural productivity
  growth in Brazil: Large and small farms excel," Food policy, 2019, 84, 176­185.

Restuccia, Diego and Raül Santaeulàlia-Llopis, "Land Misallocation and Productiv-
  ity," Working Paper 23128, National Bureau of Economic Research February 2017.

  and Richard Rogerson, "Policy distortions and aggregate productivity with heteroge-
  neous establishments," Review of Economic dynamics, 2008, 11 (4), 707­720.

Schlenker, Wolfram and Michael J. Roberts, "Nonlinear Effects of Weather on Corn
  Yields," Review of Agricultural Economics, 2006, 28 (3), 391­398.

  and      , "Nonlinear temperature effects indicate severe damages to U.S. crop yields under
  climate change," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2009, 106 (37), 15594­
  15598.

Sen, Amartya K, "An aspect of Indian agriculture," Economic Weekly, 1962, 14 (4-6),
  243­246.


                                             41
Sheng, Yu and Will Chancellor, "Exploring the relationship between farm size and
  productivity: Evidence from the Australian grains industry," Food Policy, 2019, 84, 196­
  204.




                                           42
ONLINE APPENDIX - Not for publication

A   Additional figures and tables

                         Figure A.1: Sample coverage




          Notes: Figure depicts the number of observations per county.




                                        43
      Figure A.2: Distribution of farm productivity (ln si )




Notes: The estimated production function parameters are    ^ = 0.526 and
^ =0.708. The difference between the 90th and 10th percentile is 2.23.





   Figure A.3: Yields (ln Y /T ) and farm productivity (ln si )




                                  44
  Figure A.4: Systematic measurement error in available land




Notes: Vertical axis is a proxy of measurement error = log of ratio of self-
reported to GPS measure of available land.




                                    45
      Figure A.5: Land tenure regimes in Uganda




Notes: Figure depicts the share of customary land in district (as
% of agricultural land).




                               46
                    Table A.1: Production function estimates

                                                  ln(output)
                             (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)

 ln(land cultivated)     0.372***     0.341***     0.355***     0.392***
                          (0.020)      (0.020)      (0.020)      (0.071)

 ln(total labor)         0.336***     0.339***                               0.428***
                          (0.017)      (0.019)                                (0.021)

 ln(land available)                                                           0.048**
 GPS measure                                                                  (0.020)

 ln(domestic labor)                                0.237***      0.296**
                                                    (0.017)      (0.149)

 ln(hired labor)                                   0.132***     0.131***
                                                    (0.011)      (0.011)

 Method                     OLS          OLS          OLS          IV          OLS
 Control for agric.         No           Yes          Yes          Yes         No
 practices
 Implied                   0.708        0.681        0.724        0.819        0.476
 Implied                   0.526        0.502        0.490        0.479        0.101

 Observations              15,541       14,361       14,361      13,933       10,789
 No. farmers               3,457         3,403        3,403      3,356         2,617
 R-squared                  0.154        0.155        0.155                   0.120
 Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at household
level. * denotes significant at 10%, ** significant at 5% and *** significant at 1%. All
regressions include household and region-by-period fixed effects, plus weather controls.
Columns 2 to 4 also include indicators of using fertilizers, pesticides, improved seeds,
intercropping, hired labor, and tenure of bulls/oxen. Column 4 uses land available and
no. of household members who work in farm in last year as instruments for land cultivated
and domestic labor. Column 5 replicates baseline specification in Column 1 but uses GPS
measure of land available instead of self-reported cultivated land. Land measured in has.
Labor measured in person-days.




                                           47
                      Table A.2: Using available land as measure of size

                              ln(output/land cultivated)                         Farm productivity
                          (1)        (2)        (3)                 (4)            (5)      (6)

 ln(land              -0.073***     -0.101***      -0.230***      -0.037*       0.188***      0.251***
 available)            (0.013)       (0.013)        (0.022)       (0.020)        (0.011)       (0.019)

 Controls                 No            Yes              Yes        Yes             Yes           Yes
 Household FE             No            No               Yes        No              No            No

 No. obs.               16,010        14,532         15,740        3,252          16,373          3,249
 R-squared               0.003        0.153           0.057        0.250          0.392           0.350
 Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at household level. *
denotes significant at 10%, ** significant at 5% and *** significant at 1%. All regressions (except
column 1) include soil and farmer controls similar to Table 2, as well as district fixed effects. Columns 2
to 4 also includes region-by-period fixed effects, while column 3 adds household fixed effects. Columns
4 and 6 use a cross-section of farmers obtained by collapsing the panel data at household level.




              Table A.3: Yields and farm size using regional and local prices

                                     Outcome variable: ln(output/land cultivated)
                                       (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)

            ln(land                  -0.160***                    -0.282***
            cultivated)               (0.018)                      (0.025)

            ln(land available)                     -0.583***                      -0.637***
            GPS                                     (0.019)                        (0.023)

            Output prices            Regional (n=5)               District (n=109)

            No. obs.                   14,685        10,330          7,582          5,601
            R-squared                   0.235         0.365          0.276          0.422
            Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered
           at household level. * denotes significant at 10%, ** significant at 5% and ***
           significant at 1%. All regressions include soil, farmer and weather controls similar
           to column 2 of Table 2, as well as district fixed effects. Columns 1 to 2 calculate
           real agricultural output (at 2009 prices) using median prices by region, while
           columns 3 and 4 use median prices by district.




                                                    48
          Table A.4: Farm productivity and farm size using regional and
          local prices

                                   Outcome variable = farm productivity
                                     (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)

           ln(land                0.226***                     0.177***
           cultivated)             (0.014)                      (0.020)

           ln(land available)                   0.157***                       0.142***
           GPS                                   (0.013)                        (0.019)

           Output prices          Regional (n=5)               District (n=109)

           No. obs.                 15,368          11,146       13,640         9,986
           R-squared                0.442           0.495        0.465          0.478
           Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clus-
          tered at household level. * denotes significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%
          and *** significant at 1%. All regressions include soil and farmer controls
          similar to column 1 of Table 3, as well as district fixed effects. Columns 1
          to 2 calculate real agricultural output (at 2009 prices) using median prices
          by region, while columns 3 and 4 use median prices by district.


    Table A.5: Systematic measurement error in self-reported land available

                                      ln(self-reported land available / GPS measure)
                                         (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)

 ln(land available) GPS               -0.465***       -0.505***     -0.503***        -0.573***
                                       (0.012)         (0.014)       (0.016)          (0.019)

 ln(land available) GPS                                             0.087***            0.134***
 × 1(Western/Central region)                                         (0.021)             (0.026)

 Control variables                        No             Yes              No              Yes

 Observations                           12,134          11,172       12,134              11,172
 R-squared                               0.382          0.466         0.385               0.472
 Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at household level.
* denotes significant at 10%, ** significant at 5% and *** significant at 1%. Outcome variable
is the log of the ratio of self-reported land available and the corresponding GPS measure. Mean
of outcome variable = 0.427. Columns 2 and 4 include as control variables: weather, soil and
farmer characteristics as well as district and region-by-period fixed effects.


                                               49
  Table A.6: Assessing market distortions - using continuous measure of land tenure

                                   ln(land available) GPS                    ln(total labor)
                                             (1)                     (2)           (3)           (4)

 Farm productivity                           0.142**              0.193***
                                             (0.067)               (0.024)

 Farm productivity ×                        0.376***                0.042
 % modern land in district                   (0.129)               (0.045)

 ln HH size                                                                    0.459***      0.396***
                                                                                (0.028)       (0.030)

 ln HH size ×                                                                    -0.066      -0.150***
 % modern land in district                                                      (0.051)       (0.056)

 ln(land available)                                                                          0.192***
 GPS measure                                                                                  (0.009)

 No. obs.                                     1,968                15,235        15,329        10,524
 R-squared                                    0.359                0.184         0.230         0.292
 Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. *
denotes significant at 10%, ** significant at 5% and *** significant at 1%. All regressions include soil
and farmer controls, as well as region-by-period and district fixed effects. Farm productivity (ln si ) is
estimated using a flexible Cobb-Douglas in land and labor inputs with different parameters by region.
Differences in sample size is due to columns 1 and 2 collapsing the sample to one observation per farmer.




                                                   50
       Table A.7: Assessing market distortions - using presence of local markets

                                ln(land available) GPS                      ln(total labor)
                                  (1)            (2)                     (3)             (4)

 Farm productivity              0.079            0.132*               0.176***          0.202***
                               (0.061)           (0.079)               (0.024)           (0.029)

 Farm productivity ×          0.388***           0.291**              0.104***            0.051
 modern land rights            (0.087)           (0.140)               (0.033)           (0.050)

 Farm productivity ×            0.141             0.124                 -0.027            -0.028
 has local market              (0.091)           (0.089)               (0.032)           (0.032)

 Proxy of modern              Western % non-custom.                   Western % non-custom.
 land rights                 or Central land in district             or Central land in district

 No. obs.                       1,631              1,631               11,536            11,536
 R-squared                      0.400              0.391               0.201             0.202
 Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. *
denotes significant at 10%, ** significant at 5% and *** significant at 1%. All regressions include soil
and farmer controls, as well as region-by-period and district fixed effects. Farm productivity (ln si )
is estimated using a flexible Cobb-Douglas in land and labor inputs with different parameters by
region. Differences in sample size is due to columns 1 and 2 collapsing the sample to one observation
per farmer. Western or Central is an indicator of being in one of the two regions. has local market
is an indicator of having a market place (for either agricultural or non agricultural goods) in the
community.




                                                  51
Table A.8: Farm size-yield relationship and land tenure - using presence of local markets

                                              ln(output per ha) GPS measure
                                      Yield approach          Production function approach
                                   (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)

 ln(land available) GPS        -0.703***         -0.672***            -0.265***          -0.224***
                                (0.028)           (0.030)              (0.029)            (0.031)

 ln(land available) GPS         0.117***           0.078*             0.112***              0.057
 × modern land rights            (0.032)           (0.045)             (0.028)             (0.040)

 ln(land available) GPS           0.052             0.041              0.055**              0.045
 × has local market              (0.032)           (0.032)             (0.028)             (0.028)

 ln(labor/land                                                        0.569***            0.572***
 available GPS)                                                        (0.021)             (0.021)

 Proxy of modern                Western       % non-custom.           Western         % non-custom.
 land rights                   or Central     land in district       or Central       land in district

 No. obs.                         8,246             8,246               8,081               8,081
 R-squared                        0.406             0.405               0.478               0.478
 Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. *
denotes significant at 10%, ** significant at 5% and *** significant at 1%. All regressions use GPS measure
of available land as proxy for farm size and include soil and farmer controls, as well as region-by-period
and district fixed effects. Columns 3 and 4 include log of input ratio as an additional control variable.
Western or Central is an indicator of being in one of the two regions. has local market is an indicator of
having a market place (for either agricultural or non agricultural goods) in the community.




                                                    52
B   Evidence from other countries

             Figure B.1: Farm size and productivity - Peru




                    (a) Land productivity (ln(Y /T ))




                      (b) Farm productivity (ln si )




                                   53
Figure B.2: Farm size and productivity - Tanzania




         (a) Land productivity (ln(Y /T ))




           (b) Farm productivity (ln si )




                        54
Figure B.3: Farm size and productivity - Bangladesh




          (a) Land productivity (ln(Y /T ))




            (b) Farm productivity (ln si )




                         55
                              Table B.1: Replication of Table 8: Correcting by DRS and market distortions countries

                                              Peru                                      Tanzania                                    Bangladesh
                                       ln(output per ha.)                          ln(output per ha.)                           ln(output per ha.)
                                   (1)         (2)        (3)                  (4)        (5)         (6)                   (7)         (8)        (9)

      ln(land cultivated)      -0.533*** -0.533***         -0.286***       -0.403***     -0.403***     -0.152***        -0.103***     -0.103***     0.032***
      +-1                       (0.012)   (0.012)           (0.030)         (0.019)       (0.019)       (0.020)          (0.012)       (0.012)       (0.010)

      ln(labor/land)                                       0.259***                                     0.447***                                    0.476***
       (1 - )                                               (0.029)                                      (0.017)                                     (0.016)




56
      Relax CRS                                 Yes           Yes                            Yes           Yes                           Yes           Yes
      assumption
      Add input ratio                                         Yes                                          Yes                                         Yes

      Assumed                    1.000         0.384         0.384           1.000          0.691         0.691           1.000         0.904         0.904
      Implied                    -0.533        0.083         0.330           -0.403        -0.094         0.157           -0.103        -0.014        0.128

      No. obs.                   11,359        11,359       11,357            7,899         7,899         7,890           6,506         6,506         6,506
      R-squared                  0.384         0.205        0.213             0.287         0.234         0.334           0.224         0.201         0.360
      Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. * denotes significant at 10%, ** significant at 5% and
     *** significant at 1%. Results replicate columns 1-3 of Table 8. Regressions includes same controls as baseline results in Table 7. Assumed  obtained
     from estimation of production function.
                                                 Table B.2: Robustness checks of yield-size relationship

                                             Peru                                       Tanzania                                   Bangladesh
                                      ln(output per ha.)                           ln(output per ha.)                          ln(output per ha.)
                                  (1)         (2)        (3)                   (4)        (5)         (6)                  (7)         (8)        (9)

      ln(land cultivated)      -0.759***                  -0.286***        -0.613***                   -0.152***       -0.213***                   0.040***
                                (0.014)                    (0.030)          (0.031)                     (0.020)         (0.025)                     (0.010)

      ln(land available)                    -0.498***                                    -0.363***                                   -0.083***
                                             (0.012)                                      (0.020)                                     (0.011)




57
      ln(labor/land)                                       0.259***                                    0.447***                                    0.476***
                                                            (0.029)                                     (0.017)                                     (0.016)

      Household FE                Yes           No            No              Yes            No           No               Yes           No           No

      No. obs.                  11,359        11,359        11,357           7,899         7,899         7,890            6,506         6,506        6,506
      R-squared                 0.384         0.205         0.213            0.172         0.272         0.379            0.052         0.218        0.378
      Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. * denotes significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%
     and *** significant at 1%. Results replicate columns 2-4 of Table 2. Regressions includes same controls as baseline results in Table 7. Column 1 also adds
     household fixed effects. Columns 3, 6 and 9 use the production function approach , while other columns use the yield approach.
                                          Table B.3: Robustness checks of farm productivity-size relationship

                                                Peru                                      Tanzania                                  Bangladesh
                                         ln(output per ha.)                          ln(output per ha.)                         ln(output per ha.)
                                     (1)          (2)       (3)                  (4)        (5)         (6)                 (7)        (8)         (9)

      ln(land cultivated)         0.183***       0.136***     0.176***        0.163***     0.201***      0.154***       0.078***      0.111***     0.083***
                                   (0.011)        (0.011)      (0.011)         (0.017)      (0.017)       (0.016)        (0.010)       (0.020)      (0.009)




58
      Prod. function used   CD by    CD + IV                  Translog         CD by       CD + IV       Translog        CD by       CD + IV       Translog
      used to estimate si department                                           region                                    division

      No. obs.                     11,364         11,364        11,364          7,894        7,055         7,894          6,525         6,525        6,525
      R-squared                    0.301           0.333        0.314           0.868        0.450         0.576          0.430         0.246        0.234
      Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. * denotes significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%
     and *** significant at 1%. Results replicate columns 4-6 of Table 3. Regressions includes same controls as baseline results in Table 7. No. of departments
     in Peru = 24. No. regions in Tanzania=26. No. divisions in Bangladesh=7.
         Table B.4: Yields and labor productivity by farm size ­ United States

 Farm size         Average           Farm              Land        Value added      Value added
 (acres)          farm size    distribution (%)      share (%)       per acre        per worker
 1-9                 4.8              13.4               0.1           23.3               1.0
 10-49              25.4              28.5               1.6           6.6                1.5
 50-69              58.1              6.6                0.9           4.7                2.3
 70-99              82.2              8.0                1.5           3.8                3.0
 100-139           116.0               7.3              1.9            3.0               3.3
 140-179           157.4               5.7              2.0            2.6               3.8
 180-219           197.7               3.6              1.6            2.9               5.0
 220-259           238.0               2.8              1.5            2.6               5.4
 260-499           357.8               9.0              7.3            2.6               7.5
 500-999           696.6               6.5              10.3           2.8               13.3
 1,000-1,999       1376.6              4.3              13.4           2.4               19.3
 2,000+            6103.4             4.2               57.7           1.0               22.7
 Notes: Value added per acre and value added per worker are normalized relative to the lowest value.
Data is from the 2017 US Census of Agriculture, Table 71, Summary by Size of Farm. Value added
and adjusted farm labor are computed following Adamopoulos and Restuccia (2014).




                                                59
