                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       RETIREMENT IN THE SHADOW (BANKING)

                                      Guillermo Ordoñez
                                      Facundo Piguillem

                                      Working Paper 26337
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26337


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2019




We thank Pablo D'Erasmo, Douglas Diamond, Linda Goldberg, Gary Gorton, Arvind
Krishnamurthy, Dirk Krueger, Frederic Malherbe, Alberto Martin, Alan Moreira, Motohiro Yogo
and seminar participants at Amsterdam University, Arizona State University, Bank of France,
Board of Governors, Central Bank of Chile, Chicago Booth, Colorado Boulder, EUI, ILADES,
New York Fed, Philadelphia Fed, OFR, St. Louis Fed, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona,
Universidad Catolica de Chile, University of Padova, University of St. Andrews, Wharton, the
2017 ITAM-PIER Conference on Macroeconomics in Philadelphia, the 2017 SED Meetings in
Warsaw, the 2017 RIDGE in Montevideo, the 2018 ASSA meetings, the 2018 SITE Workshop
on Financial Intermediation, the 2018 Workshop on Safety in Amsterdam, the 2019 LBS
Workshop on Financial Fragility and Safe Assets, and the 2019 ECB Annual Research
Conference for comments. We acknowledge financial support by the Jacobs Levy Equity
Management Center for Quantitative Financial Research at the Wharton School. The usual waiver
of liability applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Guillermo Ordoñez and Facundo Piguillem. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Retirement in the Shadow (Banking)
Guillermo Ordoñez and Facundo Piguillem
NBER Working Paper No. 26337
October 2019
JEL No. E21,E44,G21,J11

                                           ABSTRACT

The U.S. economy has recently experienced two, seemingly unrelated, phenomena: a large
increase in post-retirement life expectancy and a major expansion in securitization and shadow
banking activities. We argue they are intimately related. Agents rely on financial intermediaries
to save for post-retirement consumption. When expecting to live longer, they rely more heavily
on intermediaries that use securitization, with riskier but higher returns. A quantitative evaluation
of the model shows the potential of the demographic transition to account for a boom in credit
and output, but only when it triggers a more extensive use of securitization and shadow banking.


Guillermo Ordoñez
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Economics
428 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
ordonez@econ.upenn.edu

Facundo Piguillem
EIEF
Via Sallustiana, 62 00187
Roma. Italia
facundo.piguillem@eief.it
1     Introduction

In the last four decades the U.S. economy experienced a steep increase in intermedi-
ated credit, which almost doubled from one to two GDPs. Due to the magnitude of
the 2008 financial crisis, policymakers and scholars rationalized this "credit boom" in
different ways, ranging from an atypical influx of foreign funds (an international sav-
ings glut) to pure financial speculation. By focusing, perhaps excessively, on its role
to trigger crises, these explanations tend to deny the boom's potential benefits and
deem it just as a detrimental phenomenon. But was there any gain from the credit
expansion? If so, how large were these gains?

We analyze the contribution of a domestic factor that has been under-emphasized to
explain this prolonged credit boom: the demographic transition characterized by a
longer life span. In just four decades, life expectancy of the U.S. population condi-
tional on retirement, increased dramatically from 77 years to around 83 years. Even
though life expectancy has been increasing for a century, this time frame was unique
in that it was driven by people getting older as opposed to previous decades in which
it was driven by a dramatic decline in child mortality.1

Living longer after retirement induces an increase in the demand of savings, which
we argue opens the doors for new and more efficient tools and institutions to supply
savings ­ securitization and the so-called shadow banking. This view is in line with
the recent work of Scharfstein (2018) who, using cross-country evidence, highlights
that pension policies and other restrictions to save for retirement affect the structure of
financial systems, in particular the balance between banks and capital markets. In a
similar vein we argue, using time series evidence for the U.S., that the needs to save for
retirement affect the type of financial instruments and the composition of banks that
are used.2

Savings for retirement needs are indeed considered of enormous relevance to study
macroeconomics, as retirees hold a large fraction of total wealth in the economy. Wolff
(2004) documents that more than a third of total wealth in the United States is held
by households whose heads are over 65, and Gustman and Steinmeier (1999) show
   1
     The average retirement age in the U.S. is 63.5 years. For the historical evolution of life expectancy,
see https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/2011/022.pdf.
   2
     The current debate about the falling "savings rate" in the U.S. economy may seem to contradict
the higher pressure of savings for retirement needs. As we explain in detail in Section 4.1, however,
our theory is consistent with the observed fall in the saving rate out of disposable income.


                                                    1
that for households near retirement, wealth is around one-third of lifetime income.
Even before retirement, Gale and Scholz (1994) and Kotlikoff and Summers (1981)
argue that most people's savings are intended to be used after retirement. It is not
surprising then the existence of a rich literature on the macroeconomic effects of pensions,
dating as back as the celebrated overlapping generations model of Samuelson (1958).

What is puzzling, however, is the little existing work on the financial markets effects of
pensions, given that in the U.S. a large fraction of such financial wealth is managed
by financial intermediaries. The first panel of Figure 1 shows that intermediaries
manage at least 50% of total wealth (accounts in pension funds, deposits in banks and
shares in mutual funds), with the composition moving away from traditional deposits
and towards mutual funds shares, both directly (the black line in the first panel) and
indirectly through changes in the investments of traditional intermediaries (such as
the increase of mutual fund shares held by private pension funds, the black line of
the second panel of Figure 1).3


                                               Figure 1: Evolution of Shadow Banking
            Deposits              Treasury-backed Securities   Corporate Bonds              Corporate equity   Corporate Bonds   Treasury-backed Securities   Mutual Funds

 0.40
            Corporate Equity      Mutual Funds                 Retirement Accounts   0.50
            Noncorporate Equity
                                                                                     0.45
 0.35

                                                                                     0.40

 0.30
                                                                                     0.35

 0.25
                                                                                     0.30


 0.20                                                                                0.25


                                                                                     0.20
 0.15

                                                                                     0.15
 0.10
                                                                                     0.10

 0.05
                                                                                     0.05


 0.00                                                                                0.00
        1980
        1981
        1982
        1983
        1984
        1985
        1986
        1987
        1988
        1989
        1990
        1991
        1992
        1993
        1994
        1995
        1996
        1997
        1998
        1999
        2000
        2001
        2002
        2003
        2004
        2005
        2006
        2007
        2008
        2009
        2010
        2011
        2012
        2013
        2014
        2015
        2016
        2017
        2018




                                                                                            1980
                                                                                            1981
                                                                                            1982
                                                                                            1983
                                                                                            1984
                                                                                            1985
                                                                                            1986
                                                                                            1987
                                                                                            1988
                                                                                            1989
                                                                                            1990
                                                                                            1991
                                                                                            1992
                                                                                            1993
                                                                                            1994
                                                                                            1995
                                                                                            1996
                                                                                            1997
                                                                                            1998
                                                                                            1999
                                                                                            2000
                                                                                            2001
                                                                                            2002
                                                                                            2003
                                                                                            2004
                                                                                            2005
                                                                                            2006
                                                                                            2007
                                                                                            2008
                                                                                            2009
                                                                                            2010
                                                                                            2011
                                                                                            2012
                                                                                            2013
                                                                                            2014
                                                                                            2015
                                                                                            2016




In this paper we connect theoretically the increase in life expectancy that raises savings
for retirement needs with the increase in shadow banking (through the extensive use
of securitization) that characterized the changes in the anatomy of financial interme-
diation. We then evaluate this connection quantitatively. In particular, we show that
i) shadow banking was instrumental in accommodating the larger saving needs, and
        3
    This aggregate evidence is also consistent with the more detailed portfolio composition based on
the Vanguard Research Initiative reported by Ameriks et al. (2014).



                                                                                     2
it did so by substantially resorting to securitization and decreasing the financial sec-
tor's liquidity cost; ii) this domestic savings glut can account for most of the observed
credit boom; and iii) even if we assume that the great recession was entirely caused
by shadow banking operations, the benefits prior to the crisis were an order of mag-
nitude larger than the cost of the crisis.

To study the macroeconomic implications of these demographic and financial devel-
opments, we proceed in four stages. The first stage is theoretical (Section 2). We propose
an overlapping generations model with heterogeneity in the bequest motives that al-
lows for the coexistence of lenders and borrowers. Individuals with low-bequest mo-
tives save for retirement by depositing their funds in financial intermediaries (or banks).
Individuals with high-bequest motives save for retirement by buying stocks in capital
markets.4 While Scharfstein (2018) focuses on this last margin, we instead explore the
composition of bank types.

In our economy banks perform two costly activities, i) they channel credit from de-
positors (low-bequest motives) to investors (high-bequest motives) and ii) as deposits
are short-term contracts that can be withdrawn at any period, banks have to guar-
antee their availability upon withdrawal. We justify holding short-term deposits as
being disciplining devices for banks, as in Diamond and Rajan (2001), which imposes
having enough resources to prevent bank runs as in Diamond and Dybvig (1983).
The cost of providing credit, which we denote operation cost, is the cost of finding
the best available investment opportunities to allocate funds, including the process
of identifying productive opportunities, monitoring the management of projects and
administering payments. The cost of guaranteeing the availability of deposits, which
we denote liquidity cost, is the cost of transforming long-term risky loans into short-
term safe assets that can be liquidated at stable nominal conditions in relatively short
periods of time in case a large fraction of depositors decide to withdraw their funds.

There are two types of financial intermediaries: traditional banks and shadow banks. In
contrast to traditional banks, shadow banks can use securitization to reduce liquidity
costs. Securitization is a technology that involves transforming a pool of assets into
a new financial instrument (security) that improves the liquidity in the marketplace
of the assets being securitized. This technology of pooling assets, dividing the pool
   4
     The relevance of bequest motives for retirement savings has been discussed by Bernheim (1991)
and Lockwood (2012), among others. Alternatively, however, one could think about individuals with
high bequest motives as being risk takers or having access to productive investments and agents with
low bequest motives as safety seekers.


                                                 3
into tranches and making transactions complex and opaque discourages asymmetric
information among market participants, facilitating trading and improving the liq-
uidity of underlying assets. By operating at lower liquidity costs, shadow banks can
offer better rates for deposits, but at a cost in terms of fragility (sudden dry up of
liquidity) inherent to the use of opaque operations. Gorton and Ordonez (2014) pro-
vide a model of this trade-off. Ceteris paribus, a higher life expectancy triggers an
appetite for yields, and depositing in shadow banks become more appealing to fulfill
that appetite.

But how relevant were shadow banking operations in the United States to reduce liq-
uidity costs? To address this question, the second stage is empirical (Section 3). Measur-
ing the quantitative extents and implications of securitization is challenging because
of its ubiquitous use in financial markets, its lack of transparency and the correspond-
ing issues of double counting. Our approach is to use prices instead of quantities. We
use the model to map the use of securitization into a "liquidity premium" that can be
inferred from measuring the spread between lending and deposit rates in the whole
financial sector. Measured this way, the liquidity cost declined from a stable level
of 1% in 1980 to almost 0% before the recent financial crisis. This finding is consis-
tent with two alternative estimates using unrelated methodologies. First, Corbae and
D'Erasmo (2018) show, using individual bank's data from FDIC Call Reports, that
regulatory reported spreads have declined by around 1% during the same timeframe.
Concurrently, Del Negro et al. (2017b) show, using time series for interest rates, that
the natural U.S. interest rates have been continuously declining since the 1980's and
that 1% of the decline is explained by the increase in the convenience yield.

Is this estimated decline in liquidity costs quantitatively consistent with the changes
in volumes and prices of intermediated credit observed in the U.S. since 1980? What
were the individual contributions of higher retirement needs and of shadow bank-
ing operations to growth and output? To answer these questions, the third stage is
quantitative (Section 4). We calibrate the economy to 1980 and input the change in life
expectancy and liquidity costs to generate a counterfactual for 2007.

Only including these two forces we can account for the observed evolution of house-
holds' debt over GDP and total financial assets held in the economy, with an increase
of around 75% in both figures by 2007. On the one hand, absent shadow banking, the
change in life expectancy would not be able to account for any increase in household
debt over GDP, but just a steep decline in the risk-free rate. On the other hand, ab-

                                            4
sent demographic changes the risk-free rate would have increased substantially and
steady state output would have grown by only half as with both forces combined.
These results highlight the importance of first understanding the determinants of fi-
nancial markets to then assessing their impact on aggregate dynamics.

Why securitization, by reducing liquidity costs, affects aggregate real variables in this
way? First, securitization improves the liquidity of productive risky loans, allowing
banks to invest more on them and less on unproductive government bonds. Second,
shadow banking allows banks to escape blunt, and potentially restrictive, regulatory
constraints that inefficiently impose the condition that a fraction of assets be invested
in unproductive asset classes. These two forces allow for banks to channel resources
more efficiently to the most productive opportunities, as in Ordonez (2018a).

Our model abstracts from the possibility that shadow banking collapses on path. Yet,
we discuss our initial question, one that has attracted fierce debate in policy and reg-
ulatory circles: did the U.S. win or lose from the operation of shadow banks? This
justifies our last, counterfactual, stage (Section 5). We construct a hypothetical econ-
omy without shadow banks and compare it with the realized economy in the U.S. We
find that, from 1980 to 2007, the operation of shadow banking increased output by an
accumulated 60% of 2007 GDP. This number can be put in context when compared to
the cost of the great recession, which we compute to have been of a magnitude of just
14% of 2007 GDP.5 Thus, even in the extreme case of blaming the crisis and its cost
entirely on securitization and shadow banking, still the economy gained (net of the
crisis) almost half of 2007 GDP by the operation of shadow banking since the 1980s.


Related Literature: We contribute to a literature that quantitatively studies the deter-
minants of aggregate savings. De Nardi, French, and Jones (2009), De Nardi, French,
and Jones (2010), De Nardi, French, and Jones (2015) and Imrohoroglu and Zhao
(2018) show that several factors related to aging, e.g. health care risks, are relevant
drivers of savings. Also, Imrohoroglu, Imrohoroglu, and Joines (1998) point to the
sizable impact that assets' returns on determining the volume of savings in the econ-
omy. Our contribution to this literature is to link aggregate savings driven by aging to
the set of financial alternatives, with endogenous heterogeneous returns, that agents
   5
    To do this calculations we follow the literature and compute the cost by comparing the realized
GDP against a potential GDP constructed by the U.S. Congressional Budget Office. The original esti-
mate, before adjusting downwards the potential GDP, generated a cost of the crisis of around 23% of
2007 GDP.


                                                5
can use to save. More recently, Auclert, Martenet, and Malmberg (2019) study how
in a world with aging population the larger needs for retirement insurance could be
generating the global decline in interest rates.

We also contribute to the recent academic and policy debate on the effects of shadow
banking for macroeconomic aggregates. While most of this debate focuses on the
costs of shadow banking in terms of inducing financial fragility, much less is known
about its potential positive macroeconomic effects. Moreira and Savov (2015) high-
light that shadow banking improves liquidity provision during periods of low eco-
nomic uncertainty, but focus on the implied fragility and its collapse when uncer-
tainty increases. Begenau and Landvoigt (2017) provide a quantitative model of op-
timal regulation of traditional banking that recognizes that it may induce the cre-
ation of fragile shadow banks. Similarly, Farhi and Tirole (2017) argue that traditional
banking is sustained on complementarities between costly public supervision and
beneficial public liquidity guarantees, and discuss how regulation (taxes and subsi-
dies, ring fencing, etc.) can accommodate these forces to avoid a migration towards
shadow banking.6

In this paper we take a longer-term perspective and study the role of demographic
changes in boosting the use of shadow banks to better accommodate larger saving
needs, focusing on their implications for economic growth and not on their implica-
tions for economic cycles nor on how to regulate their activity. Still, even though we
focus on the growth and not on the demise of shadow banking, we are able to provide
an estimate of its net gains when attributing the whole responsibility of the crisis to
its operation.

Our paper is also related to the discussion about the origins of the pressures for chan-
neling more savings. In contrast to a rich literature that argues that the higher de-
mand for safe assets in recent decades can be attributed to larger saving needs of
foreign countries (the "global savings glut" hypothesis, as in Caballero (2010), Jus-
tiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2013), Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2016),
Carvalho, Ferrero, and Nechio (2016)), or to larger saving needs of corporations (the
"corporate savings glut" hypothesis, as in Bates, Kahle, and Stulz (2009) and Gao,
Whited, and Zhang (2018)), in this paper we focus on larger saving needs of longer-
living U.S. residents (a "domestic savings glut" hypothesis). Interestingly, a large part
   6
    Harris, Opp, and Opp (2014) and Plantin (2015) also study the interactions between regulation of
traditional banking and shadow banking.


                                                 6
of the savings glut coming from foreign countries has been accommodated by an in-
crease in U.S. government debt and the provision of U.S. government bonds. Shadow
banking, then, has had a primary role in accommodating the domestic demand for
safe assets, and indeed, we find that these forces are substantial quantitatively and
can account for most of observed macroeconomic changes.

The paper also contributes more generally to the discussion on capturing quantita-
tively the role of banking in macroeconomics using general equilibrium models, as
in Diaz-Gimenez et al. (1992) and Mehra, Piguillem, and Prescott (2011). We extend
these environments by studying the role of retirement savings in shaping financial
markets, in particular the use of securitization and the presence of shadow banking,
and in affecting macroeconomic variables not only directly but also indirectly through
a new financial system.

To write a parsimonious model suitable to perform a macro quantitative analysis, we
have refrained from modeling the microfoundations of shadow banks and how their
intensive use of securitization reduces liquidity costs in the system, as in Ordonez
(2018b). Instead we rely on reduced-form specifications that are better suited to dis-
cipline the model quantitatively using aggregate financial and macroeconomic data.



2       Model

2.1     Environment

We study an overlapping generations economy populated by agents who work in
a competitive production sector, save for retirement (either in capital markets or
through financial intermediaries) and are taxed by the government.


2.1.1   Agents

Each period a measure (1 +  )t of agents are born, where  is the population growth
rate. Agents are born at age j = 0 and live with certainty for T periods, during which
they work an inelastic amount of hours (normalized to 1) at no utility cost. After
age T they can no longer supply labor (they retire) and die with constant probability
0 < < 1 thereafter. When an agent dies at age j she may leave bequests bj to her

                                          7
offspring (a younger agent), which provides a utility  0 (in units of consumption)
per unit of bequest. Agents are only heterogeneous in the intensity of their bequest
motive,   m().7

We denote the consumption of an age-j agent at calendar time t by ct,j and the dis-
count factor by . Assuming logarithmic preferences, the utility in present value of
an agent who is born at a calendar period t is

          T
          X                           1
                                      X
                  j
                      log ct+j,j +             j
                                                   (1   )j   T 1
                                                                   [(1   ) log ct+j,j +  log bt+j,j ].   (1)
           j =0                      j =T +1



In this specification we make two simplifying assumptions, which are useful for ex-
positional reasons and not overly restrictive. First, we assume just a "joy-of-giving"
type of bequest motive, but  may capture other forces as well, such as precautionary
savings against possible health shocks.8 Second, retirement is exogenous at age T . As
Costa (1998) and Bloom et al. (2007) show, the retirement age in the U.S., as in many
other countries, has been continuously decreasing over the last century. Hence, our
assumption is conservative on capturing the effect of aging on savings.9

Individuals have three sources of income. First, an agent born in period t receives
labor income yt+j,j for the labor provided at age j during her working age. Second,
we assume that the bequest bt+j,j that the agent leaves upon death at age j is equally
   7
      As in Mehra, Piguillem, and Prescott (2011) model of financial intermediation, we rely on hetero-
geneous bequest motives to capture simultaneously returns differentials and portfolio choices. As is
well known from the literature on the equity premium puzzle, Mehra and Prescott (1985), and on the
participation puzzle, Mankiw and Zeldes (1991), this is a daunting task using just risk profiles.
    8
      As De Nardi, French, and Jones (2010) show, one important motive to save after retirement is
to insure against medical expenses. De Nardi, French, and Jones (2015) and Lockwood (2015) point
out, however, the difficulty to properly disentangle bequests motives from health needs. Further,
our specification is useful to capture a non-trivial age structure of savings. If we had assumed, for
instance, that agents are perfectly altruistic with respect to their offspring ("Barro-Becker" type of
bequest motive), individual savings would be independent of both life span and survival probabilities,
at odds with the empirical evidence discussed by De Nardi, French, and Jones (2009).
    9
      As Bloom, Canning, and Moore (2014) argue, as life expectancy increases there are two effects af-
fecting the retirement decision. On the one hand, workers can extend their working life to compensate
the longer retirement, but on the other hand, the increase in labor productivity that usually accom-
panies a longer life increases the demand for leisure (income-wealth effect), which induces an earlier
retirement. The net effect of living longer on the retirement age is then ambiguous. Recent work, such
as Shourideh and Troshkin (2017), however, point to the dominance of the income-wealth effect, except
for individuals in top income decile. Alternative explanations of why agents do not retire older range
from an increased female labor force participation, as proposed by Borella, De Nardi, and Yang (2017),
to survey-based evidence of demand-side factors such as low expectations of finding flexible jobs, as
proposed by Ameriks et al. (2019).


                                                             8
distributed among all agents alive of age TI < T . Thus, every agent receives an
inheritance, ¯
             bt+TI , at age TI . Finally, the agent receives pension transfers Pti+j from
Social Security every period after retirement.10

Notice that these three sources of income are deterministic and identical to all agents,
so we abstract from aggregate risk and other sources of idiosyncratic risk (such as
unemployment or health shocks during the working lifetime) and from heterogeneity
in income. This implies that the only source of risk in the economy is the agent's life
span and the only saving motive is retirement. This assumption allows us to focus
on to the role of aging on financial intermediation, and it is not likely very restrictive
for our purposes. First, in spite of underestimating the level of precautionary savings
(even though Gale and Scholz (1994) and Kotlikoff and Summers (1981) show that
between 75% and 90% of individual savings can be explained by retirement reasons
alone), we are interested in their change. Second, although we abstract from the risk
premia embedded in interest rates, we are interested on the intermediation spread,
not in the level of the interest rate.11

In terms of asset accumulation, we will allow agents to differ on their saving strate-
gies depending on their bequest motives. Denoting agent i's saving returns by rt i
                                                                                   and
assuming a labor income tax  , the agent i born at t has a consolidated total wealth at
birth of 12

                     T 1
                     X                                   ¯             X 1
                         (1         )yt+j,j              b                  (1      )j T Pti+j
               i
              vt =       Qj              i
                                                + QTI         i
                                                                     +      Qj            i
                                                                                                 .   (2)
                     j =0     l=0 (1 + r t +l )    l=0 (1 + r t +l )   j =T    l=0 (1 + r t +l )

We restrict agents' choices to save for retirement to two alternatives: i) banks or ii)
capital markets. Since the only source of uncertainty is the age of death, we assume
that households choose among these alternatives at birth and cannot switch across
savings alternatives during their lifetime. We take this assumption to mean that there
  10
      The introduction of social security payments is important because it attenuates the needs for pri-
vate insurance. Without it, we could be overstating the impact of demographic changes.
   11
      When we calibrate the model in Section 4.1, however, we discuss how we adjust interest rates for
risk premia to be consistent with this abstraction.
   12
      Later we will focus on the balanced growth path. In that case equation (2) greatly simplifies to:
                                   T
                                   X 1                     ¯
                             i            (1  )yj          b         (1 + ri ) Pi
                            v0 =                     +             +                  .
                                   j =0
                                          (1 + ri )j   (1 + ri )TI    ri + (1 + ri )T




                                                          9
is a cost to choose and to switch saving strategies, which has empirical support.13 To
be more precise these two strategies are:

1) Save in Capital Markets (Strategy C): Buy equity or bonds in capital markets (cor-
porate equity) or buy and manage an own firm (non-corporate equity) while working
and live out savings after retirement, bequeathing any un-spent savings.

2) Save in Banks (Strategy B): Sign a contract with a financial intermediary (a bank)
that specifies the payment that the agent must make to the intermediary during the
agent's working age (how much to deposit in the bank or to contribute to the pen-
sion plan) and the payment that the intermediary must make to the agent when the agent
retires. That is, the agent consumes cj as long as the agent is alive and leaves bj to her
heirs contingent on dying at age j .

We will discuss in detail later how banks operate. It is enough to highlight at this
point that there are two differences with capital markets. First, banks constitute a
"pool of agents' funds." In this paper this is useful to cross-insure agents who die old
with agents who die young, but in general a pool also allows to insure alternative
sources of risk. Second, banks manage assets at a cost.

The agent can choose to sign this contract with one of two possible banks: a tradi-
tional bank (T B ) or a shadow bank (SB ). Shadow banks have access to securitization
(as we will discuss at length later, securitization reduces the liquidity premium and
allows these banks to pay higher rates to their depositors) and signing the contract
with a shadow bank implies an additional utility cost  to the agents. This parameter
captures several costs related to securitization, such as the effort cost to understand
securities or the uncertainty of participating on a more fragile banking scheme. We
model these costs in reduced form here, but in the Appendix we show how they arise
endogenously when securitization may collapse, as it happened during the recent
U.S. financial crisis.
  13
     According to the IRS, individuals withdrawing from a retirement plan before 59.5 years old must
pay income tax plus an additional 10% on the amount taken out. Consistent with this cost, Mankiw
and Zeldes (1991) show evidence that most households don't ever hold stocks and prefer to keep all
their assets in risk-less alternatives (participation puzzle). Even households that hold stocks in their
portfolios don't drastically change strategies as they age. Fagereng, Gottlieb, and Guiso (2017) argue
that a combination of participation costs and a small "disaster" probability are needed to rationalize
the low change in investments. Alvarez, Guiso, and Lippi (2012) show that not only are participation
costs needed, but also observational costs.




                                                  10
2.1.2   Productive Sector

The productive sector operates every calendar period t with a Cobb-Douglas produc-
tion function with exogenous growth rate ,14

                                           Yt = Kt ( t Lt )1     


                                          t+1   = (1 + ) t ,


where K is the aggregate stock of capital in the economy, L is the aggregate supply
of labor, is the average labor productivity and  is the share of capital income over
total income. As we discussed in more detail in Section 4.1, we interpreted K not only
as productive capital, but also as any kind of storable good, i.e., it includes housing
and land. We do this because the wealth to GDP ratio is a key target moment in our
calibration.

Labor and capital markets are competitive, which implies that the rental rate of the
inputs equals their respective marginal productivity. This is,

                                      k   + r e = F K ( Kt ,   t Lt )

                                            y t = F L ( Kt ,   t Lt )


where    k   is the capital depreciation rate.

Notice that is labor-augmenting productivity. Thus, because average productivity
grows at the rate per year, individual wages also grow at rate as the agents age:
yt+1,j +1 = (1 + )yt,j .


2.1.3   Government

The government consumes a constant proportion g of output (not valued by agents),
follows a committed debt policy Dt
                                 G
                                   (independent of prices and quantities in the econ-
omy) and pays average Social Security transfer of P t . The government collects taxes
  14
    We are abstracting from changes on the growth rate of productivity, . As Chen, Imrohoroglu,
and Imrohoroglu (2006) and Fernandez, Imrohoroglu, and Tamayo (2018) show, these changes can
have important effects on savings rates. We are studying, however, a time interval in which the U.S.
economy can be considered stationary with minor variations in the growth rate of GDP. Nevertheless,
in Section 4.3 we incorporate observe changes in productivity, which slightly improves our results.


                                                   11
on labor income to balance the budget,

                                  G
                        yt Lt + (Dt +1
                                          G
                                         Dt                       G
                                            ) = gYt + P t + rt,L Dt .                  (3)


We will assume hereafter that the Social Security transfer after retirement is a fraction
ssi of the last wage yt,T at retirement, which may be conditional on the saving deci-
sions of individuals. As the only source of heterogeneity in wealth is agents' saving
decisions, i 2 {B, C }. Then,

                                Pti+j = ssi yt+T,T ; 8j > T.


2.1.4   Financial Intermediation

The financial sector consists of perfectly competitive banks that offer saving contracts,
specifying the gross rate 1 + rt that an agent receives per unit of saving. With these
funds, the bank can invest either in "safe government bonds" that pay with certainty
a unit gross rate 1 + rL,t per unit of bond or in a continuum of "risky loans" that pay
a unit gross rate 1 + r
                      be,t > 1 + rL,t per unit of loan. As the bank invests in a continuum
of loans, a known fraction sb of loans default, so there is no ex-ante uncertainty on
their return. Each bank takes the return of bonds (that is, rL,t ) and the risk-adjusted
return on loans (that is, re,t  (1 sb )(1 + r   be,t ) 1) as given. We denote the fraction
invested in loans as ft .

We denote the total financial intermediary's liabilities in period t by Dt . We assume
bank's contracts with depositors are short-term, which means Dt should be rolled
over every period. There are different ways to justify the empirical regularity that
deposits are short-term contracts. Short-term liabilities can have liquidity benefits if
agents should use them for transaction purposes (deposits as money, as in Dang et al.
(2017)) or to face liquidity shocks (deposits as insurance, as in Diamond and Dybvig
(1983)). Short-term liabilities can also induce bankers' discipline, as in Diamond and
Rajan (2001). We denote the total financial intermediary's assets in period t by At , and
assume they mature every period. As banks' liabilities and assets last for a single pe-
riod, we effectively have a bank's static problem every period and then we dispense
from using the calendar subscript t henceforth in this section.

The problem for banks of holding short-term liabilities is that they face the proba-

                                            12
bility of bank runs: all depositors choose to withdraw their funds and move them to
another bank. If a bank does not have enough funds to cover these withdrawals,
it must default completely on all depositors, which creates a coordination problem
for depositors and introduce runs on the equilibrium path. How easily can a bank
liquidate its assets on short notice and raise funds to be insulated from this possible
coordination failure? The intermediary could raise funds from selling bonds, at a
price 1 + rL , and from selling its self-originated loans, potentially at a fire-sale price
that we denote 1 + q .

The fire-sale price 1 + q that the intermediary can obtain from selling its loans in case
of distress depends, however, on how valuable those loans are for potential buyers
(other banks not facing a run at the same time). There are many reasons why buyers
cannot reap all the benefits of non-originated loans, which range from asymmetric
information about the quality of the loans to relationship lending that makes loans
more easily monitored by the originator. For a given rate r promised to depositors,
the bank is resilient (not subject to a bank run) when

                      [z (1 + q ) + (1    f )(1 + rL )]A    (1 + r)D,                   (4)

where z  f is the amount of loans that are liquidated to face the run.

In terms of the banking technology and market structure, we assume that banks face
a constant returns to scale technology, with a constant marginal cost of operation b
per unit of asset managed, and that there is perfect competition, such that a bank's
zero profit condition is

                   [f (1 + re ) + (1     f )(1 + rL )    b]A = (1 + r)D.                (5)


Finally, we introduce the next two natural parametric assumptions.


Assumption 1 There is no arbitrage (agents can buy bonds at no cost). This guarantees

                                              r = rL .


Assumption 2 Operational costs are not high (re > b). This guarantees

                                             A = D.

                                                13
The Role of Securitization: Now we introduce the market for fire sales that deter-
mines q , and highlight the role of securitization.

We assume that a bank facing a run (in distress) randomly matches with another bank
to sell its loans. Since the buyer may not have the expertise to operate the loans, it will
try to sell those loans to another bank that is better suited to operate them, obtaining
the corresponding return re . The probability the buyer can resell those loans is

                                                                 1+r
                         P r(reselling ) = (1 + ) ln  (1 + z )          .
                                                                 1 + re

If the buyer does not find another intermediary willing to buy the loans obtained
from the bank in distress, the buyer does not obtain any return.

The reselling probability captures the simplicity of exchanging assets in financial mar-
kets. We assume this probability increases in an exogenous parameter             0 that cap-
tures the technology available for finding counterparties and for reducing frictions
for trading and re-trading assets in the market. As securitization improves trading
in secondary markets, relaxing asymmetric information considerations, we model a
better securitization technology with a higher . In order to obtain q in a simple
analytical form, we also assume the probability of reselling increases in the amount
of acquired loans (because of better pooling possibilities, for instance), decreases in
the ratio 1+
          1+r
             re
                (a measure of loan specialization vis-a-vis government bonds and other
standard assets) and increases in a parameter  that we just introduced to guarantee
the probability is bounded between 0 and 1 for the relevant parameters. The specific
form of this probability is helpful in characterizing the solution, but it is not restrictive
as long as the qualitative properties remain.

The demand of a distressed bank's loans is then determined by the following maxi-
mization problem of a potential buyer
                         
                                              1+r
                   max (1 + ) ln  (1 + z )           (1 + re )      (1 + q )z
                     z                        1 + re

subject to z  f . The demand for distressed loans is then

                                            (1 + )(1 + r)
                                 1 + qD =                 .
                                                1+z

The supply of loans is given by the binding liquidity constraint of a distressed inter-

                                             14
mediary (4), which, given assumptions 1 and 2, can be rewritten as z (1 + q ) + (1
f )(1 + r) = (1 + r). Then the supply of distressed loans is

                                                 f (1 + r)
                                      1 + qS =             .
                                                     z

Market clearing implies that qD = qS . Thus z  =            1+
                                                                 f
                                                                     f
                                                                         , subject to the constraint that
z   f , which implies,
                                        f .                                                           (6)

The operation of fire-sale markets puts a bound on the fraction of loans that a bank
can hold in order to guarantee enough funds for liquidation in case of distress.

Given these assumptions, a bank simply chooses the fraction f  of investments in
loans and the interest rate r to pay to savers, taking as given the securitization tech-
nology and the return re . The next proposition summarizes these optimal choices.


Proposition 1 Banking Optimal Choices.

The fraction of loans in the portfolio f  is given by

                                       f  = min {1, }

The payment to savers r is given by

                                                        b
                                         r  = re
                                                        f

where f  and r are both increasing in securitization (decreasing in               ).


Proof When re > b the objective is to maximize f subject to the liquidity constraint
(4), which in a fire sale market is simply given by constraint (6). Given f  , the promise
to savers, r , is determined by the zero profit condition (5). It is trivial that both f 
and r are increasing in securitization (decreasing in ).                            Q.E.D.

Intuitively, when it is easy to trade assets (a liquid interbank market), there are fewer
losses in case of liquidation and distress. The higher is the fire-sale price, the higher
is the fraction of loans that a bank can hold and still successfully face a bank run (a
higher allows for a higher f  ). As banks can hold more productive assets in their

                                               15
portfolio and still avoid a run on path, zero profit conditions imply a better return for
depositors (a higher f  implies a higher r ). Combining equilibrium values of f  and
r we can define a risk-adjusted interest spread as
                                                 (            )
                                                          b
                                 re    r = max       b,           .                    (7)


The risk-adjusted interest spread has two main components: i) the physical cost of
production, represented by the value-added component, b and ii) the liquidity-premium
component. This last component depends on the securitization technology. It increases
as decreases (securitization becomes worse) and it is zero when         1.

Notice that in this model the liquidity constraint always holds but never binds, which
implies that there is never a run in equilibrium and fire sales restrict outcome off-
equilibrium. The absence of runs on the equilibrium path is an artifice from the
absence of exogenous shocks that force the constraint to bind. This could be easily
accommodated, but our intention is to characterize steady states and not fluctuations.

Traditional and Shadow Banks: We assume there are two technologies available in
the economy that differ in how loans are packaged, pooled, and tranched to be ex-
changed in the interbank market. Traditional banks operate with T B and shadow
banks with SB > T B . First, empirically shadow banks (mutual funds) trade securi-
ties much more than traditional banks (commercial banks). Second, traditional banks
face larger regulatory constraints, which put exogenous additional constraints on f .
This setting justifies shadow banks investing a larger fraction of their portfolio in pro-
ductive loans, facing less liquidation costs and offering larger return to depositors.


2.1.5   Aggregates and Definition of (Stationary) Equilibrium

Since  , ,  and g are all constant in our setting, in what follows we will focus on
a balance growth path equilibrium. Along the balanced growth path, all aggregate
variables, except L, grow at the rate ^ = (1 + )(1 +  ) 1 and all per capita variables
grow at the rate . For instance, Kt+1 = (1+ ^ )Kt , while investment is Xt = ( k + ^ )Kt ;
therefore, from now on, we omit the time subscript. Even though we will present the
main results comparing stationary equilibria, in Section 4.3 we compute the transi-
tions between equilibria.

                                           16
In a balanced growth path we only need to analyze the problem of an individual born
at t = 0, as the problem of any other individual born at any other calendar period t
is simply ct,j = (1 + )t c0,j . Thus, we solve for the life pattern of consumption of
individuals born at t = 0 (that is, c0,j ) and apply it to all agents born at t > 0. Then, in
the balance growth path, we simply denote the life pattern of consumption as cj .

First, we specify aggregates along the balanced growth path. As the only source of
heterogeneity in the model comes from , let Ai be the stationary set of agents 
                                                                R
choosing strategy i, µi () = m() if  2 Ai and define µi = 2Ai m()d. In every
period t, a density (1 +  )t m() of agents are born and their survival probabilities are
exogenous; then the density of agents of age j and type  choosing strategy i is
                                      (     µi ( )
                                          (1+ )j t
                                                                  if j  T
                         µi
                          j ( ) =         (1 )j T 1 µi ()
                                               (1+ )j t
                                                                  if j > T.

We use these measures to obtain aggregates for each agent type i, as functions of two
endogenous state variables: the marginal productivity of capital, re , and the bequest
obtained by individuals, ¯
                         b.
                                        1 Z
                                      X X
                      C( re , ¯
                              b) =                      ci     ¯    i
                                                         j (r, b; )µj ()d
                                      i=S,B j =1
                                      X1 Z
                    WB (re , ¯
                             b) =               B
                                               wj (r, ¯
                                                      b ;  ) µB
                                                              j ( )d
                                      j =1
                                      1 Z
                                      X
                    WC (re , ¯
                             b) =               C
                                               wj (r, ¯
                                                      b ;  ) µC
                                                              j ( )d
                                      j =1
                                        1
                                      X X               Z
                      B ( re , ¯
                               b) =                          bj (r, ¯
                                                                    b ;  ) µi
                                                                            j 1 ( )d
                                      i=C,B j =T +1
                                      T 1
                                      X
                           Lt =              (1 +  )t    j

                                      j =0


where C is aggregate consumption along the balanced growth path; wB and wC are
the individual net worths for agents following strategies B (banks) and C (capital
markets), respectively; WB and WC are the corresponding aggregates; B is the aggre-
gate bequest; and Lt is total labor supply available in calendar period t.




                                                   17
Definition 1 Stationary Equilibrium.

Given fiscal policies {g, ssi , DG }, a stationary equilibrium is characterized by saving choices
{{T B, SB }, C }, individual allocations {c(), w(), b()}8 0 , prices {y, re , rL , r}, and ag-
gregate allocations {Y, X, K, B, C}, such that


   1. Given prices {y, re , rL , r} and fiscal policies {g, ssi , DG }, the individual allocations
      {c(), w(), b()} solve the consumer-saver problem for all  > 0: households choose
      their retirement plan and consumption path to maximize utility.

   2. Banks choose rates to pay and their portfolio allocation to maximize profits.

   3. Factor prices are equal to marginal productivities.

   4. The government chooses  to balance the budget.

   5. Markets clear:
                                                               B (r ,¯
         · Feasibility:                            b) + X + [ W 1+
                                   Y = gY + C(re , ¯               e b)
                                                                   r
                                                                              D G ].
                                  WB (re ,¯
                                          b)       WC (re ,¯
                                                           b)
         · Assets market:          1+r
                                               +    1+re
                                                                = DG + K .
         · Bequest=inheritance: ¯
                                b = (1 + )TI B(re , ¯
                                                    b) .



2.2    Equilibrium Characterization

We solve the equilibrium backwards. First, we characterize the optimal consumption
path of an -agent conditional on saving in capital markets or through banks. Then
we solve for its optimal saving strategy.

First, consider the strategy of saving in banks. The following analysis holds regard-
less of whether the agent chooses to use traditional or shadow banking, which will be
determined later from comparing the higher rate r and the higher cost  of shadow
banking. Since the age of death is the only source of uncertainty, and banks can
provide insurance against living too long by pooling resources from a continuum of
depositors, the optimal contract agents would sign with banks is an annuity contract,
which guarantees a constant path of consumption after retirement. In this sense we
denote saving for retirement in banks as obtaining safe assets.



                                                     18
Then, any agent saving in banks maximize the utility in equation (1) subject to equa-
tion (2), knowing that consumption after retirement is constant. In the appendix we
show that the solution is characterized by:

                                cB   ¯B
                                 j = c
                                            j
                                                (1 + r)j v0
                                                          B
                                                            ,                          (8)
                                bB   ¯B
                                 j = c
                                            j
                                                (1 + r)j v0
                                                          B
                                                            .

for some constant c¯B > 0. Notice that b can be considered as another consumption
good, so that intra-temporal optimality imposes b = c. If (1 + r) = 1 a depositor
would consume a constant amount throughout its lifetime and would leave exactly
the same bequest, independently of how long the household lives.

This consumption plan implies the following pattern of the net worth evolution,

              B
             w0 = 0                                                                    (9)
              B     B
             wj = (wj    1   cB
                              j 1 + (1     )yj )(1 + r),           1  j  T, j 6= TI
              B
             wj = (wjB
                       1   cB
                            j 1 + (1       )yj )(1 + r) + ¯
                                                          b,            j = TI
                   1
                  X (1
              B              )t 1
             wj =                 [(1      ) c j + t +  bj +t   ssB yT ] ,       j>T
                  t=0
                        (1 + r)t

Intuitively, agents are born with zero wealth, and as they work, they deposit in banks
(at a return r) any non-consumed income. At age TI each household receives an inher-
itance, which is mostly saved; thus the net worth jumps at this age. After retirement,
banks pay according to the contract specified and the net worth for the household is
the present value of the contract.

Now we consider the strategy of saving for retirement in capital markets. In this
case households must plan how much to save for retirement and how to spend those
savings after retirement. This can be considered as two separate problems. We solve
it backwards, solving first the problem after retirement.

Since all bequests are accidental bj = wj for all j    T , the problem after retirement
solves
                   V (w) = max{log c + (1    ) V (w0 ) +  log w0 }

subject to
                                             w0
                                     c+             w
                                          (1 + re )

                                                19
where re is the risk-adjusted return on equity, the return or this strategy.

Given the assumed functional forms for consumption and bequests, it is straightfor-
ward to verify that the value function is logarithmic in w. That is,

                               V (w ) = ¯1 () + ¯2 () log w

                                                            1+
                               with ¯2 () =                                   .
                                                           1 (1          )
The optimal consumption plan and the implicit optimal bequest plan are then

                               c = w/¯2 ()
                              w0 = (1 + re )(w                 c + ssS yT ).                         (10)

Given this solution after retirement, the optimal plan at entry in the labor force solves

                                      T 1
                                      X
                                                 j                T
                              max                    logcj +          V (wT )
                                      j =0


subject to
                             T 1
                             X         cj            wT         C
                                              j
                                                +           T
                                                               v0
                             j =0
                                    (1 + re )     (1 + re )

with v0
      S
        given by equation (2). The solution is

                        cC
                         j   ¯C
                           = c        j               C
                                          (1 + re )j v0 ,                         j<T                (11)
                                          T 1
                                          X
                       C
                      wT = [1                    ¯C
                                                 c     j                C
                                                           ](1 + re )T v0 .
                                          j =0


During working age, the net worth of agents that follow strategy S evolves as

              C
             w0 = 0                                                                                  (12)
              C     C
             wj = (wj   1   cC
                             j 1 + (1         )yj )(1 + re ),                     1  j  T, j 6= TI
              C
             wj     C
                = (wj   1   cC
                             j 1 + (1         )yj )(1 + re ) + ¯
                                                               b,                    j = TI


Two features of this economy are apparent when we compare equations (11) and
(10) with equation (8). First, since re > r, the consumption of agents who save in


                                                      20
capital markets grows faster that the consumption of those who save in banks. After
retirement, however, the former experience a faster decline in consumption than the
latter. In fact, the consumption of agents that save in capital markets converges to
zero as the agent lives long enough. This patterns are summarized in Figure 2. The
difference in the return of these two strategies also has the same implications for the
evolution of net worth across agents with different saving strategies.

                     Figure 2: Lifetime Pattern of Consumption Under Strategies B and C
                 0.060
                                                            Working age                         Retirement age

                                   Type B
                 0.050             Type C




                 0.040
   Consumption




                 0.030




                 0.020




                 0.010




                 0.000
                         22   26    30      34   38   42   46    50         54   58   62   66     70     74      78   82
                                                                      Age


Now, based on these different consumption paths, we characterize the saving strate-
gies of agents with different bequest motives when entering the labor force. First, con-
ditional on depositing in the bank, the agent must choose a traditional or a shadow
bank. The trade-off between these two alternatives is that the return from saving in
shadow banks is higher, but represents a utility cost  of searching, understanding
the contract, and potentially facing an aggregate crisis, incurred at the time of signing
the contract. The next proposition shows that, conditional on depositing in a bank,
the agent chooses shadow banking when expects to live long enough, enjoying the
additional return longer at the same cost . This is true when the agents' bequest
motive is not so large. As we show next, these are the agents selecting into banking.



                                                                21
Proposition 2 Choice between traditional and shadow banking.

For agents with relatively low bequest motives ( < 1 1 ), there exists a unique  (, ) > 0
such that, when         
                         (, ), households that follow strategy B sign the annuity contract
with traditional banks, and when <  (, ), they sign the annuity contract with shadow
banks. Furthermore,  (, ) is increasing in  and decreasing in .


For this result, it is important that  is constant and independent of . If  were
solely capturing search and attention costs of securitization, this assumption would
arise naturally. If in addition  captures the probability that securitization collapses,
it could also depend on fundamental parameters. To address this issue in Appendix
B we consider an alternative environment where instead of the fixing , agents face
a constant annual probability p of loosing wealth equivalent to (1  ) units of con-
sumption. Then, the microfounded equivalent of  would be,

                                         T     p log( )
                              ( ) =                       > 0.
                                             1     (1   )

This representation of the cost  is increasing both in the probability and the losses
of a crisis (note that because  < 1, then log( ) < 0). The cost is also increasing on
life expectancy, but as we show in Appendix B, the benefit of higher rates increases at
a faster rate than this cost. Thus, under some additional conditions (also satisfied in
our quantitative exercise), we are able to prove an analogous result to Proposition 2.

Once determined what is the bank the agent would use if saving in a bank, agents
choose between saving in banks or in capital markets. Saving in banks has the benefit
of fully insuring against the risk of living long, but it has the cost of low deposit re-
turn. Conversely, saving in capital markets has the benefit of high asset returns, but at
the cost of not providing insurance against living too long. In particular, agents sav-
ing in capital markets may leave large amounts of accidental bequests. Of course, the
stronger is the household's bequest motive the lower the implicit cost of accidental
bequests. This intuition is confirmed by the next proposition.


Proposition 3 Choice between banks and capital markets.

There are ¯ > > 0 such that for all b 2 [ , ¯], there exists a unique  ( ) > 0 such that all
agents with  <  ( ) follow strategy B and all agents with   ( ) follow strategy S .


                                              22
Note that in this economy all agents have access to banks. That is, to safe assets that
deliver the same consumption after retirement, regardless of when the agent dies.
Individuals with high bequest motives, however, optimally choose not to use them.15

From Proposition 3, the fraction of the population using banks and capital markets
depends on the distribution of bequest motives, . Similarly, from Proposition 2, the
fraction of the population using traditional and shadow banks depends both on the
distribution of bequest motives, , and of shadow banking costs, . In what follows
we make the following assumption about these distributions.

Assumption 3 We assume that the distribution of bequest motives is concentrated in two
points:  = 0 with probability µ and  =    b > 0 with probability (1 µ). We also assume a
single and fixed cost of shadow banking  for all agents.

Since there are only two saving alternatives, banks and capital markets, the first part
of the assumption is qualitatively without loss of generality. Agents with  = 0 will
save in banks (as re ! r), hence we need to guarantee that       b is high enough to
also have agents saving in capital markets. This assumption immediately implies
from Proposition 3 that the size of the banking industry is pinned down by µ, which
we assume exogenous. Endogenizing the size of the banking sector is in part the
motivation of Scharfstein (2018), but beyond our scope, which instead focuses on the
change in composition within the banking system.

The combination of the two parts of the assumption has, however, implications for
the composition of the banking industry. Since all agents saving in banks (those with
 = 0) face the same , the threshold  (, ) from Proposition 2 is identical for all
of them, and then all choose to switch to shadow banks simultaneously. This simpli-
fication is motivated by the difficulty to measure intermediation costs of traditional
and shadow banks separately, which forces us to target average intermediation costs
when performing the calibration. Since it is irrelevant in the aggregate whether the
observed reduction in average intermediation costs comes from a wide adoption of
shadow banking with slight less intermediation costs or by a moderate adoption of
shadow banks with much lower intermediation costs, we assume the first case, with
all agents adopting shadow banking at the same time. There is always, however, a
distribution of  that can perfectly match the evolution of shadow bank adoption.
   15
      This mechanism is in line with the recent finding by Lockwood (2012 and 2015), who argues that
a high bequest motive could be an explanation for the "annuity puzzle".


                                                23
3     Measuring Shadow Banking and Intermediation Costs

In this section, and in preparation to evaluate the model quantitatively, we docu-
ment the evolution of average intermediation costs since 1980 and discuss the role of
shadow banking in interpreting such evolution.

As there is no readily available measure of in the aggregate, as a proxy for interme-
diation costs we use spreads between total interests received and total interests paid
in the whole financial sector, from NIPA tables. We have to make some adjustments,
however. First, productive investment opportunities are risky and some loans are
not recovered by the bank. Hence, in the data, we subtract from interests received
the "bad debt expenses."16 Second, there are many services provided by banks that
are not priced in, such as safety, accessibility to ATMs, financial advising, insurance,
etc. Thus, we add to the interests paid by the financial sector the "services furnished
without payment," which assigns a monetary value to these services.

To be more precise we want to measure = re r, where re has to be corrected for
defaulting debt and r for non-priced services. We can decompose into measurable
components as
                                                 rT
                                r        z       }|    {
                             z }| {      f re + (1 f )rL rL
                     = re ( rL + r s ) =                    rs ,
                                                    f
where rL is the interest paid for deposits (same as bond returns), rs is the return for
other services not priced by banks, f the fraction of portfolios in productive loans and
re = (1 sb )(1 + rbe ) 1, with rbe being the rate charged for loans and sb the fraction
that defaults. These components have counterparts in NIPA tables:

    1. rT =(Total interest received - bad debt expenses)/hh's debt.
       This expression measures the average return on assets for all concepts that banks re-
       ceive. We use Table 7.11, Line 28 of the NIPA tables, which provides the total interest
       received by private financial intermediaries and subtract Table 7.1.6 Line 12 of the NIPA
       table that provides "bad debt expenses" declared by corporate business.17 To express
  16
     If the law of large numbers holds for financial institutions, the average loss per unit should be
equal to the average. From this point of view, the adjusted interest received could be considered as the
equivalent risk free return on loans.
  17
     As not all corporate business are financial intermediaries, we follow Mehra, Piguillem, and
Prescott (2011) and assign half of it to the financial sector. We also perform alternative calculations
assigning 25%, 75% and 100% to the financial sector without any qualitative change, just a change in
levels.


                                                  24
     these values as returns, we divide them by all household liabilities (hh's debt) from Table
     D.3 of the Flow of Funds.

  2. rL =(Total interest paid)/hh's debt.
     This expression measures the average return on deposits that depositors and savers
     receive. Table 7.11, Line 4 of NIPA provides information about the total interest paid on
     deposits by the financial sector, which we divide by hh's debt.

  3. rs =(Services furnished without payment)/hh's debt.
     This expression measures the average return on services provided by financial interme-
     diaries that are not explicitly charged to depositors and savers. We obtain this figure
     from Table 2.4.5, Line 88 of the Flow of Funds, which we also divide by hh's debt.

  4. f =Fraction of portfolio of financial intermediaries allocated to productive investments
     This is perhaps the most difficult figure to measure, but also central to our analysis. We
     denote by s the fraction of intermediaries not chartered as depository institutions, call
     them shadow banking institutions (hedge funds, SIVs, investment banks, money market
     funds, etc.) and assume they allocate all of their portfolio to productive assets. The
                                                                                       b of their
     remaining fraction corresponds to traditional banks that only allocate a fraction f
     assets to productive assets (either they suffer the threat of runs or they are regulation
     constrained). The fraction of productive investments in the financial sector is then,

                                            f = s + (1     b.
                                                         s)f

     Measuring s is challenging because part of traditional banks' investments is also chan-
     neled by shadow banking activities (securitization, sponsoring of special purpose vehi-
     cles, participation in repo markets, etc.). To avoid double counting and taking a stand
     on what should be classified or not, instead of measuring shadow banking directly we
     measure it as a residual from traditional baking activities. First, we compute (1     s) by
     the fraction of consumer credit and mortgages to households that is channeled through
     traditional banks (from Table 110 we divide consumer credit from Line 14 plus mort-
     gages from Line 15 by total consumer credit and mortgages obtained by all households
     from Table D3). Then, we compute f b by the fraction of loans in the portfolio of tradi-
     tional banks (from Table 110 we divide all the loans from traditional banks from Lines
     12, 14 and 15 by all their deposits, checkable and savings, from Lines 23 and 24).

Combining these components, Figure 3 shows the spreads since the seventies. In
short, right before 1980 spreads were stable at around 4%, there was an increase in

                                                25
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ChartTitle

                                                                                                                           Figure 3: Risk-Adjusted Spread,
                              7.0%




                              6.0%




                              5.0%




                              4.0%




                              3.0%




                              2.0%




                              1.0%




                              0.0%
                                           1970
                                                  1971
                                                         1972
                                                                1973
                                                                       1974
                                                                              1975
                                                                                      1976
                                                                                               1977
                                                                                                      1978
                                                                                                             1979
                                                                                                                     1980
                                                                                                                            1981
                                                                                                                                   1982
                                                                                                                                          1983
                                                                                                                                                 1984
                                                                                                                                                         1985
                                                                                                                                                                  1986
                                                                                                                                                                         1987
                                                                                                                                                                                1988
                                                                                                                                                                                        1989
                                                                                                                                                                                               1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1991
                                                                                                                                                                                                             1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1993
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1995
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2016
the 80s and 90s, and a large decline that reached 3% before the great recession, to
jump again in recent years to pre-1980s levels.

Figures 4 and 5 show the decomposition of the spread. According to our measures,
shadow banking institutions (s) increased from 5% in the seventies to more than 50%
in recent years, while shadow banking activities of traditional institutions (captured
           b) also increased from 80% in the seventies to almost 100% before the crisis,
in part by f
and then collapsed to 70% right after the recent U.S. financial crisis.


                    Figure 4: SB Intermediaries, s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 5: SB Activities, f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.0
1.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.9
0.9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.8
0.8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.7
0.7


0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.6


0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.5


0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.4


0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.3


0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2


0.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.1


0.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1970
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1972
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1976
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1978
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1982
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1984
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1988
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2016
      1970
             1972
                    1974
                           1976
                                  1978
                                         1980
                                                1982
                                                         1984
                                                                1986
                                                                       1988
                                                                               1990
                                                                                        1992
                                                                                                 1994
                                                                                                         1996
                                                                                                                    1998
                                                                                                                            2000
                                                                                                                                   2002
                                                                                                                                          2004
                                                                                                                                                  2006
                                                                                                                                                           2008
                                                                                                                                                                    2010
                                                                                                                                                                            2012
                                                                                                                                                                                       2014
                                                                                                                                                                                               2016




Why did spreads decline in the last decades? Have financial intermediaries improved
either their management efficiency or their asset liquidation value? Philippon (2015)

                                                                                                                                                                                                             26
performs a thorough calculation of the changes in efficiency of the financial sector
in the U.S. during the last century using data on value added. He shows that the
technology in the financial intermediation industry exhibits constant returns to scale
and b has been constant at roughly 2% for more than 100 years.18

This result implies that the liquidity premium accounts for most of the observed vari-
ation in the risk-adjusted spread. To see this, we define the liquidity premium as

                                                                                    Liquidity premium = (1                                                                                                           f )(re                                 rL )

This is the difference between the realized spread and the spread if liquidity were
not an issue. Figure 6 shows the evolution of this premium during since 1970, which
declined from around 1% to almost 0% by 2007. After the recent financial crisis, the
                                        ChartTitle
liquidity premium of intermediation increased again to almost 0.5%. The pattern in
       2.0%




                                                                                                         Figure 6: Liquidity Premium
       1.5%




       1.0%




       0.5%




       0.0%
              1970
                     1971
                            1972
                                   1973
                                          1974
                                                 1975
                                                        1976
                                                               1977
                                                                      1978
                                                                             1979
                                                                                    1980
                                                                                           1981
                                                                                                  1982
                                                                                                         1983
                                                                                                                1984
                                                                                                                       1985
                                                                                                                              1986
                                                                                                                                     1987
                                                                                                                                            1988
                                                                                                                                                   1989
                                                                                                                                                          1990
                                                                                                                                                                 1991
                                                                                                                                                                        1992
                                                                                                                                                                               1993
                                                                                                                                                                                      1994
                                                                                                                                                                                             1995
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                           1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2016




Figure 6 is surprisingly similar to the pattern documented by Del Negro et al. (2017b)
in the same timeframe, with a completely different methodology. They also show
that 1 percentage point of the fall in the U.S. natural interest rate experienced from
the eighties until the great recession is explained by the change in the convenience
  18
     Philippon (2015) performs two alternative calculations: one assuming that the composition of the
types of loans offered by the financial sector was stable during the sample period and another adjusting
for changes in the quality of the loans. When computing the per-unit value added, Philippon (2015)
explicitly, and correctly, discards the use of intermediation spreads as measures of value added. As we
show in equation (7), intermediation spreads are affected by other factors that, even though not reflect
physical costs, deeply affect the cost of financial intermediation.


                                                                                                                                                                         27
yield. Further, Del Negro et al. (2017a) point to the relevant role played by shadow
banks as liquidity providers.

In short, the three decades before the recent crisis was characterized by a large drop
in the financial intermediation spread, almost exclusively led by a reduction in the fi-
nancial sector's "liquidity premium." Shadow banking has had a direct impact by im-
proving the assets' tradability, replacing less profitable government bonds on banks'
balance sheets by more productive loans, and then improving investment and output.



4        Quantitative Assessment of the Model

To decompose the direct macroeconomic effects of an increase in life expectancy and
its indirect effect through transforming the financial system towards more securitiza-
tion and lower intermediation costs, we first calibrate the economy to replicate the
main aggregates for financial intermediation in 1980. Then, we obtain the model's
output for 2007 keeping most of the parametrization as in 1980 and we only change
the newly observed life expectancy and intermediation costs. We also analyze what
would have happened if the United States had to face the demographic transition
while forbidding the use of securitization and shadow banking.


4.1      Calibration for 1980

We calibrate the model to yearly data. There are some parameters that are standard
in the literature: i) the discount factor = 0.9975, ii) capital share  = 0.33 consistent
with a capital income share of output equal to 33%, iii) labor productivity growth,
  = 0.02 and iv) population growth,  = 0.01.19

When choosing the capital depreciation rate, k , we need to take into account what
capital means in our economy. The literature targets a capital-output ratio of 2.7,
    19
     The calibrated parameter is larger than standard values in the literature. The reason is that, for
tractability, we have fixed the coefficient of relative risk aversion parameter to 1 (log preferences) and
then the discount factor must capture how agents assess, when entering the labor force, the risk of
death after retirement. Most of the discounting comes from the probability of death, which is absent
in most macroeconomic models. Indeed, Giglio, Maggiori, and Stroebel (2015) find that households
barely discount payoffs that happen in the very long run. In any event, using preferences with arbi-
trary relative risk aversion would allows us to decrease the value of by increasing the coefficient of
risk aversion. See also the discussion in Krueger and Kubler (2005).


                                                   28
which is the approximate ratio for the U.S. economy when one focuses only on pro-
ductive capital. In our economy capital includes many other physical assets that
constitute wealth for the household, such as housing and land. Including these as-
sets capital-output ratio is about 3.4, which is generated by a depreciation rate of
 k = 0.0271. Regarding the agents' lifecycle, we assume that they enter the labor force

at age 23, retire at age 63 (this is, T = 40) and, based on the Survey of Consumer
Finances, receive inheritance at age 52 (this is, TI = 29).

Regarding µ (the fraction of agents with  = 0 who choose to save in banks), we disci-
pline it with the fraction of agents directly participating in capital markets. Thus, we
measure it with the fraction of financial assets held in corporate and non-corporate
equity from the Flow of Funds (the first panel of Figure 1). This figure has been
roughly constant in the U.S. at around 28% since the eighties. Accordingly, we cali-
brate µ = 0.72 such that 1 µ = 0.28.

As for the parameters that determine fiscal policies, according to NIPA government
spending is 20% of GDP (this is, g = 0.20) and in 1980 government debt (federal, state
and local) was around 40% of GDP. Since we model a closed economy and around
20% of the government debt was held by foreign investors, we set DG /Y = 0.33.

Finally, two parameters remain to be calibrated: i) the bequest motive,  b, and ii) the
fraction of the last wage that the government transfers as Social Security after retire-
ment, ssi . Since there is no direct measure of these parameters, we normalize ssC = 0
(no social security for investors in capital markets) and choose ssB and b to replicate
two moments in the data: i) government debt to GDP ratio of 0.33 in 1980 and ii)
household debt to GDP ratio of 1 in 1980. This implies      b = 4.64 and ssB = 0.55.
To assess the validity of these parameters notice that: i)  b of around 4.6 generates
in the model a level of savings consistent with the findings from De Nardi, French,
and Jones (2015) and ii) ssB of 55% of the last wage implies a ratio of Social Secu-
rity of 34% of the average wage, which is consistent with information from the Social
Security Administration.20

The two counterfactual parameters that we will modify between 1980 and 2007 are: i)
the survival probability after retirement, , which captures life expectancy and ii) the
  20
    Monthly average payments per retired beneficiary were around $1,250 per month in 2015. Given
an average annual wage of $57,000 in 2014, this implies a ratio of 27%, which is lower than the ratio
generated by the model. Including Medicare and Medicaid, however, would raise this ratio closer to
the one implied by the model.


                                                 29
spread between borrowing and lending, , which captures the role of securitization
and shadow banking to reduce intermediation costs. We start by calibrating =
0.072 for 1980, which implies a life expectancy of 13.9 years after retirement. In the
counterfactual we decrease this value to = 0.052, which implies a life expectancy
of 19.23 years after retirement, the observed value in 2007.21 Based on Section 3, we
calibrate = 0.04 for 1980 and in the counterfactual we decrease its value to = 0.03,
which is the observed value in 2007.

We can assess the model's performance for moments that we have not targeted. First,
the model generates a ratio of private consumption to GDP of 0.56 in 1980, close to
the observed ratio of 0.62. Second, the model is not as successful on capturing the
amount of inheritances, as it generates 4.9% of GDP, while most empirical studies
estimate this figure to be around 2.7%. Those empirical estimates, however, abstract
from inter-vivos transfers whose present value could be larger than the inheritance.

Remark on savings rates: Given the long standing debate about the declining "sav-
ings rate" in the U.S. (see Summers and Carroll (1987)), it may appear puzzling that
our theory relies on larger savings to explain the increased in financial intermediation.
This apparent contradiction can be settled, however, by properly defining "savings".
While such literature documents a sharp decline in the flow of savings out of dispos-
able income, in most theories, including ours, savings are defined at a given time by
the stock of financial assets. There are two main reasons why these two measures could
generate contradictory results. First, in short windows larger savings needs (in terms
of stocks) are perfectly compatible with lower savings flows whenever an economy is
in a transition or affected by shocks. Second, the stocks of financial assets are greatly
affected by the prices of those assets. Thus, as long as individuals do not consumed
their capital gains, it is possible to increase the stock of savings with declining (or
even negative) flows of savings. The relevance of this last channel has been stressed
by Fagereng et al. (2019) to explain the behavior of savings rates in Sweden. The fact
that in the U.S. economy both the capital-output ratio and the wealth to GDP-ratio
have sharply increased since 1980 (see next section) confirms our theory once we de-
fine savings based on the stock of financial assets.
  21
    These numbers can be computed using the actuarial tables of the Social Security Administration
given that workers retire at an average age of 63. We use slightly conservative estimates, since life
expectancy is still in a downward path.




                                                 30
4.2    Decomposing the Role of Life Expectancy and Shadow Banking

We now perform a counterfactual exercise, decomposing the effects of the change of
life expectancy and the change in intermediation costs on asset accumulation, output
and welfare, from 1980 to 2007, before the crisis.

What parameters do we use for the counterfactual on 2007? Most parameters have
not changed, but some have. First, the population growth rate increased to 1.4% in
1992, and then fell to 0.7% in 2011. In our counterfactual we set  = 0.007 for 2007.
Second, we maintain a government debt of 33% as a ratio of GDP in 2007. Even
though the ratio increased to 62%, around 45% of U.S. federal debt was held by non-
U.S. residents.22 Based on these figures we argue that the increase in the provision of
government bonds during this period was not relevant domestically. Third, as in the
data, we maintain the replacement ratio (that is, the proportion of wages obtained
from the government after retirement) and allow labor taxes to adjust in order to
satisfy the government budget constraint. Later, we show the same simulations, but
we keep the labor tax constant and allow the government debt to change. This last
exercise is helpful to understand the underlying mechanisms affecting our results.

In Table 1, the first column shows the calibration results for 1980. The last column
introduces the counterfactual when life expectancy increases (captured by a reduction
in from 0.072 to 0.052) and agents move bank's savings from traditional to shadow
banks. Because of Proposition 1, there are two levels of utility costs to sign a contract
with securitization, 0 <  <  ¯ such that if  2 [, ¯ ], it is optimal for agents to choose
traditional banks when = 0.072 and shadow banks when = 0.052. Due to the move
from traditional to shadow banks, the intermediation spread falls from = 0.04 to
  = 0.03, as we observe in the data and the model in Section 3.

Comparing the first and last columns, in which we allow for both an increase in life
expectancy and a reduction in spreads, the model generates a large increase in the
output steady-state level (of around 7%), an increase in the capital to output ratio
(from 3.4 to 3.9) and a large increase in households' total financial assets (from 1.33 to
1.94 of GDP). While the data counterparts of the first two figures are difficult to ob-
serve, we use Table L100 of the Flow of Funds to measure the increase of households'
  22
    See http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/tic/Pages/ticsec2.aspx.               See
also Bertaut et al. (2012) for a detailed discussion about the international savings glut in the U.S. econ-
omy.



                                                    31
financial assets. Subtracting from the total domestic non-financial assets (Line 1, Ta-
ble L100) the corporate equity (Line 16, Table L100) and the equity on non-corporate
businesses (Line 23, Table L100), we obtain a proxy for the net worth of households
that use intermediation, which grew from 1.36 of GDP to 2.33 of GDP, very close
to the model's prediction. Finally, the model's prediction of the change in the new
amount intermediated, measured by the household debt to GDP ratio, accounts for
more than 90% of the observed change (the model generates 1.62 as opposed to the
1.66 measured in the data).


                        Table 1: Counterfactual to 2007 (Fixed DG )

                                       1980   Larger        Same      & change
     Economy                        Benchmark  >   ¯         <         2 [ , ¯]
     Interm. Cost ( )                   4%      4%            3%        3%
     Survival prob. ( )                0.072   0.052         0.072     0.052

     Interest Rates
     Borrowing Rate (r)                0.030        0.023    0.034      0.028
     Lending Rate (re )                0.070        0.063    0.064      0.058

     National Accounts
     Output                             1.00        1.035    1.031      1.070
     Capital to output ratio            3.40         3.65     3.62       3.90

     Net Worth
     Total                              3.73        3.98      3.95       4.23
       Equity (Plan C)                  2.40        2.68      2.08       2.28
       Bank Debt (Plan B)               1.33        1.30      1.86       1.94
       Data (FF: Table L100)            1.36                             2.33

     Bequest/Y                         0.049        0.049    0.040      0.039
     Government Debt/Y                  0.33         0.33     0.33       0.33
     Household Debt/Y                   1.00         0.96     1.53       1.62
     Data (FF: Table D3)                1.00                            1.66

     Change in welfare at birth          -            -       0.3%       0.4%
     Plan C                              -            -      -4.3%      -4.8%
     Plan B                              -            -       2.5%       2.8%




                                               32
Now we can decompose the effects of the increase in life expectancy and the decline
in intermediation costs by suppressing one at a time. The second column of Table
1 shows the counterfactual without shadow banks. We compute the model with life
expectancy increasing in the same magnitude as observed in the data, but assum-
ing that  >   ¯ , so that the migration toward shadow banking does not happen and,
without securitization, spreads remain at 1980 levels. In this case the increase in the
capital to output ratio and steady state output would have been around 50% of the
total increase with the presence of shadow banking (the capital to output ratio would
have increased from 3.4 to 3.65 instead of to 3.9, while output would have increased
from 1 to 1.035 instead of to 1.07). Also, absent shadow banking we would have not
observed any change in the net worth held by agents saving through banks, in terms
of GDP (roughly constant at 1.3), nor in household debt over GDP (roughly constant
at 1). Finally, the increase in retirement needs without an improvement in interme-
diation costs would have increased the demand for savings without an increase in
supply, generating a reduction in savings return (r declines from 3% to 2.3%). Still,
since there are more funds channeled to investment opportunities, the equity return
declines (re declines from 7% to 6.3%).

Finally, the third column of Table 1 is a thought experiment without an increase in life
expectancy, where we assume that  falls below the lower bound , still inducing a
movement towards shadow banking. With shadow banking but no extra needs for
retirement, the increase in capital to output ratio and steady state output would have
been between 40% and 50% of the total increase with higher retirement needs (the
capital to output ratio would have increased from 3.4 to 3.62 instead of to 3.9, while
output would have increased from 1 to 1.031 instead of to 1.07). That is, the arrival of
shadow banking without an increase in the demand of savings would have generated
a permanent increase in GDP of almost 3% instead of 7%. We would have observed,
however, a large increase in the net worth held by agents in terms of GDP (from 1.33
to 1.86 instead of to 1.94) and household debt over GDP (from 1 to 1.53 instead of
to 1.62), almost accounting for the full observed change. Finally, the increase in the
supply of savings without an increase in the demand for savings induces an increase
in savings returns (r increases from 3% to 3.4%). Still, since more funds are channeled
to investments, the equity return still declines (re declines from 7% to 6.4%).

Partial equilibrium intuition of the decomposition results: To build intuition about
the forces behind the previous decomposition, we show in Figure 7 the partial equi-

                                          33
librium effects of changes in both life expectancy and intermediation costs on interest
rates, capital and credit.

In the left panel we depict the equilibrium in capital markets. The decreasing solid line
shows the supply of capital, which is the level of K that technologically satisfies: re =
f 0 (K ) k . For this reason, it will not be affected by changes in either demographics or
financial technology. The increasing solid curve with dot markers is the demand for
capital. This can be decomposed between the direct demand with own funds by C -agents
(the net worth that agents of type C are willing to accumulate at a given interest rate
re , given by WC (re )/(1 + re ),) depicted as the increasing solid curve without markers.
As the return on capital re increases, agents want to increase their savings, demanding
more capital. The second component is the indirect demand with borrowed funds, which
is the amount of funds that banks channel to C -agents to buy capital. This second
component, however, is determined by the operation of banks, which we denote next
as the credit market.

In the right panel of Figure 7 we depict the equilibrium in credit markets. The credit
supply, depicted by the increasing solid blue function, is given by the net worth of
B -agents and accumulate at an interest rate r, not held in government bonds (that is,
WB (r)/(1 + r) DG (r)). The solid decreasing red curve, (r + )  K (r + ) WC (r +
 )/(1 + r + ), is the demand for credit to buy capital, which is the capital that cannot
be bought by C -agents with their own funds. As is clear, both markets are interlinked
and cannot be solved separately.

The solid lines in both panels of Figure 7 are computed assuming = 0.072, as in the
first column of the 1980 benchmark. Equilibria in both markets are represented by E 0.
In credit markets this implies a ratio of debt over GDP of 1 and r = 0.03. In capital
markets this implies a capital to output ratio of 3.4 and a return on capital of re = 0.07.
These are the results in the first column of Table 1, consistent with = re r = 0.04.

What happens in this partial equilibrium analysis when life expectancy increases?
This counterfactual is shown with dotted lines. First, we discuss what happens in
credit markets. Since B -agents expect to live longer, they accumulate more assets
in banks, increasing the supply of credit in the economy. C -agents also expect to
live longer and assign more of their own wages to buy stocks, reducing the demand
of credit. As a result, the new partial equilibrium is at point B , with approximately the
same amount of private debt (around 1), but with a much lower credit rate (r = 0.022).

                                            34
                                                  Figure 7: Partial effects
                              Capital Market                                                        Credit Market
          7                                                                      4
                                   Equity Demand (only net worth)                                   Credit supply        H
                                                                                                                             ,   H
                                                                      H
         6.5                       Equity Demand (plus debt)                   3.5                  Demand      H
                                                                                                                  ,   H
                                                                  H
                                   Supply= K,                                                       Credit supply        L
                                                                                                                          ,      H
                                                  H
          6                        Equity Demand (only net worth)                3                  Demand      L
                                                                                                                 ,    H
                                                                      L
                                   Equity Demand (plus debt)                                        Demand      L
                                                                                                                 ,    L
                                                                  L
         5.5                                                                   2.5
                                   Supply=K,      L

          5                                                                      2                        E1

         4.5                                                                   1.5
               E1
          4                                                                      1           B
                                                                                                                    E0

         3.5                               E0                                  0.5
                      Borrowing

          3                                           Borrowing                  0

         2.5                                                                -0.5

          2                                                                      -1
               0.06        0.065           0.07          0.075            0.08        0.02       0.025          0.03                 0.035   0.04
                                      re                                                                    r




What happens in capital markets? While the supply of capital is not affected (it is
purely a technological function), the demand increases because C -agents save more.

Intuitively, the higher demand of savings for retirement by all agents in the economy
counteract each other, generating an increase in both the demand and supply for
credit, reducing the return on safe assets and increasing capital in the economy, but
not changing the total amount of credit.

The arrival of shadow banking tends to have a first-order effect on increasing credit in
the economy. A fall in does not directly affect capital markets, but it does affect the
functioning of credit markets. A fall in intermediation costs reduces the cost of credit
for C -agents, increasing their demand of credit. The new "partial" equilibrium is at
point E 1, with a higher intermediate interest rate r, more credit and an even higher
level of capital, all of which could not be generated by just changing .

We emphasize the partial nature of this intuitive analysis, as changes in these two
markets will feedback to each other via the quantity of capital in the economy and
the accumulation of net worth. In particular, the slopes of demand and supply func-
tions depend on general equilibrium forces. These general equilibrium effects are
fully accounted for in the table, but the figure is useful to understand the underlying
mechanisms and interactions between agents.




                                                                          35
Remarks on welfare effects: When there are changes to "preferences" (in our case life
expectancy) affecting the computation of present values, comparisons across different
scenarios are hard to interpret in terms of welfare. Still, we can make comparisons
using consumption equivalent changes when fixing .

Let c = {ct , bt }1
                  t=0 be the sequence of consumption and bequest for an agent at birth
before a change in the economy and e           c = {c~t , ~
                                                          b t }1t=0 the analogous sequence after the
change. We define the consumption equivalent parameter as the constant pro-
portional change in every period allocation that makes the consumer indifferent be-
                                                       P
tween the two scenarios. That is, solves 1                 t=0 ((1
                                                                             t
                                                                        t ) ) u((1 + )ct , (1 + )bt ) =
P1
   t=0 ((1
                   t
             t ) ) u(~ct , ~
                           bt ). If is positive the consumer benefits from the change, while,
if it is negative, the consumer is worse off, since preferences are logarithmic. The
                                          P                                  P1
above equation can be written as 1           t=0 ((1
                                                              t
                                                       t ) ) log(1+ )+         t=0 ((1
                                                                                             t
                                                                                       t ) ) u(ct , bt ) =
P1
   t=0 ((1
                    t
                      ct , ~
              t ) ) u(~    bt ). Let U0 (c) be the utility at birth, then satisfies:

                                  T +1              T
                       1
                                         +                    log(1 + ) = U0 (e
                                                                              c)     U0 (c)
                           1                 1      (1   )
                                             T +1            T
                                   1
                  = exp                                               exp [U0 (e
                                                                               c)   U0 (c)]   1
                                       1             1       (1   )

Comparing columns 1 and 3 of Table 1, where the economy has the same = 0.072
but lower intermediation costs due to shadow banking, we observe a net increase in
welfare of 0.3%. This increase, however, is not without redistribution consequences.
While B -agents (who represent almost 70% of the agents) experience a consumption
equivalent increase of 2.5%, C -agents experience a drastic decrease of 4.3%. Compar-
ing columns 2 and 4, the economy has a higher life expectancy (of = 0.052) and
the same reduction in intermediation costs. Shadow banking improves welfare by
30% more when agents live longer (from 0.3% to 0.4%), with stronger redistribution
consequences.


Remarks on flexible government debt: In the previous simulations we have main-
tained DG fixed. In Table 2 we consider alternative scenarios, with changing DG .
The first column just replicates the calibration in Table 1, while the second column
replicates the counterfactual for 2007 when allowing both retirement needs and inter-
mediation costs to vary (the last column of Table 1). The third column shows what
the equilibrium would have been if life expectancy had increased, the spread had

                                                             36
decreased to 3% and the government were allowed to freely choose the level of debt
without changing taxes. In this case, the government would have chosen a similar
level of tax-debt combination, which is due to the similar expenses due to the social
Security System. As a consequence, in this scenario the main variables would have
remained very similar to just fixing debt to the 1980 level.


                    Table 2: Counterfactual to 2007 (alternative DG )

                                     1980            2007       Free   All DG
        Economy                   Benchmark       Calibration    D G
                                                                      Domestic
        Interm. Cost ( )              4%              3%         3%      3%
        Survival prob. ( )           0.072           0.052      0.052   0.052

        Interest Rates
        Borrowing Rate (r)           0.030           0.028      0.027   0.029
        Lending Rate (re )           0.070           0.058      0.057   0.059

        National Accounts
        Output                        1.00           1.070      1.071   1.060
        Capital to output ratio       3.40            3.90       3.91    3.85

        Net Worth
        Total                         3.73           4.23       4.21    4.47
          Equity (Plan C)             2.40           2.28       2.28    2.36
          Debt (Plan B)               1.33           1.94       1.93    2.11
          Data (FF: Table L100)       1.36           2.33

        Bequest/Y                    0.049           0.039      0.039   0.041
        Government Debt/Y             0.33            0.33       0.30    0.62
        Household Debt/Y              1.00            1.62       1.63    1.49
        Data (FF: Table D3)           1.00            1.66



By changing the government debt to GDP ratio, we can also shed light on what would
have happened in the U.S. without an international saving glut contemporaneous
with the domestic savings glut. Justiniano et al. (2013 and 2015) relate the credit
boom experienced before the crisis to the international savings glut, claiming the fall
in interest rates and between a fourth and a third of the higher U.S. household debt
can be attributed to the influx of foreign funds. The last column assumes that the debt


                                             37
to GDP ratio moves from 0.33 (as in 1980) to 0.62, the domestic supply of government
bonds in 2007 if foreign nations were not holding any U.S. Treasuries.

The direct effect of more government debt is an increase in interest rates, r, by 20 basis
points. This result is consistent with half the estimate of the elasticity of U.S. Treasury
yields to U.S. government debt provided by Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen
(2012) (they estimate that doubling U.S. government debt roughly increases Treasury
interest rates by 40 basis points).23 This change in interest rates induces a decline in
private credit (household debt to GDP ratio) with respect to the case in which there
is no global savings glut, to 1.49GDP instead of 1.62GDP. This result implies that
the international demand for U.S. Treasuries would account for around 21% of the
generated increased in the credit boom. This number is very close to the interval
provided by Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2013) for the contribution of the
international savings glut to the credit boom in the 2000s. However, in our setup the
channel is different. There is no direct supply of foreign funds (lenders) generating
incentives that stimulate households borrowing. Instead, the foreign demand for U.S.
Treasuries crowds out the domestic demand for safe assets.

In summary, without a foreign savings glut, the U.S. economy would have experi-
enced a smaller increase in capital-output ratio and in output (on the order of 15%
lower steady state output), as there would have been a larger supply of safe assets
that forced an increase in the return on capital and less investment.



4.3    Transitions

Since it can take many years for an economy to converge to a new steady state, com-
paring two steady states may not be the best way to assess the impact of an increase in
life expectancy in a four decade span. We show here that convergence indeed happen
quite fast: by 2010 most of the increase in debt (around 90%) had already taken place.
We also show that cyclical movements of productivity have played an important role
in accommodating the slow growth in private debt observed during the early 80s and
the subsequent speeding up during the 2000s.
  23
   In our setting, the spread   remains constant as we do not model the convenience yield of govern-
ment bonds.




                                                 38
                                       Figure 8: Transition Dynamics: Constant TFP
                 0.05                                                     1.1
                                              Lending Rate
  Lending Rate                                Borrowing Rate 0.07        1.08
                 0.04                                                    1.06
                                                             0.06
                                                                         1.04
                 0.03
                                                             0.05        1.02

                                                                           1
                 0.02                                        0.04
                    1980     1990      2000      2010     2020             1980   1990   2000     2010   2020
                              (a) Interest rate                                      (b) Output
                   2                                         3
                           Type B                                        1.6
                           Type S
                                                             2.75
                                                                         1.4

                  1.5                                        2.5         1.2

                                                                           1
                                                             2.25
                                                                         0.8
                    1                                        2
                   1980      1990      2000      2010     2020            1980    1990   2000     2010   2020

                                    (c) Assets                             (d) Household Debt/Output

The computation of the transition presents several challenges. First, as there is a dis-
tribution of agents indexed by age and assets at the time the life expectancy increases,
who is affected by the shock? We assume that all working-age agents experience in
1980 a decline in the survival probability to = 0.052, while there is no change for
retired agents. Second, as some agents were already involved in a banking contract,
what happens with those contracts? We assume that after the shock all existing con-
tracts are renegotiated to take into account the new survival probability. Third, what
happens with the government budget? We assume that lump-sum transfers remain
at the same absolute value as before the shock and that the government still follows
a policy of maintaining the debt to output ratio constant and equal to 0.3, adjusting
labor taxes correspondingly during the transition to maintain government's budget
balanced. Finally, what happens with retirement payments? We assume that they do
not change for those already retired in 1980.

In Figure 8 we show the transition dynamics when both life expectancy increases


                                                                    39
and intermediation costs decline. In panel (a), we see that the spread (the differ-
ence between lending and borrowing rates) falls drastically on impact and then in-
creases slowly until reaching the new steady state. The lending rate converges non-
monotonically because the capital stock is low with respect to its desired value when
agents expect to live longer. Thus, the return on savings suddenly increases and then
slowly converges to the new lower level as capital increases. The increase in capital
induces a continuous increase in output (panel b) and an in the net worth of B -agents.
Interestingly, the net worth of C -agents declines (panel c) in spite of the increase in
capital because of the increase in leverage (panel d).

For convenience, in the panels we show the new steady state in the last period (in
2020) to get a sense of how complete the convergence is 40 years after the changes. In
panel (d), for example, household debt increases from 1GDP in 1980 to about 1.54 by
2007, almost 85% of the difference between steady states.


                                       Figure 9: Transition Dynamics: Observed TFP
                 0.05                                                     1.1
                                              Lending Rate
                                              Borrowing Rate 0.07        1.08
  Lending Rate




                 0.04                                                    1.06
                                                             0.06
                                                                         1.04
                 0.03
                                                             0.05        1.02

                                                                           1
                 0.02                                        0.04
                    1980     1990      2000      2010     2020             1980   1990   2000     2010   2020
                              (a) Interest rate                                      (b) Output
                   2                                         3
                           Type B                                        1.6
                           Type S
                                                             2.75
                                                                         1.4

                  1.5                                        2.5         1.2

                                                                           1
                                                             2.25
                                                                         0.8
                    1                                        2
                   1980      1990      2000      2010     2020            1980    1990   2000     2010   2020

                                    (c) Assets                             (d) Household Debt/Output



                                                                    40
In Figure 9 we compute transitions using the actual path for TFP (measured by the
Solow residual) instead of fixing A = 1, as in the previous simulation. This exercise is
informative because it shows how the recessions in the early 80s and early 90's slow
down the convergence during the 80s, and how debt speeds up in the second half of
the 90s. Although the evolution of interest rates is mostly unaffected by TFP changes,
output and private debt are slightly above the figures computed in Figure 8.24


Remark on the growth of shadow banking: Since our counterfactuals just compare
scenarios with and without shadow banking, we are not required to discipline . It is
outside the scope of this paper to introduce a distribution of  across agents (captur-
ing, for instance, heterogeneity on the ability of different agents to face a collapse in
securitization or heterogeneity of search and informational costs required to operate
using shadow banking) such that agents gradually move from traditional to shadow
banking along the transition, as observed in the data. The speed at which shadow
banking is adapted would discipline the distribution of .



5        On the Costs and Benefits of Shadow Banking

Our goal is to understand the rise and the benefits of shadow banking, thus abstract-
ing from its potential cost in inducing a crisis. However, the great recession, charac-
terized by a collapse in securitization and other instruments used to improve asset
liquidation, is a reminder of how large these costs can be. To address this issue we
appeal to the methodology proposed by Luttrell, Atkinson, and Rosenblum (2013),
and later expanded by Ball (2014) and Fernald (2014). This approach compares the
realized output with the potential output computed by the Congressional Budget Of-
fice (CBO), which implies that the great recession generated a loss, in present value,
of 23% of 2007 GDP. In Figure 10, we depict this number as the difference between
the dotted back line (potential GDP computed by the CBO) and the dashed red line
(realized output) after 2007.25
    24
      See Chen, Imrohoroglu, and Imrohoroglu (2006) and Fernandez, Imrohoroglu, and Tamayo (2018)
for the effect of TFP in saving rates.
   25
      For a detailed explanation of these calculations, see the staff report by Atkinson, Luttrell, and
Rosenblum (2013). Our number is lower than the estimation from the previous literature, which ranges
from 40% to 90% of 2007 GDP, mainly because the CBO has recently revised down potential output.


                                                  41
                Figure 10: The Costs and Benefits of Shadow Banking

               Never Shadow Banking
  16400
               Actual GDP and forecast (after 2016)

               Potential GDP (CBO)
  14400

               Alternative Potential

  12400




  10400




   8400




   6400
       1980     1985       1990        1995       2000   2005   2010    2015     2020



If securitization was the single responsible of the crisis, was it worth it? Was the
contribution of shadow banking in the economy large enough to compensate this
cost? A quick answer is provided by Table 1. Shadow banking generates a perma-
nent increase in output level equivalent to 2.8% per year in the stationary equilibrium
(1.062 1.034, according to the second and fourth columns of Table 1), which repre-
sents a present value of around 3.3GDP of 2007. This is, however, misleading. First,
it assumes shadow banking is permanent and does not generate crises. Second, it
overestimates the gains during the transition.

To make a more meaningful comparison of the benefits and cost of shadow banking
surrounding the recent crisis, we compute a benchmark economy without shadow
banks. This benchmark does not have the gains from lower intermediation costs, but
it does not have the cost of a crisis either. For this counterfactual we assume  > ¯ , so
that after the increase in life expectancy individuals keep choosing traditional banks
and spreads remain at the 1980 level of 4%. This counterfactual is the blue solid line
of Figure 10 until 2007 and the dashed-dotted grey line after 2007.


                                                42
With our counterfactual we can now compute the gains from shadow banking before
2007 and its losses after 2007. The present value of the gap between the benchmark
and the realized output from 1980 to 2007 represents 59% of 2007 GDP. The gap be-
tween the benchmark and the realized output from 2007 to 2020 represents 13.5% of
2007 GDP. Assuming that shadow banking was solely responsible of the crisis, the
comparison between these two numbers still delivers a net gain from shadow bank-
ing of 45% of 2007 GDP.

Note that our estimated cost of shadow banking based on the counterfactual is lower
than the estimated cost of 23% of 2007 GDP that, following the literature, is based
on the CBO estimated potential output. The reason is that the initial level of the CBO
potential output is the realized output before the crisis, which according to our model
was initially high exactly because shadow banking was instrumental in increasing
output. In other words, measuring the cost of a financial crisis using potential output
is highly misleading as it ignores the forces that generated the output level before the
crisis happens, confusing the ex-post cost of shadow banking with its ex-ante value.



6    Conclusions

The recent discussion, both in academic and policy circles, about the demand for safe
assets and its macroeconomic effects has focused on the "savings glut" from foreign
countries. At the same time, the recent discussion about shadow banking has focused
on its pervasive role on triggering painful crises. In this paper we argue that these
two discussions are intimately related. While the higher foreign demand for safe assets
seems to have been accommodated by an increase in government debt, the higher
domestic demand for safe assets triggered by an increase in life expectancy has pushed
an endogenous increase in the supply of safe assets by the private sector, more specif-
ically using securitization and shadow banking. We have explored quantitatively the
individual roles of higher life expectancy and the rise of shadow banking in the accu-
mulation of financial assets, private debt, output and welfare.

By calibrating our model to the eighties, we show that the domestic savings glut and
the corresponding expansion of shadow banking accommodates well the large in-
crease in asset accumulation and private credit experienced by the United States in
the last four decades. We find that in the absence of shadow banking capital-output

                                          43
ratio and output would have increased only half of what they did, while assets and
credit would have not increased at all. Our approach allows us to compute a coun-
terfactual without shadow banks. We have shown that the gains from operating with
shadow banking from 1980 to 2007 were in the order of 60% of 2007 GDP. Further,
even if we blame the great recession exclusively to the operation of shadow banks,
its cost was in the order of 14% of 2007 GDP. In short, our model suggests that there
were net gains to having shadow banks, even if it were true that they single handedly
generated the recent crisis.

These results are relevant to the recent policy discussion about how to regulate the
banking system. Although restricting the use of shadow banks or certain financial
innovations, such as securitization, may have benefits in terms of reducing the like-
lihood and magnitude of financial crises, we show that it is also costly in terms of
choking-off output. Even though our quantitative estimations are based on a stream-
lined model, and as such should be only taken as a "proof of concept" that the in-
volved magnitudes are likely to be sizable, they highlight the relevance of measuring
benefits and costs of shadow banking before implementing regulatory changes.



References
 Alvarez, Fernando, Luigi Guiso, and Francesco Lippi. 2012. "Durable Consump-
    tion and Asset Management with Transaction and Observation Costs." American
    Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 102 (5): 2272­2300.
 Ameriks, John, Joseph Briggs, Andrew Caplin, Minjoon Lee, Matthew Shapiro, and
   Christopher Tonetti. 2019. "Older Americans Would Work Longer If Jobs Were
   Flexible." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics. Forthcoming.
 Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, Minjoon Lee, Matthew Shapiro, and Christopher
   Tonetti. 2014. "The Wealth of Wealthholders." Working Paper, Stanford Univer-
   sity.
 Atkinson, Tyler, David Luttrell, and Harvey Rosenblum. 2013, July. "How bad
    was it? The costs and consequences of the 2007­09 financial crisis." Technical
    Report 20, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
 Auclert, Adrien, Frederic Martenet, and Hannes Malmberg. 2019. "Wealth and De-
   mographics in the 21st Century." 2019 meeting papers 952, Society for Economic
   Dynamics.
 Ball, Laurence. 2014. "Long-Term Damage from the Great Recession in OECD Coun-
    tries." NBER Working Paper 20185.

                                         44
Bates, Thomas, Kathleen Kahle, and Rene Stulz. 2009. "Why Do U.S. Firms Hold So
   Much More Cash Than They Used To?" Journal of Finance 64:1985­2021.
Begenau, Juliane, and Tim Landvoigt. 2017. "Financial Regulation in a Quantitative
   Model of the Modern Banking System." Working Paper, Stanford University.
Bernheim, Douglas. 1991. "How Strong Are Bequest Motives? Evidence Based on
   Estimates of the Demand for Life Insurance and Annuities." Journal of Political
   Economy 99:899­927.
Bertaut, Carol, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, Steven Kamin, and Ralph Tryon. 2012.
   "ABS inflows to the United States and the global financial crisis." Journal of Inter-
   national Economics 88 (2): 219­234.
Bloom, David E., David Canning, Richard K. Mansfield, and Michael Moore. 2007.
   "Demographic change, social security systems, and savings." Journal of Monetary
   Economics 54 (1): 92 ­ 114. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy.
Bloom, David E., David Canning, and Michael Moore. 2014. "Optimal Retirement
   with Increasing Longevity." Scandinavian Journal of Economics 116 (3): 838­858.
Borella, Margherita, Mariacristina De Nardi, and Fang Yang. 2017, October. "The
   Effects of Marriage-Related Taxes and Social Security Benefits." NBER Working
   Paper 23972.
Caballero, Ricardo. 2010. "A Caricature (Model) of the World Economy." Working
  Paper, MIT.
Caballero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2016. "Global
  Imbalances and Currency Wars at the ZLB." Working Paper, MIT.
Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio. 2016. "Demographics and
   real interest rates: Inspecting the mechanism." European Economic Review 88 (C):
   208­226.
Chen, Kaiji, Selahattin Imrohoroglu, and Ayse Imrohoroglu. 2006. "The Japanese
  Saving Rate." American Economic Review 96 (5): 1850­1858 (December).
Corbae, Dean, and Pablo D'Erasmo. 2018. "Capital Requirements in a Quantitative
   Model of Banking Industry Dynamics." Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of
   Philadelphia.
Costa, Dora L. 1998. "The Evolution of Retirement: Summary of a Research Project."
   The American Economic Review 88 (2): 232­236.
Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, Bengt Holmstrom, and Guillermo Ordonez. 2017. "Banks
  as Secret Keepers." American Economic Review 107:1005­1029.
Del Negro, Marco, Gauti Eggertsson, Andrea Ferrero, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki.
   2017a. "The Great Escape? A Quantitative Evaluation of the Fed's Liquidity
   Facilities." American Economic Review 107 (3): 824­857 (March).



                                          45
Del Negro, Marco, Domenico Giannone, Marc Giannoni, and Andrea Tambalotti.
   2017b. "Safety, Liquidity, and the Natural Rate of Interest." Brookings Papers on
   Economic Activity 48 (1 (Spring): 235­316.
De Nardi, Mariacristina, Eric French, and John Jones. 2009. "Life Expectancy and
   Old Age Savings." American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 99 (2): 110­
   115.
       . 2010. "Why Do the Elderly Save? The Role of Medical Expenses." Journal of
   Political Economy 118:39­75.
      . 2015. "Savings After Retirement: A Survey." NBER Working Paper no.
   21268.
Diamond, Douglas, and Philip Dybvig. 1983. "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and
   Liquidity." Journal of Political Economy 91:401­419.
Diamond, Douglas, and Raghuram Rajan. 2001. "Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Cre-
   ation, and Financial Fragility: A Theory of Banking." Journal of Political Economy
   109:287­327.
Diaz-Gimenez, Javier, Edward Prescott, Terry Fitzgerald, and Fernando Alvarez.
   1992. "Banking in computable general equilibrium economies." Journal of Eco-
   nomic Dynamics and Control 16:533­559.
Fagereng, Andreas, Charles Gottlieb, and Luigi Guiso. 2017. "Asset Market Partic-
   ipation and Portfolio Choice over the Life-Cycle." The Journal of Finance 72 (2):
   705­750 (March).
Fagereng, Andreas, Martin Blomhoff Holm, Benjamin Moll, and Gisle Natvik. 2019.
   "Saving Behavior Across the Wealth Distribution: The Importance of Capital
   Gains." Technical Report.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Jean Tirole. 2017. "Shadow Banking and the Four Pillars of
   Traditional Financial Intermediation." Working Paper, Havard University.
Fernald, John. 2014. "Productivity and Potential Output Before, During and After
   the Great Recession." Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper
   2014-15.
Fernandez, Andres, Ayse Imrohoroglu, and Cesar Tamayo. 2018. "Saving Rates in
   Latin America: A Neoclassical Perspective." 2018 meeting papers 1229, Society
   for Economic Dynamics.
Gale, William, and John Karl Scholz. 1994. "Intergenerational transfers and the
   accumulation of wealth." Journal of Economic Perspectives 8 (4): 145­160.
Gao, Xiaodan, Toni Whited, and Na Zhang. 2018. "Corporate Money Demand."
  Working paper, University of Michigan.
Giglio, Stefano, Matteo Maggiori, and Johannes Stroebel. 2015. "Very Long-Run
   Discount Rates." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (1): 1­53.


                                        46
Gorton, Gary, and Guillermo Ordonez. 2014. "Collateral Crises." American Economic
  Review 104 (2): 343­378.
Gustman, Alan, and Thomas Steinmeier. 1999. "Effects of pensions on savings:
  Analysis with data from the Health and Retirement Study." Carnegie-Rochester
  Conference Series on Public Policy, Volume 50. Elsevier, 271­324.
Harris, Milton, Christian Opp, and Marcus Opp. 2014. "Higher Capital Require-
  ments, Safer Banks? Macroprudential Regulation in a Competitive Financial Sys-
  tem." Working Paper, Wharton School.
Imrohoroglu, Ayse, Selahattin Imrohoroglu, and Douglas H Joines. 1998. "The Ef-
   fect of Tax-Favored Retirement Accounts on Capital Accumulation." American
   Economic Review 88 (4): 749­768 (September).
Imrohoroglu, Ays  ¸ e, and Kai Zhao. 2018. "The chinese saving rate: Long-term care
   risks, family insurance, and demographics." Journal of Monetary Economics 96 (C):
   33­52.
Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. 2013. "The Effects
   of the Saving and Banking Glut on the U.S. Economy." In NBER International
   Seminar on Macroeconomics 2013, NBER Chapters, 52­67. National Bureau of Eco-
   nomic Research, Inc.
      . 2015. "Credit Supply and the Housing Boom." Manuscript.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., and Lawrence H. Summers. 1981. "The Role of Intergenera-
   tional Transfers in Aggregate Capital Accumulation." Journal of Political Economy,
   pp. 706­732.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2012. "The Aggregate De-
   mand for Treasury Debt." Journal of Political Economy 120:233­267.
Krueger, Dirk, and Felix Kubler. 2005. "Pareto Improving Social Security when
   Financial Markets are Incomplete." American Economic Review 96:737­755.
Lockwood, Lee. 2012. "Bequest Motives and the Annuity Puzzle." Review of Eco-
   nomic Dynamics 15 (2): 706­732.
      . 2015. "Incidental Bequests: Bequest Motives and the Choice to Self-Insure
   Late-Life Risks." Manuscript.
Luttrell, David, Tyler Atkinson, and Harvey Rosenblum. 2013. "Assessing the costs
   and consequences of the 2007 - 09 financial crisis and its aftermath." Economic
   Letter, vol. 8 (Septiembre).
Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Stephen Zeldes. 1991. "The consumption of stockholders
  and nonstockholders." Journal of Financial Economics 29 (1): 97­112.
Mehra, Rajnish, Facundo Piguillem, and Edward Prescott. 2011. "Costly Financial
  Intermediation in Neoclassical Growth Theory." Quantitative Economics 2 (1): 1­
  36.


                                        47
Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward C. Prescott. 1985. "The equity premium: A puzzle."
  Journal of Monetary Economics 15 (2): 145­161 (March).
Moreira, Alan, and Alexi Savov. 2015. "The Macroeconomics of Shadow Banking."
  Working Paper, Yale University.
Ordonez, Guillermo. 2018a. "Confidence Banking and Strategic Default." Journal of
   Monetary Economics, vol. Forthcoming.
      . 2018b. "Sustainable Shadow Banking." American Economic Journal: Macroe-
   conomics 10:33­56.
Philippon, Thomas. 2015. "Has the US Finance Industry Become Less Efficient? On
   the Theory and Measurement of Financial Intermediation." American Economic
   Review 105 (4): 1408­38.
Plantin, Guillaume. 2015. "Shadow Banking and Bank Capital Regulation." Review
   of Financial Studies 28 (1): 146­175.
Samuelson, Paul. 1958. "An exact consumption-loan model of interest with or with-
   out the social contrivance of money." Journal of Political Economy 66:467­482.
Scharfstein, David. 2018. "Presidential Address: Pension Policy and the Financial
   System." Journal of Finance 73:1463 ­ 1512.
Shourideh, Ali, and Maxim Troshkin. 2017. "Incentives and Efficiency of Pension
   Systems." Working Paper, Carnegie Mellon University.
Summers, Lawrence, and Christopher Carroll. 1987. "Why Is U.S. National Saving
  So Low?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 18 (2): 607­642.
Wolff, Edward. 2004. "Changes in household wealth in the 1980s and 1990s in the
  U.S." Levy Economics Institute Working Paper 407.




                                      48
                                                  Appendix

A      Proof of Proposition 2:

We first characterize the best banking strategy in a steady state for a general interest
rate r. This problem solves:
                ( T               1
                                                                             )
                 X                X
                       j              j
          max            log cj +       (1   )j T 1 [(1   ) log cj +  log bj
               {cj ,bj }
                              j =0               j =T +1

                       T
                       X                 X1                                         X1
                                 cj           cj (1  )j                  T
                                                                                          bj (1    )j T          1
                                                                                                                       B
                s.t.                  +                                       +                                       v0
                       j =0
                              (1 + r)j j =T +1 (1 + r)j                           j =T +1
                                                                                               (1 + r)j

Notice that the price of an annuity payment at age j is Pj =                                             1
                                                                                                       (1+r)j
                                                                                                                if the agent is alive
                                 (1 )j T                                                                                j   T   1
at age j  T , Pj =          if the agent is alive at age j > T and Pj = (1 (1+
                                   (1+r )j
                                                                             )
                                                                               r )j
                                                                                    if the
agent dies at age j > T . Thus, prices are present discounted values of the probabilities
of each potential event contingent on age (and only on age).
The first order conditions for this problem generate:

                                                   cj +1 = (1 + r)cj ; 8j

                                                      bj =  c j ;            8j > T
These two equations imply:
                                                           j
                                                 cj =          (1 + r)j c0 ;          8j

                                               bj =  j (1 + r)j c0 ;               8j > T
Replacing the last two in the budget constraint we can find c0 , by solving:
T
X                          1                                                        1
       j
           (1 + r)j c0 X                j
                                            (1 + r)j c0 (1          )j   T         X      j (1 + r)j c0 (1 )j               T 1
                                                                                                                                       B
                      +                                                      +                                                      = v0
j =0
           (1 + r)j     j =T +1
                                                 (1 + r)j                        j =T +1
                                                                                                  (1 + r)j

Which gives as c0 = c    B
                    ¯( )v0 , and then all consumptions are proportional to initial
wealth, where

                                                                      1
                                             c
                                             ¯( ) =             T                     T
                                                                                                   .                                (13)
                                                      1             + (1          )       B(   )

                                                                    49
We can simplify the characterization by splitting the problem in two parts: before
and after retirement, which is useful in Lemma 2 where agents following strategy S
change their pattern of consumption after retirement.
We guess and verify that the maximum utility after T can be written in recursive way
as B + B log(wTB
                 ). For this to be true, the coefficients B and B must satisfy:


            B   + B log(w) = log(c) + (1                    )[   B   + B log(w0 )] +           log(b0 )
The problem after retirement solves:


                  max
                   0 0
                       {log(c) + (1               )[   B   + B log(w0 )] +           log(b0 )}
                 c,w ,b

                                    1
                                s.t. c + w0 +     b0  w
                                    1+r       1+r
which generates the first order conditions

                                             w0 = (1 + r)B c

                                             b0 = (1 + r)c

Substituting these in in the budget constraint we get that ,

                                 c [1 + (1             ) B +             ] = w                            (14)

Now we guess that c =      w
                           B
                               and verify it for

                                                         1+ 
                                       B ( ) =                                ,
                                                       1   (1             )

confirming that the solutions are proportional to wealth.
Based on this solution, the maximum utility in steady state as a function of attain-
able by an agent who follows a banking strategy (B) that pays an interest rs , where
s 2 {SB, T B } is the indicator for whether the interest rate corresponds to shadow or
traditional banking respectively, such that rSB > rT B , as shown in Proposition 1, can
be expressed as:

                                      T 1
                                      X
                                              j
                     UB ( , r s ) =               log(cB
                                                       j )+
                                                                 T
                                                                     [   B
                                                                                       B
                                                                              + B log(wT )]
                                      j =0




                                                       50
where
                                 1+ 
        B ( ) =
                               1    (1   )
                               (B ( ) 1) log( (1 + rs ))                     log(B ( )) +  [log()               log(B ( ))]
      B(   , rs ) =
                                                                           1     (1    )
    cB            ¯( ) j (1 + rs )j v0
     j ( , rs ) = c
                                     B

    B                                             T
   wT ( , rs ) = B ( )¯
                      c( )                            (1 + rs )T v0
                                                                  B



where c
      ¯ is defined in equation (13) and v0
                                         B
                                           in equation (2).
Define B ( ) = [UB ( , rSB ) ] UB ( , rT B ). Lemma 1 below shows that, as long
as  is not too high, @ @B( )
                             < 0, i.e., the utility difference of participating in shadow
banking is increasing in life expectancy (decreasing in ) for all > 0.


                                              @   B(   )
Lemma 1 If  <                  1
                                   1
                                       then       @
                                                           < 0, 8 > 0.


Proof Using the property of logarithmic functions,
           T 1
           X                                                                                                                          
                       j       (1 + rSB )j                  T                                                          wTB
                                                                                                                           (rSB )
 B(   )=                   log              +                      B(   , rSB )         B(   , rT B ) + B ( ) log        B
                                                                                                                                             
            j =0
                               (1 + rT B )j                                                                            w T ( rT B )

                                                                                    
where      B(   , rSB )                               b
                                       B ( , rT B ) = B ( ) log
                                                                           1+rSB
                                                                                       , defining
                                                                           1+rT B


                                                       bB ( ) = (1 + (
                                                       
                                                                                        1))
                                                                                            .
                                                                [1   (1                 )]2

Then, we can rewrite the new benefit of shadow banking as
        T 1
        X                     j                  "                              T                                                 1
                                                                                                                                      #
             j      1 + r SB     T     1 + r SB    bB ( ) + B ( ) log  1 + r SB
 B( ) =        log              + log                                                                                                     
        j =0
                    1 + r T B          1 + r T B                       1 + rT B

Taking derivatives with respect to ,
                                                                " b                           T                        1
                                                                                                                           #
            @      B(      )           T            1 + rSB      @ B ( ) @B ( )      1 + rSB
                               =           log                          +       log
                   @                                1 + rT B       @      @          1 + rT B

where
                                           @bB ( )   [(               1)(1    (1 + ))             2 ]
                                                   =
                                             @                        [1   (1     )]3

                                                                        51
and
                                                @B ( )    [(1    ) 1]
                                                       =               .
                                                 @       [1   (1   )]2
                  b
              B( )
Notice that @ @    < 0 if and only if  < (1 (1
                                                 )+
                                                 )
                                                    and @@ B( )
                                                                < 0 if and only if  < 1 1 .
Since the first condition is always satisfied when the second condition is satisfied,
then the sufficient condition for @ @B( )
                                          is that  < 1 1 .
Notice that the conditions for an interior                            
                                                                          are       B (0)   > 0, this is
      T 1
      X                             j                                      "                                                     T         1
                                                                                                                                               #
               j     1 + rSB                    T             1 + rSB                                    1            1 + rSB
<                log                    +           log                                          +           log
      j =0
                     1 + rT B                                 1 + rT B          (1          )2       1                1 + rT B

and     B (1)   < 0, this is
        T 1
        X                               j                                    "                                                  T      1
                                                                                                                                           #
                j     1 + rSB                       T             1 + rSB                                          1 + rSB
    >             log                       +           log                              + (1 + ) log
        j =0
                      1 + rT B                                    1 + rT B                                         1 + rT B

which is feasible when 1                    (1            ) > 0, or  <          1
                                                                                    1
                                                                                        .                                            Q.E.D.


Since UB ( , rSB ) UB ( , rT B ) is independent of  and B ( ) is just linear in  it is
straightforward from Lemma 1 that, given  there is a single  2 (0, 1) such that
  B ( ) = 0, where     = 0 if B (0) < 0 and  = 1 if B (1) > 0. Furthermore, 
                    

weakly decreases in  (strictly except at the corners, where  is so high that  = 0 or
so low that  = 1).

                            @ ( )
Finally, computing           @
                                    it is easy to see that
                                               " b                              T                                     1
                                                                                                                          #
         @    B( )          T         1 + rSB      @ B ( ) @B ( )      1 + rSB
                   =            log                        +      log                                                         > 0.
             @                        1 + rT B       @       @         1 + rT B
                                                              b
This derivative is positive because @ @
                                      B( )
                                           = [1 (1 )]2 > 0 and @@
                                                                B( )
                                                                     = 1 (1 ) > 0.
This implies that, fixing and , is weakly increasing in  (strictly increasing except
                                 

at the corners). QED.



B     An interpretation of :
Even though we have introduced the cost  on shadow banking in a reduced form
way, here we show that we can write

                                                              T     p log( )
                                                =                              >0
                                                                  1     (1   )

                                                                     52
where p < 1 is the defined as the yearly probability that the bank cannot pay as
promised, in which case the agent just consumes a fraction  < 1 of the promised
consumption. Notice that we assume that securitization can enter into a crisis (p > 0),
while traditional banking cannot (see Gorton and Ordonez (2014), for microfoun-
dations of such a crisis due to information opacity and lack of government explicit
support). Thus  can be interpreted as the net cost of shadow banking. Furthermore,
the lower the recovery in case of a crisis (lower  ), the higher the cost.
This expression comes from extending the recursive formulation of the utility condi-
tional on retirement as

 B   + B log(w) = [(1 p) log(c) + p log( c)] + (1     )[ B + B log(w0 )] +  log(b0 )
                = [log(c) + (1    )[ B + B log(w0 )] +  log(b0 )] + p log( )

which adds a constant compared to the previous specification without crises (this is,
with p = 0 or  = 1). As this does not affect the first order conditions, B ( ) remains
unchanged, but the constant term is affected as

                                                                               p log( )
                                             B(     , rs , p,  ) =             B(      , rs ) +
                                                                             1     (1    )
                                                                                   
and then        B(     , rSB , p,  )                               b                    p log( )
                                                    B ( , rT B ) = B ( ) log 1+rT B + 1 (1 ) .
                                                                             1+rSB


Therefore, we can rewrite the benefit of shadow banking as
              T
              X 1                                   j                                    "                                                 T       1
                                                                                                                                                       # 
                      j       1 + rSB                       T             1 + rSB             bB ( ) + B ( ) log               1 + rSB                             T       p log( )
 B(      )=               log                           +       log                           
                              1 + rT B                                    1 + rT B                                             1 + rT B                                1       (1   )
              j =0                                                                                                                                           |             {z         }
                                                                                                                                                                               

The rest of the analysis follows, with the only exception that  in this case also depend
on (as declines the cost of shadow banking also increases). However, the adjusted
condition for an interior  are B (0) > 0, this is
                                 2                                                                                                                                                     #3
                                      T
                                      X 1                                      j                                  "                                                            T   1
                                                               1 + rSB                                1 + rSB                                  1                 1 + rSB
     T
         p log( ) < (1           )4             j
                                                    log                            +    T
                                                                                            log                                       +             log                                5
                                                               1 + rT B                               1 + rT B         (1        )2        1                     1 + rT B
                                      j =0

and         B (1)    < 0, this is
                          T 1
                          X                                       j                                       "                                                       T        1
                                                                                                                                                                               #
     T                            j       1 + rSB                          T              1 + rSB                                                  1 + rSB
         p log( ) >                   log                             +        log                                 + (1 + ) log
                          j =0
                                          1 + rT B                                        1 + rT B                                                 1 + rT B

                                                                                                  !                PT                      h            ij
                                                                                        T    1
                                                                                                                            1    j
                                                                                                                                   log         1+rSB
                                                                      1 + rSB                                           j =0                   1+rT B
which is feasible when  1 + log                                                                       <   1
                                                                                                              1                     h        i               .
                                                                      1 + rT B                                              T   log 1+1+rSB
                                             |                         {z                         }                |                {z
                                                                                                                                        rT B
                                                                                                                                                         }
                                                                      >1
                                                                                                                                      >0


                                                                                   53
This condition is more stringent than with the reduced form , but the insight is the
same, as  is well defined when agents have relatively low bequest motives, who
are the agents who self-select into banking contracts. Also, because in our calibration
 = 0 and is close to 1, the condition is satisfied in the quantitative exercise.



C     Proof of Proposition 3:

Take a steady state with prices (r, re , y0 ), tax rate  , and inheritance ¯  b to any measure
zero individual. Let UB () and UC () represent the maximum attainable utility of an
agent of measure zero in this economy who follows strategy B (banking) or C (capital
markets) respectively as a function of . Define () = UC () UB (). Lemma 2
below shows that, as long as is not too small, @ @      ( )
                                                             > 0, i.e., the utility difference is
increasing in the bequest motive, for all  0.

                              h                   i1    (1   )
                                  1   (1      )                         @ ( )
Lemma 2 If    1+re
              1+r
                      >                                          then    @
                                                                                        0, 8 > 0.


Proof The maximum utility as a function of  attainable by an agent who follows a
banking strategy (B), taking as given the parameters of the economy, can be expressed
as:

                                      T 1
                                      X
                                                   j
                      UB (  ) =                        log(cB
                                                            j )+
                                                                        T
                                                                            [   B ( )
                                                                                                    B
                                                                                        + B () log(wT )]
                                      j =0

where
                        1+ 
     B (  ) =
                      1   (1  )
                      (B () 1) log( (1 + r))                         log(B ()) +  [log()                   log(B ())]
      B ( )   =
                                                                    1    (1   )
         cB
          j   ¯() j (1 + r)j v0
            = c               B

         B                                T
        wT = B ()¯
                 c(  )                        (1 + r)T v0
                                                        B



where c
      ¯() =       1
                          1
                      T +(1       )   T
                                          B ( )
                                                   and v0
                                                        B
                                                          is defined in equation (2).

Similarly, the maximum utility as a type  who saves in capital markets (C) is

                                      T 1
                                      X
                                                   j
                      UC () =                          log(cC
                                                            j )+
                                                                        T
                                                                            [   C ( )
                                                                                                    C
                                                                                        + C () log(wT )]
                                      j =0


                                                                   54
where
                1+ 
  C (  ) =
              1   (1   )
              (C () 1) log(1 + re ) + (C ()                                      1) log(C ()           1)         C () log(C ())
      C ( ) =
                                          1                                      (1     )
          C       j        j C
         cj = c
              ¯() (1 + re ) v0
        C                              T
       wT = C ()¯
                c(  )                      (1 + re )T v0
                                                       C



Since C () = B () = (), using the properties of the logarithm function:

                  T 1
                  X                                                                                                          
                                  (1 + re )j v0
                                              C                                                                          C
                                                                                                                        wT
         ( ) =            j
                              log             B
                                                +                   T
                                                                             C ( )       B ( )   + () log                B
                                                                                                                                         (15)
                   j =0
                                  (1 + r)j v0                                                                           wT

Because the first term is independent of  it follows that
                                                                                                            C
                                                                                                                  
                          @ ( )                  @(   C ( )             B ())                              wT
                                =            T
                                                                                 +    T 0
                                                                                          () log            B
                                                                                                                                         (16)
                           @                                   @                                           wT

where 0 () =          1   (1    )
                                    which does not depend on .

                                           PT 1 (1  )y0 (1+ )j          ¯
                       C
                      wT   (1 + re )T v0
                                       C
                                            j =0   (1+re )j T
                                                                 + (1+reb
                                                                        ) TI                                  T

                       B
                         =             b
                                         = P T 1 (1  )y0 (1+ ) j        ¯                                         >1
                      wT    (1 + r)T v0      j =0         j T    +      b
                                                                         T                                  T
                                                                             (1+r )           (1+r )   I



since re > r, j < T and T > TI . This implies the second term in (16) is positive, i.e.,
  T 0       wC
    () log( wTB) > 0
                  T



              @ ()
To prove       @
                      > 0, we proceed in three steps showing that:

                  @ ( )
  a) lim!0         @
                          > 0;
        @ 2 ( )
  b)       @2
                  < 0;
                      @ ()
  c) lim!+1            @
                               >0


Simple algebra yields
                                                                                                           
 @(   C ( )       B ())                 0 ( )                     (1 + re )                  ( )       1                               ( )
                          =                              log                     + log                             (1        ) log(        )
          @                    1          (1      )               (1 + r)                                                              
                                                                                                                                         (17)

                                                                        55
From (17) it is readily seen that lim!0 @ ( C (@
                                               ) B ())
                                                       ! +1. This follows since the
last term tends to +1 and all the other terms are bounded. This coupled with the
                      wC                         @ ( )
fact that T 0 () log( wT
                       B ) > 0 proves that lim!0  @
                                                       > 0.
                        T

                            @ 2 ( )
The second derivative          @2
                                      < 0 is negative by direct differentiation,

                 @ 2 ( )                                T +1
                                                             (1           )
                         =                                                                  <0
                    @2     (1              (1          ))(1 + (           1) )(1 +      )

since the denominator is always positive and the numerator is negative.

Finally it can be shown that lim!1 @ @   ( )
                                             > 0 under the condition stated in the the-
orem. Notice that (taking the limit of (17) when  ! 1) equation (16) is positive if
and only if
                                                            
                   1           (1 + re )          0          (1 + re )T v0
                                                                         C
                         log              + log ( ()) + log              B
             1     (1  )       (1 + r)                        (1 + r)T v0

The last term in the above expression has already been shown to be positive. Thus a
sufficient condition for this inequality is
                                                              
                      1             (1 + re )
                               log             + log            >0
                1     (1     )      (1 + r)           1 (1  )

This inequality can be written as
                                                                          1   (1   )
                                1 + re             1         (1      )
                                       >
                                1+r

                                                                  @ ( )
Since a), b), and c) are satisfied, it follows that                @
                                                                          > 0, 8       0.        Q.E.D.


On the one extreme, if re = r, insurance is free and all agents would prefer to follow
strategy B. Thus, () < 0, 8 0. On the other extreme, as re r ! +1, the returns
from self-insurance are so large that () > 0 8 0. Because (, ) is continuous
in it follows that there exist and ¯ with < ¯ such that there is a unique  ( ) for
which ( ) = 0. Then the Lemma 2 that we prove below delivers the existence and
uniqueness of the threshold  ( ). QED




                                                        56
