                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE EFFECTS OF JOB CHARACTERISTICS ON RETIREMENT

                                          Péter Hudomiet
                                          Michael D. Hurd
                                           Andrew Parker
                                         Susann Rohwedder

                                        Working Paper 26332
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26332


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2019




This research was supported by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation (G-2014-13537). The data collection
was jointly funded by the same grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and by a grant from the
National Institute on Aging (P01AG008291). Jessica Hayes provided excellent programming assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Péter Hudomiet, Michael D. Hurd, Andrew Parker, and Susann Rohwedder. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Job Characteristics on Retirement
Péter Hudomiet, Michael D. Hurd, Andrew Parker, and Susann Rohwedder
NBER Working Paper No. 26332
October 2019
JEL No. J14,J24,J26

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper presents results based on a survey fielded in the RAND American Life Panel that
queried older workers about their current, desired, and expected job characteristics, and about
how certain job characteristics would affect their retirement. Having access to flexible work
hours was found to be the most consistent predictor of retirement expectations. For example, we
estimated that the fraction of individuals working after age 70 would be 32.2% if all workers had
flexible hours, while the fraction working would be 17.2% if none had the option of flexible
hours. We further found that job stress, physical and cognitive job demands, the option to
telecommute, and commuting times were also strong predictors of retirement expectations. By
comparing workers' current job characteristics with those that individuals desire, we show that
people would like preretirement jobs to be less cognitively and physically demanding and more
sociable compared to their current jobs. We also find that most workers worry about their health
and the demands of their jobs when they think about their future work trajectory, but relatively
few were worried that their employers would retain them. Having access to part-time jobs, and
expected longevity were less important predictors of retirement.

Péter Hudomiet                                  Andrew Parker
RAND Corporation                                RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street                                4570 Fifth Ave #600,
Santa Monica, CA 90407                          Pittsburgh, PA 15213
hudomiet@rand.org                               parker@rand.org

Michael D. Hurd                                 Susann Rohwedder
RAND Corporation                                RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street                                1776 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407                          Santa Monica, CA 90407
and NBER                                        susannr@rand.org
mhurd@rand.org
1. Introduction


       The share of older individuals in the total population has been increasing because

mortality and fertility rates have been declining in recent decades, and this trend is predicted to

continue (Mather, Jacobsen, & Pollard, 2015). Consequently, it has been argued that it would be

beneficial if people worked longer and delayed retirement. Longer work lives would help

individuals maintain their standard of living after retirement by increasing their lifetime income.

Longer work would also relieve some of the financial pressures on public programs such as

Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid.

       There are, however, barriers that may prevent people from delaying retirement. Physical

abilities and critical dimensions of cognitive ability decline with age (Spirduso, Francis, &

MacRae, 2005; Salthouse, 2012) and, depending on the job characteristics of older workers, it

may be difficult for some to remain productive at advanced ages (Belbase, Sanzenbacher, &

Gillis, 2016; Hudomiet, Hurd, Rohwedder, & Willis, 2018a). Older workers may also differ from

their younger peers in terms of preferences for jobs with particular characteristics. It is therefore

important to know what types of jobs older workers want, which types are available to them, and

how the availability of these working conditions affects older workers' retirement decisions.

       In this paper we present results from a recent survey fielded in the RAND American Life

Panel (ALP) that queried older workers about their preferred retirement pathways; their current,

desired, and expected job characteristics; as well as about how certain job characteristics would

affect their retirement decisions. Some of the questions are qualitative, while others allow the

effect of a certain factor on the timing of retirement to be quantified. With respect to a variety of

job attributes, we use a novel methodology called Subjective Conditional Probabilities, which



                                                  1
elicits the subjective probability of working after age 70 conditional on different job

characteristics and other factors. These measures are discussed in detail in an earlier paper by us

(Hudomiet, Hurd, & Rohwedder, 2018b), in which we show that the measures pass a number of

internal and external consistency checks and they offer a useful tool to study causality when

randomized controlled trials (RCTs) or natural experiments are not at hand.

       A number of studies have used the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) to investigate the

factors that influence retirement, such as Barnes-Farrell (2003); Beehr & Bennett (2015); Bound,

Cullen, Nichols & Schmidt (2004); Bound, Stinebrickner & Waidmann (2010); Feldman &

Beehr (2011); Fisher, Chaffee, & Sonnega (2016); French & Jones (2011); Gruber & Wise

(2004); Gustman & Steinmeier (2005); Maestas, Mullen & Strand (2013). However, from the

observed retirement trajectories one cannot infer preferred trajectories or desired job attributes

that are more relevant for policy design. To the extent that individuals' choices are constrained--

for example, due to limited availability of the type of jobs they would prefer or due to health

shocks or the need to take care of someone else--workers' preferences for retirement pathways

and job attributes will differ from observed patterns.

       Even though older workers' preferences for job characteristics are of central importance

in retirement research, it is very hard to measure them reliably. First, preferences are not directly

observable in surveys or other datasets. Second, RCTs are rarely feasible or ethical in retirement

research. Third, observational data about the correlations between working conditions and

retirement patterns are unlikely to show causal relationships, because of the sorting of different

types of workers into different types of jobs. Even though there is large heterogeneity in job

attributes, this heterogeneity is strongly selective: Workers in "good jobs" tend to enjoy more

perks than workers in "bad jobs."




                                                  2
       An alternative avenue is a stated preferences approach using specialized surveys to

measure older workers' preferences for job characteristics. Maestas, Mullen, Powell, von

Wachter, & Wenger (2018), for example, used a vignette methodology to study workers' (both

young and old) willingness to pay for various job amenities. They found that older workers

would be willing to pay relatively more for better job amenities, and they care most about the

availability of paid time off, moderate physical activities, the opportunity to sit, job autonomy,

and flexibility over their work hours. Van Soest, Kapteyn, & Zissimopoulos (2007) elicited the

preferences of Dutch respondents asking them to rate hypothetical retirement trajectories

involving early retirement, late retirement, and gradual retirement, each with its own

corresponding income path. They found that many respondents would be willing to work part-

time after age 65 in return for a reasonable compensation.

       Adding to this line of study, our survey queried older workers about their work and

retirement preferences. We analyzed four sets of outcome variables: First, we listed nine

alternative work-to-retirement pathways, which differed in the timing of retirement as well as

how gradual the process was, and asked survey participants to rate these pathways. Second, we

asked workers about their current and expected future job demands and job characteristics, such

as flexible work hours or physical demands of work. Third, we asked individuals about the

subjective probabilities that they would work after age 70. Fourth, we asked individuals about

the subjective probabilities of working after age 70 conditional on different job characteristics

and other factors.

       The path from work to retirement can take many forms. Some people work full-time up

to a certain age and then withdraw completely from the labor force, while others retire gradually,

shifting from full-time to part-time work and eventually retire completely. Self-employment rates




                                                 3
are also higher at older ages (Karoly & Zissimopoulos, 2004; Quinn, 1996), offering another

option to older workers. Based on data from the HRS, Hudomiet, Parker, & Rohwedder (2018c)

documented the distribution of the various retirement pathways for the cohort of full-time

workers who were 55 to 58 years old between 1992 and 1998. They found that only 37%

followed the "traditional" path to retirement, transitioning from full-time work directly to full-

retirement in their 60s. An important aspect of our survey is that we ask individuals about their

preferences for various work-to-retirement pathways that we can compare, to the extent possible,

to such observed pathways.

       This paper first describes the data and our statistical approach. Our presentation of

empirical results starts out with descriptive statistics of how the outcome variables relate to

covariates of interest, such as gender and labor force status, and then follows with OLS

regressions that include "standard" and "less standard" predictor variables. Among the standard

ones, we consider demographics, socio-economic status, health, and workers' current job

characteristics. An innovative feature of this project is to include psychological predictor

variables in the regression models: a measure of fluid cognitive ability, and the Big 5 personality

traits. Such psychological factors may be related to workers' preferences for different working

conditions and leisure activities, and they may predict heterogeneity in the retirement choices of

individuals even after the standard economic variables are controlled for in the statistical models.

In our earlier paper (Hudomiet et al., 2018c) we found that these psychological factors predicted

the retirement pathways of individuals in the HRS, but the available data did not allow shedding

light into underlying mechanisms.




                                                  4
2. Data


The RAND American Life Panel

The American Life Panel (ALP) is an ongoing Internet panel survey operated by RAND (Baird

& Pollard, 2017). It is a nationally representative, probability-based sample of about 6,000

participants, who are at least 18 years old, speak either English or Spanish, and live in the United

States. Respondents receive email invitations to complete questionnaires about twice a month.

The ALP has conducted over 500 surveys since its inception in 2003.

       The majority of the panel members access the surveys using their own computers,

laptops, or cell phones, but RAND provides a laptop or an Internet service subscription or both

for panel members who need them. The sample, thus, does not suffer from selection bias related

to households' access to the Internet. Post-stratification weights are applied to adjust the

distribution of age, sex, ethnicity, education, and income, respectively, to those in the Current

Population Survey.

       The surveys typically take no more than 30 minutes to complete, and respondents are

paid an incentive of about $20 for a 30-minute survey, or less for shorter surveys. Response rates

are typically between 75% and 85% of enrolled panel members, depending on the topic, time of

year, and length of time a survey is kept in the field.

ALP survey on working longer

The survey we used in this project was fielded from December 2017 to February 2018 to the 50-

79-year-old English-speaking members of the ALP. The survey was started by 2,374 individuals.

Our analytic sample consists of the 2,177 people who: (1) finished the survey; (2) answered

some of the basic questions in the survey (labor force status, self-assessed health, personality


                                                  5
questions); and (3) had some attachment to the labor force. The latter requirement is important

due to this study's focus on retirement pathways and working conditions. A person was

considered "attached" to the labor force if any of the following was true:

         1. He or she worked at the time of the survey.

         2. He or she worked for at least five of the previous 15 years (if younger than 65).

         3. He or she worked for at least five years after the age of 50 (if older than 65).

         Table 1 shows weighted and unweighted descriptive statistics about our sample. About

half of the weighted sample is female, two-thirds are non-Hispanic white, 11% are non-Hispanic

black, and 16% are Hispanic. The sample is diverse in terms of education, marital status, self-

assessed health, labor force status, and income. Regarding highest level of education achieved,

about one-third said high school; one-third said some college; and one-third said at least a

college degree. About two-thirds of participants are married, and more than 80% reported

"excellent," "very good," or "good" health. At the time of the survey, 29% were not working,

48% were full-time employees, 13% were part-time employees, and 10% were self-employed.

We also measured psychological factors that may be relevant for retirement, including a number

series score, which is a measure of fluid intelligence (McArdle, Smith, & Willis, 2009); and the

Big 5 personality traits: neuroticism (emotional stability),1 extroversion, agreeableness,

conscientiousness, and openness to new experiences (see John & Srivastava (1999) for an

overview of the measures' development; and Borghans, Duckworth, Heckman, & ter Weel

(2008) for their predictive power of economic outcomes). The psychological factors were created




1
  The literature sometimes uses "emotional stability" to refer to the inverse of neuroticism, and we use both terms in
this study.


                                                          6
using the same items and coding procedure as in the Health and Retirement Study.2 We then

standardized these factors to have 0 means and standard deviations of 1.0 in the unweighted

sample.

         By comparing the weighted and the unweighted means in Table 1, we can see how

representative the unweighted ALP sample is. Though the weighted and unweighted numbers are

similar, the unweighted sample has a noticeably higher fraction of white, more educated, and

somewhat older respondents than the weighted sample. The unweighted fraction of non-workers

and average number series score exceed the weighted fraction and average. These are in line with

earlier findings indicating that internet survey participants tend to be somewhat more educated

and more affluent than the general population (Baird & Pollard, 2017; Börsch-Supan & Winter,

2004).

         Most of the survey focused on older individuals' attitudes, preferences, and expectations

about retirement, and how job characteristics affected them. This paper concentrates on four sets

of measures:

         1. Preferences for various work-to-retirement pathways, such as working in a full-time

             job until age 62, then taking a part-time job, and finally retiring at age 70.

         2. Workers current and expected future job demands and job characteristics, such as

             flexible work hours or physical demands of work.

         3. Subjective probabilities of working after age 70.




2
  The number series score is based on an adaptive test, in which each survey participant answers six questions, and
the difficulty of the last three items depends on the participant's performance on the first three. Fisher, McArdle,
McCammon, Sonnega, & Weir, (2013) explain the coding procedure in detail. For the Big 5 personality traits
respondents rate themselves using a scale from "not at all" to "a lot" on 26 adjectives, and the appropriate items are
averaged, as explain by Smith, Fisher, Ryan, Clarke, House, & Weir, (2013).


                                                           7
        4. Subjective conditional probabilities of working after age 70. These questions asked

               about the probabilities of working after age 70 conditional on various hypothetical

               scenarios, such as having flexible working hours or less stressful work environment.

        These measures will be overviewed in detail in the next section, right before we present

our results.



3. Results


        Unless noted, all statistics shown in the results section are weighted by the survey

weights provided by ALP.


Desired work-to-retirement pathways.
    The pathways from work to retirement can take different forms. Some people fully retire

directly from their career jobs at the early or normal retirement age, while others retire at earlier

or later ages, and still others leave the labor force more gradually, by taking up part-time jobs or

self-employment before leaving the labor force entirely (Beehr & Bennett, 2015; Hudomiet et al.,

2018c; Kantarci & van Soest, 2008; Maestas, 2010). For example, in our earlier work (Hudomiet

et al., 2018c), we investigated the work-to-retirement pathways of about 3000 individuals in the

HRS from about age 56 to 70 who were full-time workers at baseline. We found that only 37%

of individuals followed the "standard" pattern of retiring directly and completely from a full-time

job; 14% took part-time jobs before retirement, 10% remained in full-time jobs until age 70, 16%

switched to a part-time job and did not retire until age 70, and the rest (24%) followed more

complex retirement pathways. Because of the recent rise in the share of individuals working in




                                                    8
alternative work arrangements (Katz & Krueger, 2016) such as Uber, it is possible that the role

of non-traditional retirement pathways will increase further in the future.

        Little is known about why the non-traditional retirement pathways are so common in the

U.S. It is conceivable that older workers desire a more gradual exit from the labor force, because

these alternative jobs align better with their changing preferences, capabilities and health

compared to their career jobs. These non-standard work-to-retirement pathways, however, may

also differ from workers' preferred pathways. Some older workers, for example, may be forced

out of their career jobs in their 60s, driving them into alternative work arrangements. Non-

traditional pathways, thus, may be common due to older workers' preferences or due to outside

constraints. To explore the importance of the preference mechanism, we asked individuals in the

survey to rate nine different work-to-retirement pathways with scores ranging from 0 (very

unfavorable) to 10 (very favorable). The pathways differed in terms of when the person retired,

and whether retirement occurred directly from full-time jobs or more gradually through part-time

or self-employment jobs.3 The nine pathways were the following:

        1. Work full-time and retire completely at age 62.

        2. Work full-time and retire completely at age 65.

        3. Work full-time and retire completely at age 70.

        4. Start working part-time at age 62 and retire completely at age 65.

        5. Start working part-time at age 62 and retire completely at age 70.




3
  Our original aim was to measure workers' preferred work-to-retirement pathways holding their wage rate constant.
Because of the complexity of the pathways, providing precise instructions for this was challenging, especially in
view of constraints on available survey time for this question. We decided to use a simpler wording that allowed
workers to interpret "preferred" retirement pathways more freely. The lack of precise instructions may have led to
some uncertainty about the interpretation of these questions. At the same time, most workers considering retiring
earlier/later, with or without including part-time work, presumably realized that part-time jobs pay less, but allow
more leisure time. In that sense, the wording employed may be realistic.


                                                         9
       6. Start working part-time at age 65 and retire completely at age 70.

       7. Become self-employed at age 62 and retire completely at age 70.

       8. Never retire

       9. Retire at age 62, start working again at age 65 and retire completely at age 70.

       We identified an individual's preferred pathway as the one that received the highest score

from this list. When multiple pathways received the highest scores, we randomly selected one of

their top choices as "preferred." 164 individuals who gave the same rating to all pathways were

dropped from this analysis. Most of them (76%) gave 0, 1, or missing ratings to all pathways.

Table 2 shows, by gender and current labor force status, the fractions of the sample, respectively,

who preferred different work-to-retirement pathways. The pathways are listed in the rows, and

the columns correspond to the different samples. Appendix Table B1 shows the average of

individuals' reported 0-10 ratings.

       Our main question is how popular (preferred) the alternative work-to retirement pathways

are compared to the standard "full-time  retirement" pathways. Individuals' reports may be

compared to the literature on workers' realized pathways, but due to differences in the samples

as well as the definitions of the objective and subjective pathways such comparisons have

limitations.

       The standard pathways appear to be the most popular work-to-retirement pathways. The

most frequently preferred pathway is working in full-time jobs, and then retiring completely at

age 62: more than 28.5% of the sample would prefer to retire this way. The second and third

most-frequently-preferred pathways are similar, but the age of retirement is 65 or 70. While these

traditional retirement pathways are more popular than the gradual pathways through part-time

jobs or self-employment, one size does not fit all, and we see large heterogeneity among the




                                                10
population in their preferences for the different pathways. More than 50% of the sample prefer

one of the three "traditional" pathways; almost 1 in 4 prefer first taking part-time jobs; and

almost 10% prefer a period of self-employment before retirement. Never retiring is the preferred

route for a little over 10% of the sample. These results are more or less in line with the literature

showing that non-traditional retirement pathways are very common in the U.S. The standard

retirement pathways, however, appear to be somewhat more popular than realized in the data:

53% of our sample would prefer one of the standard retirement pathways in contrast to only 37%

of the HRS sample that followed such pathways (Hudomiet et al., 2018c).

       The ratings of males and females are similar, though females are somewhat more likely

to prefer the gradual pathways through part-time jobs, and they are less likely to prefer self-

employment and never retiring.

       We see large differences by labor force status, and the results are consistent with the

notion that individuals self-select into labor force status based on their preferences: While full-

time employees and retired individuals show stronger preferences for retiring directly from full-

time jobs, part-time employees and the self-employed are almost indifferent toward the

traditional and the gradual pathways. The preferred pathway among part-time employees is still

full-retirement at age 62 (chosen by 22.8%), while the preferred pathway among the self-

employed is gradual retirement through self-employment and never retiring. Overall, we find

large heterogeneity in retirement preferences, which lines up reasonably well with older workers'

observed labor force statuses.

       To investigate heterogeneity in retirement preferences in more detail, Table B2 in the

appendix shows OLS regressions of the various pathways as a function of demographics, health,

labor force status, and psychological factors. We found that the effect of labor market status is




                                                 11
similarly strong compared to the results shown in the cross-tabulations above; and that gender,

education, age, self-rated health, cognitive ability and the Big 5 personality traits are all quite

strong predictors of retirement preferences. For example, traditional retirement is more popular

among males, and less popular among those with higher cognitive ability and those who are

more open to new experiences; part-time jobs are more popular among females, people with high

cognitive ability; and self-employment is less popular among more neurotic and conscientious

people. It is hard to know if these associations reflect causal mechanisms, but it is interesting to

see how strongly demographics, and psychological factors predict preferences.


Job demands and job characteristics

Constraints and job demands
   We showed evidence in the previous section that older workers' preferences for different

work-to-retirement pathways lined up reasonably well with observed pathways. It does not mean,

however, that preferences perfectly predict realizations. To investigate the role of other factors,

such as external constraints and the importance of labor demand, the survey queried older

employees about how various factors would affect their abilities to keep their jobs until age 70.

The question wording was the following:

           [...] assume that you wanted to continue working at your

       [current/main] job until age 70. Do you think the following

       factors would limit your ability to continue working at

       your [current/main] job until retiring completely?"

       We asked about the following factors:

       1. Health problems

       2. Demands of the job


                                                  12
       3. Having to take care of others

       4. Business conditions

       5. Employer would not extend contract

       The answer options were (1) Not at all, (2) Somewhat, (3) Moderately, or (4) Greatly.

Table 3 shows the distribution of the answers in the sample of employees. Health problems and

job demands were reported to be the most important factors, on average. More than 50% of

employees reported that health problems would moderately or greatly affect their ability to keep

their jobs until age 70. Almost 50% identified demands of the job as moderately or greatly

important factors. An interpretation is that these workers foresaw an increasing mismatch

between their ability to perform the job and the demands of the job, which, at some point would

not permit them to work until age 70. Fewer workers worried about the continuing availability

of their job (labor demand): a little over half of the sample said that they were not at all worried

that their employers would not extend their contract. We interpreted this to mean that most

thought their employer would allow them to work until age 70. Just 15.2% were greatly worried

about it. Business conditions in general were somewhat more frequently identified as a potential

barrier, but the most frequent answer was still "Not at all", chosen by 33.2% of the sample.

Worrying about caretaking obligations showed the largest heterogeneity in the sample: 24.9%,

34.9%, 21.4%, and 17.8% of the sample identified said caretaking would "Not at all,"

"Somewhat," "Moderately," or "Greatly" affect their abilities to keep their jobs until age 70.

This heterogeneity is likely related to family size and composition, but lacking information about

families in the survey, we could not investigate this explanation further.

       Overall, it appears that health and demands of the job are the factors that older workers

most frequently worry about when they plan the length of their working lives. Table 3, however,




                                                 13
does not identify what characteristics of the job older workers want. To learn about these issues,

we next look into detailed job features.


Current, and last job features compared to desired future job features
   Respondents were asked about the features and requirements of their current or last jobs

along 14 dimensions, such as physical and cognitive demands and the social climate of the

workplace (Morgeson & Humphrey, 2006). There were six cognitive items:

       1. My job requires monitoring a great deal of information.

       2. My job requires engaging in a large amount of thinking.

       3. My job requires a variety of skills.

       4. My job requires using a number of complex or high-level skills.

       5. At my job the tasks are simple and uncomplicated.

       6. At my job I solve problems that have no obvious correct answers.

       The survey included two items to capture the physical intensity of the jobs:

       1. My job requires a great deal of muscular strength.

       2. My job requires a lot of physical effort.

       Four items measured social features:

       1. At my job the people I work with are friendly.

       2. At my job I have the chance to get to know other people.

       3. At my job I have the opportunity to develop close friendships.

       4. At my job the people I work with take a personal interest in me.

       The survey also measured two other job characteristics:

       1. At my job the climate is comfortable in terms of temperature and humidity.

       2. At my job I make my own decisions about how to schedule my work.



                                                 14
       Respondents chose from the options: (1) Absolutely yes, (2) Partly yes/partly no, (3)

Absolutely no, or (4) It did not matter to me (for some questions). We converted these responses

to a 0 to 1 scale: "absolutely no" answers were coded as zero; "partly yes/partly no," "it did not

matter to me," and missing answers were coded as 0.5, and "absolutely yes" answers were coded

as 1. The one exception was the "At my job the tasks are simple and uncomplicated" feature,

which was reversed so that higher values correspond to cognitively more challenging jobs.

       We also created three aggregate variables: cognitive, physical, and social job features, by

taking the average of the relevant items for each. These aggregate scores are also between 0 and

1, and larger numbers indicate more-cognitive, more-physical, or more-social jobs.

       Table 1 shows the mean of these indices in workers' current jobs, or latest jobs if they did

not work at the time of the survey. Their jobs have relatively high cognitive requirements: the

average is about 0.70 which is almost half way from "partly yes/no" to "absolutely yes." The

physical requirements are much lower. Social opportunities appear to be widely available. The

means of workers' current and non-workers' latest jobs are similar in all three dimensions.

       Later in the survey we asked individuals to rate a future job along the same 14

dimensions. The future job would be a job they would try to get after age 60 (for those below age

60), or in the future (for those above 60). The question wording was:

           Please continue to assume that you would be looking for a

       new job sometime [after age 60/in the future]. Do you think

       the job you would look for at that time would have any of

       the following [requirements/features]?

       The question used a natural wording, but these are the jobs they would look for, so we

sometimes interpret the answers as showing individuals' desired future job characteristics.




                                                15
       Table 4 shows the average values, stratified by gender, of the 14 individual and three

aggregate measures of job features for individuals' current and future jobs. Table 5 shows them

stratified by labor force status. Because we compare current and desired future job features, the

samples used for the tables are restricted to individuals who worked for pay at the time the

survey was fielded.

       Individuals' current jobs score relatively high in cognitive and social domains (0.670 and

0.687 respectively on the 0-1 scale) and relatively low in physical domains (0.348). The jobs

people would like to get in the future are less cognitive (0.539), and even less physical (0.176)

than their current jobs, while they are slightly more social (0.715). People would also like to

have a more comfortable temperature at their workplaces and future jobs with flexible schedules.

The individual items follow similar patterns to the three aggregate scores with some exceptions.

For example, individuals would like to get future jobs with lower cognitive demands in most

dimensions, but they desire an increase in "solving problems."

       The patterns are qualitatively similar among males and females, but females are in

cognitively and physically less demanding jobs.

       Cognitive demands are highest among full-time employees (0.712) compared to part-time

employees (0.538), and the self-employed (0.636). The desired future jobs have lower average

cognitive scores than the current jobs in all three groups, but the difference is largest among full-

time employees who have the highest baseline value (a drop of more than 0.15). Physical

demands are slightly higher among part-time employees and the self-employed, but the patterns

are similar. Social demands do not vary much by labor force status.

       It would be interesting to know if these patterns are different in the public vs. private

sectors, but unfortunately our survey did not ask about workers' sectors. Table B3 in the




                                                 16
Appendix shows some suggestive evidence that current and future job demands do not vary

much by sectors.4

         To investigate heterogeneity in more detail, Appendix Tables B4 and B5 show the results

of OLS regressions on current and future job features as well as their differences. We found that

females desire a significantly larger drop in cognitive demands compared to men. Higher family

income predicts a larger drop in the desire for cognitive and social demands, because higher-

income individuals are currently in more-cognitive and more-social jobs, but the desired future

jobs do not vary much by income. Some psychological factors are strong predictors of job

features, as they were of preferred retirement pathways. For example, individuals with higher

cognitive ability desire a smaller decline in cognitive job demands. Individuals who score higher

on the neuroticism scale desire a larger increase in the social aspects of their jobs; while more

extroverted participants desire a larger reduction in jobs' cognitive and physical aspects; more

agreeable individuals desire smaller declines in physical and larger increases in social aspects of

their jobs; and more conscientious individuals also desire smaller declines in physical job

demands, but their desired increase in social demands would be smaller.

         Overall, it appears that the average older worker would prefer moving into jobs with

lower cognitive and physical demands, but there is strong heterogeneity in these preferences. It is

an interesting question if such jobs are in fact available to them.




4
  Table B3 is based on information from three other ALP surveys preceding ours by 0-2 years. We managed to link
about 2/3 of our sample to at least one of these other samples, and we used sector information from the latest
available survey. Of course, this information may be selective and outdated so we do not use it in our main analysis.
But based on Table B3, current and desired job features look similar in the private and public sectors, and only
slightly different in the non-profit sector. These latter jobs appear a bit more cognitive and social and less physical
than average.


                                                          17
Availability of job characteristics
   We study the availability of four job characteristics elicited in the survey. The first one asked

about the subjective probability that full-time workers could switch to a part-time position if they

wanted to:

             Suppose that you wanted to move into a part-time position

         at your current job. What is the percent chance that your

         employer would allow you to do that?

         The second one asked a similar question about the possibility to flexibly choose work

hours:

             Suppose that at some point you wanted to flexibly choose

         your work schedule while you still worked the required

         number of hours. What do you think the chances are that

         your employer would allow you to do that?

         The third question asked about telecommuting, and the wording depended on job-type.

Employees were asked if their employers allowed them to work from home at least occasionally.

Self-employed people were simply asked if they could work from home.

         The fourth question asked about average total commuting time.

         Table 6 shows the averages of these measures by gender and labor market status. The

average subjective probability of being allowed to switch to a part-time position is 40.7%, and it

is significantly higher among females (47.0%) compared to males (35.8%).

         The sample average of the subjective probability of being allowed to flexibly choose

work hours is similar, 39.8%, and it is also higher among females compared to males (43.1% vs.

36.8%). We found very large differentials by employees' current work hours: flexibility in work

hours is far less likely in full-time jobs (36.0%) compared to part-time jobs (56.2%).


                                                18
        About 43.1% of workers are allowed to telecommute, and this fraction is slightly higher

among females: 45.2% compared to 41.2% among males. Telecommuting is far more common

among the self-employed. For example, 87.0% of part-time self-employed workers can

telecommute, while only 32.2% of part-time employees report that this option is available to

them.

        On average, older workers commute for about an hour a day (64.9 minutes). Males and

females commute for about the same time, but there is some variation by labor market status.

Part-time employees commute the most (74.2 minutes), and part-time self-employed people

commute the least (44.3 minutes).

        Table B6 in the appendix shows OLS regressions of these three measures. The

relationships suggest that high SES individuals have better access to better working conditions.

For example, work hour flexibility increases with education and income; telecommuting

increases by income; and minorities have longer commutes. Health, job features, and

psychological factors also predict the outcome variables.

        Overall, we see that favorable working conditions (i.e. the ones that offer more flexibility

and are closer to home) are widespread among older workers in the U.S., but they are far from

being universal.


Subjective probabilities of working after age 70
   In this section we investigate how job characteristics predict retirement behavior as measured

by the reported subjective probabilities of working after age 70, which we call P70. The survey

asked the following question:

           What are the chances that you will be doing any work for

        pay after you reach age 70?


                                                 19
       We analyze the target age 70 rather than, say, 65 because the labor force participation

rate after age 65 has been rapidly increasing and because of discussion about increasing the full

Social Security retirement age beyond age 67. At times we will call P70 a measure of "labor

supply."

       Table 7 shows how P70 varies by job constraints (analyzed in Table 3), current and future

job features (Tables 4 and 5), and job characteristics (Table 6). Column 1 shows the means of

P70 in the sample with low values of the explanatory variable (i.e. not important, not available,

or below median), column 2 shows the means for high values (i.e. important, available, or above

median), and column 3 shows the difference. For example, among those who say health

problems would not be important in working to age 70, the average P70 is 34.6; among those

who said health would be important the average P70 was 31.7. Table 8 shows the OLS

regression version of this table, in which we also control for demographics, health, income, labor

force status, and psychological factors.

       In Table 3 we saw that many workers consider demands of the job an important factor for

their ability to keep their jobs until age 70. According to Table 7, this variable is also a very

strong predictor of P70. Those who are more worried about job demands, expect a 7.9 percentage

point lower likelihood of working past age 70. The regression results in Table 8 show that this

differential is even greater when controlling for the other variables. Individuals who are worried

about health problems expect a slightly lower probability of working after age 70, but this

differential is not statistically significant in the regressions. Those who worry more about

business conditions in the future, expect a higher chance of working after age 70.

       The subjective probability of working after age 70 varies by older workers' current and

desired future job features. The most consistent predictor of P70 is the cognitive score of




                                                  20
individuals' desired future jobs (Table 7). Earlier we saw that people, on average, desire to work

in less cognitive jobs compared to their current jobs. But those who desire a smaller decline in

the cognitive demands of their future jobs expect to work longer than those who desire a greater

decline. An interpretation is that those persons anticipate a more moderate rate of their own

cognitive decline, permitting them to hold a more cognitively demanding job.

          Current job characteristics are also strong predictors of P70. The two most consistent and

statistically significant predictors are flexible work hours and commute times. More flexibility

and shorter current commute times are associated with a higher reported chance of working after

age 70.

          Labor force status strongly predicts P70: the difference in P70 between part-time

employment and full-time self-employment is 19.6 (Table 8). Higher current income reduces

P70 while education and self-assessed health have a minor influence. Among the psychological

factors, openness to experience is the strongest predictor of P70: those who are more open to

new experiences expect to work longer. This is in line with results we found in Hudomiet et al.

(2018c) using HRS panel data.

          Overall, the strongest predictors of P70 are "worrying about future job demands," the

cognitive score of individuals' desired future jobs, commute times, and having flexible work

hours. It must be noted that these patterns are correlational and do not necessarily show causal

links.


Subjective causal effects of job characteristics on retirement
    To quantify the effect of several specific job characteristics on the timing of retirement we

use responses to questions about subjective conditional probabilities. These questions ask

individuals about the chance that they would work after age 70 conditional on various factors,


                                                  21
such as having flexible work hours or less physically demanding jobs. These questions can be

used to estimate the subjective causal effect of the factors on retirement by altering the

conditioning. The method corresponds to the experiment of altering a characteristic of a job and

then observing a change in retirement behavior. The population response would depend on

preferences, other job characteristics, economic resources and constraints. For example, a

worker with a DB pension focused on a particularly retirement age would be less responsive than

a worker with a DC plan. The population average would be the average treatment effect. But our

method accommodates analysis of heterogeneity in response because we observed within-person

responses. Our approach is related to stated preferences, with the important difference that the

probability format of subjective conditional probabilities offers individuals the opportunity to

express uncertainty.


The measures
   Apart from minor wording differences, these questions used the following format, with [X]

referring to the condition whose effect on retirement we estimated:

           Suppose that [X]. In this case, what are the chances that

       you would be doing any work for pay after you reach age 70?

       The conditions were the following:

       1. Flexible hours: "...your employer allowed you to flexibly choose

           your work schedule as long as you worked the required

           number of hours."

       2. Less stress: "...there were jobs available to you that involved

           little or no stress with the same pay and job demands as

           your current job."



                                                 22
3. Less physical: "...there were jobs available to you that

  required little or no physical effort and offered the

  same pay as your current job."

4. Self-employed: "...you became self-employed at some point."

5. Short commute: "...there were jobs available to you that were

  very close to your home with the same pay and job demands

  as your current job."

6. Telecommute: "...you had the opportunity to work from home

  either at your current job or at a different job."

7. Less concentration: "...there were jobs available to you that

  required little concentration and attention with the same

  pay and job demands as your current job."

8. Part-time: "...you moved into a part-time position at your

  current employer at some point."

9. Good health: "...when you reach age 70 your health is

  excellent, very good or good."

10. More wealth: "...you were to inherit $500,000."

11. Higher wage: "...Congress changed the tax system in a way that

  all workers above age 70 would bring home 20% more in

  wages compared to what they currently make."

12. Longer life: "...scientists discovered a new medicine that added

  an extra ten years to your life."




                               23
         In this paper we are primarily interested in the effect of the job characteristics from (1) to

(8), and the other factors (9) to (12) serve as comparisons.

         We wanted to ask the questions of the broadest sample possible, but some questions did

not apply to those workers who were already experiencing the condition described. For example,

(1) was asked only of employees who reported less than 100% probability that their employer

would allow them to flexibly choose their hours (asked earlier in the survey); (4) was only asked

of employees who reported less than 100% probability of ever becoming self-employed; (5) was

only asked of workers who commuted at least an hour a day; and (8) was asked only of full-time

employees who reported less than 100% probability that they would switch to a part-time job at

their current employer.

         To examine question wording effects, we used randomized formats for (10), (11), and

(12). The detailed results are reported in Hudomiet et al. (2018b). Here we provide a short

summary to explain the sample selection in this paper for the analyses of the respective survey

items. We found that the three alternative versions5 for question (10) were very similar, so we

used them as if they were the same question in this paper. We found, however, that the three

alternative versions6 of (11) yielded very different response patterns, so here we only used the

one that best approximates a causal interpretation (shown in the list above). Two out of three

alternatives7 of (12) were similar, and therefore we use both here.



5
  The second version was similar to the wording we listed above but added an introductory sentence: "Now please
think about your situation today, including your current health and financial situation." The third version did not
mention inheritance: "Suppose you had $500,000 more in financial assets than you do today."
6
  The second version was similar to (11), but further specified that the person's health at age 70 would be excellent,
very good, or good. The third version used a more compact wording that did not mention the tax system or the
timing of the wage change: "Now imagine that you earned 20% more than you do now... "
7
 The second version was similar to what we listed above but added the following clarifying clause: " but all other
aspects of your life would be unchanged." The third version, which we ignore in this paper, added that the extra 10
years would be healthy years.


                                                          24
        For some of the questions we asked about counterfactual conditional probabilities, in

which the condition is "turned off." For example, we altered (9) to ask about bad as opposed to

good future health. And we sometimes also asked about the probability of the condition. For

example, we asked the subjective probability that the person's health would be good at age 70.


Estimation of the subjective causal effects

    Let Pri (W70 | X ) denote the subjective probability of working conditional on random variable

X. X takes the value of 1 if the particular condition is satisfied (e.g., health at age 70 is good),

and takes the value of 0 if the condition is not satisfied (e.g., health at age 70 is not good). The

subjective causal effect of the condition is then:

                 iX = Pri (W70 | X = 1) - Pri (W70 | X = 0 ) ,   (1)


        where  i denotes the subjective causal effect of X (e.g., good health) on retirement for
                 X




individual i. Then the mean of  i in the sample is the average subjective causal effect of X on
                                     X




retirement. Because  i is available on the individual level, we can also use them as left-hand
                        X



variables of OLS regressions to analyze heterogenous subjective treatment effects.

        The simplest way to estimate  i is by asking two conditional probability questions in
                                            X



the survey (conditioning on the two possible values of X) and using formula (1). This approach

was used only for condition (9) Good health.

        We used a slightly modified version for (11) Higher wage. We asked about two

conditional probabilities. Pri (W70 | y = 20% ) is the subjective probability of working after age

70 conditional on a 20% wage increase (see wording above), and Pri (W70 | y = -20% ) is the




                                                     25
same probability under the condition that wages go down by 20%. Then the subjective causal

effect of a 20% wage change was defined as

                         Pri (W70 | y = 20% ) - Pri (W70 | y = -20% )
               iwage =                                                         (2)
                                               2

       For the rest of the conditions, the counterfactual conditional probabilities (under X = 0 )

were not available in the survey and had to be approximated. For most cases we replaced them

with the unconditional probability of working past age 70, P70. The subjective causal effect was

approximated as

                iX  Pri (W70 | X = 1) - Pri (W70 ) .    (3)

       This approximation is valid if the condition (under X = 1 ) refers to a change from the

status quo. For example, the longer life condition in item (12) proposes the discovery of a new

drug that is not available and not even discussed in public, and so it seems reasonable to assume

that the counterfactual conditional probability equals the unconditional probability,

Pri (W70 | X = 0 ) = Pri (W70 ) . This approach was used for the following conditions: (2) Less stress,

(3) Less physical, (5) Shorter commute, (6) Telecommute, (7) Less concentration, (10) More

wealth, and (12) Longer life. We worded these questions to refer to a change from the status quo.

But it is possible that some individuals did not interpret the question the way we intended. The

subjective causal effects reported by these individuals would be biased toward zero, but we

expect this bias to be small in the sample.

       For the remaining three conditions, (1) Flexible hours, (4) Self-employment, and (8) Part-

time, we used survey data on the probability of the condition, denoted by Pri ( X = 1) which was

available in the survey. For example, we asked employees about the probability that they will




                                                   26
ever become self-employed. Then we used the law of total probabilities to estimate the

counterfactual conditional probability:

                                          Pri (W70 ) - Pri (W70 | X = 1) Pri ( X = 1)
                   Pri (W70 | X = 0 ) =                                                 (4)
                                                        1 - Pri ( X = 1)

           The few cases where the estimated probabilities were outside the [0,1] interval were

censored at 0 or 1. Then we entered this estimate into equation (1) to obtain the subjective causal

effects.


Results
    Panel A of Table 9 shows the average subjective causal effect of job characteristics, and

Panel B shows the effects of health, wealth, earnings, and longevity. Both panels are based on

the sample of 50- to 69-year-old workers; and the factors are ordered by effect sizes within the

panels. Column 2 shows the average probabilities of working after 70 if the particular condition

(e.g., flexible schedule) is not available, and column 3 shows the analogous probability if the

condition is available. Then column 4 shows the difference, which is our estimate of the average

subjective causal effects of the condition. The values in each row are estimated on the same

sample, but the samples across the rows are different due to sample restrictions on some

questions, as discussed in Section 3.4.1, and due to item non-response.

           Of the 12 factors considered, health has the strongest effect on labor supply. The fraction

of those who would work after age 70 would be twice as great if the health of individuals at age

70 were good, very good, or excellent compared to fair or poor (39.5% vs. 18.5%, or an increase

of 21.0 percentage points). Wealth also has a fairly strong effect on labor supply above age 70:

Inheriting $500,000 would reduce labor supply by 16.2 percentage points, from 32.6% to 16.4%.

These elasticities are large, but they are in line with other findings in the literature showing that



                                                          27
labor supply elasticities increase with age as individuals get closer to the margin of leaving the

labor force (Blundell, French & Tetlow, 2016). The rest of the factors in Panel B have somewhat

smaller effects. A 20% increase in wages would increase labor supply after age 70 by 10.1

percentage points, and an extra 10 years longevity would increase labor supply by only 1.4

percentage points.

        With respect to working conditions, we found that working in jobs that permit flexible

hours had the largest subjective causal effect on average. According to our estimates it would

increase the subjective probability of working after age 70 by 15 percentage points on a base of

17.2%. This effect is similar to the effect of inheriting $500,000, and considerably larger than a

20% increase in take-home pay. Flexible hours, thus, seem to be very important to older

individuals.

        The stress level of the jobs, physical demands, and ability to become self-employed also

show large effects. Each of these factors would increase labor supply by more than 10 percentage

points, or roughly the same as a 20% increase in wages. Short commuting time (estimated on the

sample that commutes at least an hour a day), having the option to telecommute, and having a

job that does not require concentration had slightly lower effects of about 8-9 percentage points.

Switching to a part-time job at an individual's current employer would not affect labor supply by

much.

        Next, we investigated the heterogeneity in the subjective casual effects of selected

conditions by observable factors. To that end we regressed the individual-level subjective causal

effects on individual characteristics. The OLS regression coefficients are shown in Table 10.

The interpretation of a coefficient is the additional causal effect among those with the

characteristic compared with those not having the characteristic. For example, among those who




                                                 28
say that health problems will likely be an important factor limiting their ability to work, the

subjective causal effect on P70 of having a flexible schedule is 6.4 percentage points greater than

among those where health is not perceived to be an important factor. An interpretation is that

having flexibility to manage health problems permits later retirement among those who

anticipate having work-limiting health problems. Flexibility is less important among those who

do not anticipate having health problems. We note that this interpretation provides an

explanation for the strong desire to have flexibility on the job.

       The results suggest that the labor supply of workers who worry about the demands of the

job tends to be more responsive to many job characteristics: the subjective causal effects of job-

stress, physical requirements, self-employment, and concentration are all significantly higher in

this group, as evidenced by the positive and statistically significant coefficients in the "Job

demands" row. For example, consider those concerned about whether the demands of the job

would permit them to work to age 70. If the job were not stressful rather than stressful, P70

would increase by 7.8 percentage points more than it would among those not concerned about

the demands of the job. Reference to Table 8 shows that P70 is reduced by 9.0 percentage points

when job demands are perceived to be important, so that the elimination of job stress would

approximately eliminate the difference between those concerned about the demands of the job

and those not concerned.

       Individuals' current job features (second panel) do not seem to affect their subjective

causal effects by much. The only statistically significant coefficient is on the social index: the

labor supply of workers in more social jobs are less affected by having flexible schedules.




                                                 29
       Interestingly, the labor supply of those individuals who are allowed to telecommute was

significantly less responsive to working conditions compared to those who are not allowed to

work from home. Perhaps their jobs are already flexible, not stressful, not physical and so forth.

       With respect to demographic predictors, we found weak gender differences in the causal

effects of the different job characteristics, while the differences by education were more

pronounced, suggesting highly educated individuals' labor supply may be more sensitive to

stress, physical requirements, and concentration. The labor supply of individuals in bad health

tends to be less responsive to job characteristics, likely because it is more difficult for them to

work in any jobs. High-income individuals' labor supply is less responsive to work-stress and the

level of required concentration, which may mean that they are better at coping with such

challenges.

       Current labor market status is a weak predictor of subjective causal effects. Compared to

full-time employees, part-time employees care more about being self-employed and having jobs

that require little concentration, but care less about the option to telecommute. Self-employed

people have similar causal effects to full-time employees.

       The psychological factors predict the subjective causal effects less strongly. We see some

evidence that those who score higher on the number series test (i.e., the cognitively more able)

care more about the option to telecommute, similar to more neurotic and more agreeable

individuals and those who are more open to new experiences. Having jobs that require little

concentration has a significantly higher effect on the labor supply of the more extroverted

respondents, and significantly smaller effect on more individuals with higher scores for

openness.




                                                  30
        Appendix Tables B7 and B8 investigate some methodological properties of conditional

subjective probabilities. Table B7 shows the fraction of the sample whose responses reflect a

"corner solution" of 0% or 100% limiting the size of the subjective causal effects. We found that

a small, but non-negligible fraction of the sample would never work after age 70 (P70 = 0)

independently of the values of the conditions. For example, 15% report P70 = 0 when the job is

posited to be not stressful. It is less frequent that individuals are sure to work after age 70 (P70 =

100).

        An interesting additional result in Table B7 is that more than 60% of individuals say that

they would surely not work after age 70 (i.e. the probability of work would be 0%) if they did

not have flexible work hours. This is by far the strongest predictor of this outcome.

        In Table B8 we investigated the fraction of the sample with 0% causal effects vs. positive

or negative effects. We found that about a third of the sample are not responsive to the

conditions, and about 2-31% of the sample (depending on the condition) gave answers that were

in the wrong direction; that is, P70 decreased when a desirable condition was assumed. People

gave the least consistent answers to the longevity question.



4. Conclusion


        The decision about when and how to retire can be complex for many workers. Many

factors influence this choice such as workers' health, abilities, and preferences for job

characteristics and leisure activities, as well as employers' demands, government regulations,

and other institutional factors. Prior literature found large heterogeneity in the way people

transition from work to full retirement. Some retire early, others retire late, some retire directly




                                                  31
from full-time jobs, and others take a more gradual pathway through part-time work or self-

employment before completely leaving the labor force.

       Using a newly designed survey of over 2,000 individuals age 50 to 79, this paper

explored the role of workers' preferences for job characteristics and for retirement pathways so

as to understand their role in the retirement process. Our survey included questions about four

related sets of outcome variables: (1) workers' ratings of alternative work-to-retirement

pathways; (2) workers' current and desired job characteristics; (3) subjective probabilities of

working after age 70; and (4) workers' subjective conditional probabilities of working after age

70 if certain job characteristics were available to them. We presented cross-tabulations between

these outcome variables and covariates of interest, such as gender and labor force status, and

OLS regressions with a rich set of predictor variables.

       We found that the traditional retirement paths (i.e., retiring directly and completely from

full-time jobs) were by far the most frequently preferred work-to-retirement pathways: About

half of the sample indicated a preference to retire this way. We also found large heterogeneity in

workers' preferences, with many indicating more-gradual pathways as one of their preferred

choices: almost a quarter of the sample expressed a preference for first taking part-time jobs; 8%

preferred a period of self-employment before retirement; and a little over 10% preferred working

forever. Females were somewhat more likely to prefer the gradual pathways through part-time

jobs and self-employment, and they were less likely to prefer never retiring. Part-time employees

and self-employed workers were more likely than full-time employees to prefer the gradual

pathways. We also found differences by education, health, and psychological factors, such as

cognitive abilities, and workers' Big 5 personality traits. Standard economic theory ignores




                                                32
psychological factors, but our results suggest that they may be useful to understand heterogeneity

in the population that is not explained by standard economic variables.

       We found that most workers were worried about health and the demands of their jobs

when considering their prospects of working longer. At the same time, relatively few workers

worried that their employers would not allow them to stay at the firm.

       When looking at older workers' current and desired job features, we found that most

people would like to move to a less cognitively and less physically demanding job compared to

their current one, while they would prefer jobs with more social opportunities, with more

comfortable temperatures, and with more flexible schedules. We also found large differences in

preferences by gender, labor force status, income, and psychological factors.

       We found that less than half of older workers reported that they could flexibly choose

their work hours, could switch to a part-time position, or telecommute. These favorable working

conditions are far from universal, among older workers in the U.S.

       When we analyzed the subjective probabilities of working after age 70, we found that the

strongest predictors were "worrying about future job demands," the cognitive score of

individuals' desired future jobs, commute times, and whether the worker has flexible work hours.

       We analyzed the subjective causal effects of working conditions on working past age 70.

We found that flexible work hours had the largest effect, which would increase the subjective

probability of working after age 70 by 15 percentage points on a base of about 17%, thus having

a larger effect than a 20% increase in wages. Work stress, the physical demands of jobs, the

opportunity to become self-employed, short commuting time, and having the option to

telecommute were also relatively important, in this order. Switching to a part-time job at an

individual's current employer would not affect labor supply much. These findings suggest that




                                                33
policies that increase older workers' abilities to choose their work hours more flexibly may have

the largest impact on delaying their retirement. At the same time, the option to take part-time

jobs, which is often argued to be more suitable for older workers, does not seem to have large

effects on individuals' retirement expectations.

         Overall, having flexible work hours and having short commutes were the factors that

consistently came out as important determinants of retirement across most of our models.

Moreover, demands of the jobs, especially the cognitive demands of individuals' future jobs as

well as stress, were also strong predictors of retirement.

         In interpreting these findings, it is important to keep in mind that they are based on

observational data, and that the outcome variables were stated preferences, as opposed to

workers' observed behavior. The external validity of such stated preference measures is not

guaranteed. It would be interesting for future research to complement our approach with other

methodologies that identify workers' preferences from their choices, such as their subsequent

realized retirement pathways that could be observed in longitudinal data. Furthermore, there are

several alternative mechanisms that can explain the identified patterns. For example, we found

that the psychological factors were predictors of preferences for different retirement pathways

and desired job features even after controlling for traditional socio-economic variables.

Cognitive abilities and personality traits may affect individuals' preferences for leisure activities,

or the disutility from carrying out difficult tasks at work; and they may also correlate with certain

personal or baseline job characteristics that we did not observe in our data. It would be

interesting to explore in future research the mechanisms that are responsible for the patterns we

found.




                                                   34
       We documented large heterogeneity in workers' preferences for job characteristics

preceding retirement and for retirement pathways, and some of this heterogeneity was explained

by observable characteristics, such as health, current job characteristics, cognitive ability, or

personality traits. These heterogeneities imply that there is no one job type that fits all older

workers' desires. The differences between workers' current job attributes and the ones they

desire for their jobs preceding retirement suggest that increased flexibility from either adjusting

tasks on the job or changing jobs would help workers realize their preferences. In some cases,

institutional factors limit that flexibility. For example, workers with a defined benefit pension

plan usually cannot transfer those benefits to another job. According to our results, the largest

impact on delaying workers' retirement may be achieved by allowing older workers to choose

their work hours more flexibly. This is rather starkly brought out by our estimate that 60% of

our sample would surely not work at age 70 (P70 = 0) if their jobs provided no hours flexibility.




                                                  35
Tables

                     Table 1. Descriptive statistics about the analytic sample
                                          Unweighted                Weighted
                                         mean      sd             mean      sd
Female                         2,177     0.538        0.499       0.503     0.500
Age                            2,177     63.04         7.53       58.36     7.01
Non-Hispanic white             2,177     0.819        0.385       0.673     0.469
Non-Hispanic black             2,177     0.071        0.256       0.108     0.311
Non-Hispanic, other race       2,177     0.033        0.178       0.056     0.230
Hispanic                       2,177     0.078        0.268       0.163     0.369
High school or less            2,177     0.146        0.353       0.356     0.479
Some college                   2,177     0.356        0.479       0.276     0.447
College or more                2,177     0.497        0.500       0.368     0.483
Married                        2,177     0.623        0.485       0.676     0.468
Divorced/separated             2,177     0.200        0.400       0.183     0.387
Widowed                        2,177     0.079        0.269       0.048     0.213
Never married                  2,177     0.098        0.298       0.093     0.291
Health excellent               2,177     0.115        0.319       0.106     0.308
Health very good               2,177     0.406        0.491       0.393     0.489
Health good                    2,177     0.317        0.466       0.341     0.474
Health fair                    2,177     0.122        0.328       0.120     0.325
Health poor                    2,177     0.040        0.195       0.040     0.195
Log family income              2,177     10.98         0.85       10.99     0.90
Full-time employee             2,177     0.345        0.475       0.477     0.500
Part-time employee             2,177     0.130        0.336       0.128     0.334
Full-time self-employed        2,177     0.051        0.220       0.058     0.234
Part-time self-employed        2,177     0.066        0.248       0.045     0.208
Not working                    2,177     0.408        0.492       0.291     0.454
Cognitive job (current job)    1,288     0.679        0.227       0.670     0.225
Cognitive job (last job)        889      0.709        0.230       0.674     0.231
Physical job (current job)     1,288     0.282        0.315       0.348     0.344
Physical job (last job)         889      0.308        0.336       0.400     0.373
Social job (current job)       1,288     0.682        0.207       0.687     0.206
Social job (last job)           889      0.692        0.212       0.679     0.215
Number series score            2,177     0.000        1.000      -0.081     1.032
Neuroticism                    2,177     0.000        1.000       0.045     1.005
Extroversion                   2,177     0.000        1.000       0.022     0.995
Agreeableness                  2,177     0.000        1.000       0.002     1.012
Conscientiousness              2,177     0.000        1.000      -0.047     1.012
Openness                       2,177     0.000        1.000      -0.074     1.029



                                                 36
                   Table 2. Preferred work-to-retirement pathways by gender and labor force status
                                                                                                                                            Not
                                                    All     Males      Females          Employees                 Self-employed           currently
                                                                                                                                          working
                                                                                     Full-t.     Part-t.         Full-t.     Part-t.
Work full time, retire at age 62                  0.285       0.315      0.255       0.298       0.228           0.212       0.123         0.332
Work full time, retire at age 65                  0.139       0.136      0.143       0.156       0.108           0.056       0.068         0.152
Work full time, retire at age 70                  0.108       0.107      0.109       0.120       0.048           0.076       0.079         0.125
  Work full time, retire, any age                 0.532       0.558      0.507       0.575       0.384           0.343       0.270         0.609
Start part time at 62, retire at 65               0.112       0.074      0.150       0.108       0.174           0.071       0.082         0.102
Start part time at 62, retire at 70               0.062       0.053      0.072       0.050       0.110           0.027       0.056         0.072
Start part time at 65, retire at 70               0.065       0.057      0.073       0.079       0.057           0.057       0.071         0.042
  Start part time, retire, any age                0.239       0.184      0.294       0.238       0.341           0.155       0.209         0.216
Start self-emp. at 62, retire at 70               0.077       0.088      0.067       0.051       0.071           0.241       0.281         0.060
Never retire                                      0.111       0.138      0.085       0.101       0.120           0.246       0.166         0.088
Stop work at 62, start 65, stop 70                0.040       0.033      0.047       0.036       0.084           0.015       0.074         0.027
Total                                             1.000       1.000      1.000       1.000       1.000           1.000       1.000         1.000
        Notes: Age 50-80, N = 2,013. Weighted. The question was "We would like to know what you consider the ideal path from work
        to retirement. We are going to list a series of work-to-retirement pathways, in which a person like you moved between full-time
        work, part-time work and retirement at different ages. We ask you to rate these retirement pathways on a scale of 0 (very
        unfavorable, not at all for me) to 10 (very favorable, very well suited to me). " The table shows the weighted fraction of the
        sample that gave the highest rating for the respective pathway. When multiple trajectories received the same highest score, the
        preferred pathway was randomly selected. Individuals who gave the same score to all pathways were dropped from the sample.




         Table 3. Importance of constraints for the ability of a worker to stay at his/her current job until age
                                                           70
                                                 Not at all      Somewhat        Moderately         Greatly          DK/RF              Total
 Health problems                                  11.0%            34.8%          23.8%             30.0%             0.4%             100.0%
 Job demands                                      18.2%            33.3%          26.0%             21.5%             1.0%             100.0%
 Having to take care of others                    24.9%            34.9%          21.4%             17.8%             1.0%             100.0%
 Business conditions                              33.2%            31.9%          18.8%             15.1%             1.0%             100.0%
 Employer would not extend contract               50.5%            19.6%          13.9%             15.2%             0.8%             100.0%
        Notes: Age 50-69, working for pay, N = 1,160. Weighted. The question was "[...] assume that you wanted to continue working at
        your current/main job until age 70. Do you think the following factors would limit your ability to continue working at your
        [current/main] job until retiring completely?"




                                                                       37
                          Table 4. Current and desired future job features by gender
                                                     Total sample                          Males                          Females
                                                 current        future            current        future            current          future
                                                   job           job                job           job                job             job
 Cognitive job features
 Monitor information                              0.746          0.516             0.766           0.546            0.725           0.484
 Thinking                                         0.749          0.558             0.755           0.604            0.741           0.509
 Variety of skills                                0.802          0.659             0.823           0.685            0.781           0.631
 High level skills                                0.598          0.503             0.645           0.552            0.548           0.450
 Not simple tasks                                 0.585          0.423             0.601           0.461            0.567           0.382
 Solve problems                                   0.539          0.577             0.560           0.587            0.517           0.567
   Average cognitive                              0.670          0.539             0.692           0.572            0.647           0.504
 Physical job features
 Muscular strength                                0.307          0.141             0.352           0.167            0.259           0.114
 Physical effort                                  0.389          0.211             0.448           0.257            0.327           0.163
   Average physical                               0.348          0.176             0.400           0.212            0.293           0.139
 Social job features
 Coworkers friendly                               0.759          0.854             0.752           0.842            0.766           0.866
 Can get to know other people                     0.801          0.758             0.817           0.711            0.784           0.808
 Can develop friendships                          0.599          0.634             0.570           0.621            0.630           0.648
 Coworkers take personal interest                 0.588          0.615             0.568           0.599            0.609           0.633
   Average social                                 0.687          0.715             0.677           0.693            0.697           0.739
 Other job features
 Comfortable temperature                          0.660          0.770             0.629           0.749            0.692           0.792
 Flexible schedule                                0.558          0.687             0.573           0.685            0.542           0.689
Notes: Age 50-80, working for pay, N = 1,288. Weighted. The wording of the question about workers' current job was " We
would like to learn about your [current/main job]. Does it have any of the following [requirements/features] ?" The wording of
the question about workers' future job was "Please continue to assume that you would be looking for a new job sometime [after
age 60/in the future]. Do you think the job you would look for at that time would have any of the following
[requirements/features]?" The answer options were: (1) Absolutely yes, (2) Partly yes/partly no, (3) Absolutely no, or (4) It did
not matter to me (for some questions). These responses were coded into a 0 to 1 scale: "absolutely no" answers were coded as
zero; "partly yes/partly no," "it did not matter to me," and missing answers were coded as 0.5, and "absolutely yes" answers were
coded as 1.




                                                               38
                     Table 5. Current and desired future job features by labor force status
                                           Full-time employees        Part-time employees      Self-employed
                                            current          future   current     future    current     future
                                              job             job       job        job        job        job
Cognitive job features
Monitor information                          0.813           0.543     0.581      0.458       0.641     0.465
Thinking                                     0.795           0.581     0.614      0.477       0.698     0.549
Variety of skills                            0.841           0.681     0.660      0.575       0.800     0.659
High level skills                            0.646           0.527     0.446      0.426       0.564     0.486
Not simple tasks                             0.633           0.435     0.407      0.355       0.581     0.449
Solve problems                               0.545           0.575     0.523      0.586       0.534     0.576
  Average cognitive                          0.712           0.557     0.538      0.480       0.636     0.531
Physical job features
Muscular strength                            0.298           0.138     0.320      0.139       0.332     0.157
Physical effort                              0.366           0.202     0.449      0.198       0.421     0.269
  Average physical                           0.332           0.170     0.385      0.169       0.377     0.213
Social job features
Coworkers friendly                           0.756           0.847     0.763      0.877       0.764     0.859
Can get to know other people                 0.820           0.745     0.761      0.813       0.763     0.752
Can develop friendships                      0.611           0.619     0.595      0.683       0.548     0.644
Coworkers take personal interest             0.574           0.605     0.604      0.636       0.633     0.640
  Average social                             0.690           0.704     0.681      0.752       0.677     0.723
Other job features
Comfortable temperature                      0.660           0.771     0.669      0.779       0.648     0.750
Flexible schedule                            0.507           0.665     0.499      0.660       0.867     0.817
   Notes: Age 50-80, working for pay, N = 1,288. Weighted.




                                                                39
                    Table 6. Availability of certain job characteristics for older workers
                                          Probability that the
                                                                                    At the workers' current job
                                          employer would...
                                        ...allow         ...allow             Fraction with             Daily total
                                       part-time         flexible             possibility to          commute time
                                          work          work hours           work from home             in minutes
 Total sample                             40.7                39.8                   0.431                  64.9
 Males                                    35.8                36.8                   0.412                  65.0
 Females                                  47.0                43.1                   0.452                  64.8
 Full-time employees                      40.7                36.0                   0.381                  64.6
 Part-time employees                       -                  56.2                   0.322                  74.2
 Full-time self-employed                   -                   -                     0.794                  62.7
 Part-time self-employed                   -                   -                     0.870                  44.3
 Number of valid answers                  647                 866                    1158                   1154
Notes: Age 50-69, working for pay, weighted. The availability of part-time work is only asked of full-time employees. The
availability of flexible work hours is only asked of employees.


 Table 7. Mean subjective probability of working after age 70 by job constraints, job features and
                                        job characteristics
                                                        [1]                  [2]                   [3]
 A. Importance of job constraints                 not important          important             difference
 Health problems                                       34.6                31.7                    -2.9
 Caretaking                                            33.5                32.6                    -0.8
 Job demands                                           36.7                28.8                    -7.9
 Employer willingness                                  33.4                32.5                    -0.8
 Business conditions                                   32.3                34.6                     2.3

 B. Current and future job features               below median         above median            difference
 Future job cognitive score                           30.6                 35.7                    5.1
 Current job cognitive score                          31.9                 34.9                    3.0
 Future job physical score                            33.0                 33.0                    0.0
 Current job physical score                           32.5                 33.6                    1.1
 Future job social score                              30.9                 37.7                    6.8
 Current job social score                             32.0                 35.2                    3.1

 C. Availability of job characteristics           below median         above median            difference
 Employer would allow part-time                       31.3                 35.4                    4.1
 Employer would allow flexible
 hours                                                 29.0                  35.6                  6.6
                                                        no                   yes               difference
 Can work from home                                    31.2                  35.4                  4.2
 Commute less than 60 min a day                        29.8                  35.1                  5.3
Notes: Age 50-69, working for pay, weighted. Important job constraints correspond to "Moderately" or "Greatly" important
constraints. The question wording was "What are the chances that you will be doing any work for pay after you reach age 70?"


                                                               40
          Table 8. OLS regressions of the subjective probability of working past age 70
                                             [1]          [2]          [3]          [4]          [5]
Following job constraints will be
important
Health problems                                         -2.086                                 -1.688
                                                        [2.071]                                [2.066]
Caretaking                                              3.338                                  3.592
                                                        [2.158]                                [2.140]*
Job demands                                             -8.976                                 -9.523
                                                       [2.035]***                             [2.074]***
Employer willingness                                    -0.064                                 1.216
                                                        [2.364]                                [2.377]
Business conditions                                     4.603                                  5.933
                                                       [2.275]**                              [2.282]***
Current and future job features
Future job cognitive score                                           24.119                    22.159
                                                                    [5.091]***                [5.094]***
Current job cognitive score                                          -5.868                    -1.893
                                                                     [4.937]                   [4.938]
Future job physical score                                            -6.212                    -8.426
                                                                     [4.431]                   [4.380]*
Current job physical score                                           4.367                     7.954
                                                                     [3.260]                  [3.355]**
Future job social score                                              7.186                     7.253
                                                                     [5.336]                   [5.258]
Current job social score                                             4.819                     1.936
                                                                     [5.077]                   [5.041]
Availability of job characteristics
Employer would allow part-time                                                    0.049         0.06
                                                                                  [0.033]      [0.033]*
Employer would allow flexible hours                                               0.084        0.077
                                                                                 [0.031]***   [0.031]**
Can work from home                                                                2.281        -0.647
                                                                                  [2.067]      [2.133]
Commute less than 60 min a day                                                    5.123        5.323
                                                                                 [1.862]***   [1.847]***
Female                                      -5.181      -5.391       -3.929       -5.584       -4.048
                                          [1.977]***   [1.974]***    [2.037]*    [1.971]***   [2.032]**
High school or less                          ref.        ref.         ref.         ref.         ref.
Some college                                 2.2        1.874        0.818        1.565        0.421
                                            [2.451]     [2.427]      [2.482]      [2.437]      [2.439]
College or more                             4.269       3.411        1.847        3.478        0.997
                                           [2.476]*     [2.460]      [2.653]      [2.474]      [2.615]
Health excellent                            0.236       0.399        0.478        -0.448       0.073
                                            [3.160]     [3.127]      [3.140]      [3.135]      [3.086]
Health very good                            3.007        2.99          3.4        2.999        3.707
                                            [2.076]     [2.058]      [2.068]      [2.063]      [2.040]*


                                               41
 Health good                                                  ref.            ref.          ref.            ref.           ref.
 Health fair                                                -0.153          -0.516         0.379           0.021          0.101
                                                             [3.611]        [3.599]        [3.593]        [3.618]         [3.580]
 Health poor                                                 1.238          3.223          2.215          -1.035          2.346
                                                             [7.893]        [7.886]        [7.850]        [7.828]         [7.795]
 Log family income                                          -7.554          -7.567         -7.328         -8.072         -7.086
                                                           [1.453]***     [1.448]***     [1.504]***      [1.471]***     [1.511]***
 Full-time employee                                           ref.            ref.           ref.          ref.            ref.
 Part-time employee                                         -10.275         -9.747         -9.971        -12.089         -10.772
                                                           [2.728]***     [2.708]***     [2.768]***      [2.752]***     [2.760]***
 Full-time self-employed                                     9.331          8.946          9.847           6.936          8.466
                                                           [3.423]***     [3.430]***     [3.439]***      [3.502]**      [3.551]**
 Part-time self-employed                                    -2.179          -2.335         -2.361         -4.102          -2.51
                                                             [3.966]        [3.936]        [3.959]        [4.059]         [4.042]
 Number series score                                         1.757          2.197           1.41           1.724          1.811
                                                            [1.029]*       [1.021]**       [1.026]        [1.023]*       [1.015]*
 Neuroticism                                                -0.286          -0.23          -0.118         -0.085         -0.046
                                                             [0.969]        [0.966]        [0.976]        [0.963]         [0.969]
 Extroversion                                               -1.052          -0.937         -1.527         -1.358         -1.989
                                                             [1.202]        [1.190]        [1.223]        [1.199]        [1.204]*
 Agreeableness                                               1.919          1.507           1.67           1.959          1.299
                                                            [1.103]*        [1.099]        [1.115]        [1.092]*        [1.101]
 Conscientiousness                                          -2.335          -2.273         -2.278         -2.229         -2.058
                                                           [1.037]**       [1.028]**      [1.035]**      [1.027]**      [1.020]**
 Openness                                                    3.371          3.356          2.305           3.157          2.216
                                                           [1.081]***     [1.078]***      [1.111]**      [1.082]***     [1.100]**
 Constant                                                  117.631         121.046         97.185        115.336         87.948
                                                           [16.280]**     [16.396]**     [17.515]**      [16.547]**     [17.821]**
                                                                *              *              *               *              *
 Age, race, marital status controls                          YES            YES            YES             YES            YES
 R-squared                                                   0.131          0.155          0.155           0.152          0.197
Notes: Age 50-69, working for pay, weighted, N=1043. A handful of missing job constraints were replaced by zero (i.e. not
important). Missing job characteristics, typically due to unavailability in certain labor market states, were replaced by their
respective medians.




                                                                 42
            Table 9. Subjective causal effect on P70 of job characteristics and other factors
                                                                     Probability of working past age 70
                                                                                                                      Subjective
                                                                          Without                  With
                                                        N                                                            causal effect,
                                                                         condition               condition
                                                                                                                       ([3] - [2])
  Panel A: Job characteristics                         [1]                   [2]                      [3]                   [4]
A.1. Employer offers flexible schedule                656                   17.2                     32.2                  15.0
A.2. Job not stressful                                990                   33.4                     44.6                  11.2
A.3. Job requires no physical effort                  975                   33.3                     44.3                  11.0
A.4. Become self-employed                             712                   27.7                     38.5                  10.8
A.5. Short commute                                    243                   29.3                     38.3                   9.1
A.6. Work from home                                   989                   30.5                     39.3                   8.9
A.7. Job requires no concentration                    972                   33.4                     41.4                   8.0
A.8. Switch to part-time at current emp.              543                   31.4                     35.6                   4.2
 Panel B: Other factors
B.1. Health: good or better                           1018                  18.5                     39.5                  21.0
B.2. Wealth: $500k more                               1007                  32.6                     16.4                 -16.2
B.3. Wage: 20% more                                   338                   27.1                     37.2                  10.1
B.4. Longevity: 10 more years                         662                   31.2                     32.6                   1.4
Notes: Weighted statistics. Each row is restricted to 50-69-year-old workers with non-missing subjective causal effect estimates.
Those who answered "Don't know" or skipped any relevant questions were dropped from the analysis. (1) is only available for
employees who reported less than 100% probability that their employer would allow them to flexibly choose their hours. (4) is
only available for employees who reported a less than 100% probability of ever becoming self-employed. (5) is only available for
workers who commute at least an hour a day. (8) is only available for full-time employees who reported less than 100% chance
that they will switch to a part-time job at their current employers. (11) is only available for a random third of the sample. (12) is
only available for a random two thirds of the sample.




                                                                43
     Table 10. OLS regressions of the subjective causal effects on P70 of selected job characteristics
                                                 A.1.             A.2.         A.3.         A.4.         A.6.         A.7.
                                               Flexible          Job not       Not         Self-        Work         Job no
                                               schedule         stressful    physical     employ.       home        concentr.
                                                  [1]              [2]         [3]          [4]          [5]           [6]
Job constraints that will be important (1 if
yes, 0 otherwise)
Health problems                                 6.372            -0.751       -2.196       -3.795       0.770        -0.379
                                                [3.300]*         [2.069]      [2.090]      [3.823]      [2.064]      [2.079]
Caretaking                                      -4.992           -1.825       0.452        7.540        2.433        -0.731
                                                [3.340]          [2.134]      [2.157]      [3.906]*     [2.123]      [2.129]
Job demands                                     -5.623           7.766        7.257        9.208        -2.412       7.037
                                                [3.407]*        [2.075]***   [2.089]***   [3.912]**     [2.069]     [2.084]***
Employer willingness                            3.093            0.891        2.850        4.538        2.059        3.496
                                                [3.481]          [2.411]      [2.420]      [4.136]      [2.391]      [2.404]
Business conditions                             7.657            3.319        -0.118       -5.325       -2.976       1.525
                                               [3.568]**         [2.264]      [2.293]      [4.102]      [2.266]      [2.263]
Current job features (0-1 scale)
Current job cognitive score                     11.575           7.475        2.032        1.904        -3.102       4.956
                                                [7.776]          [4.846]      [4.906]      [8.893]      [4.754]      [4.844]
Current job physical score                      -8.034           -0.469       -2.166       -8.493       0.125        -1.201
                                                [5.090]          [3.091]      [3.106]      [5.997]      [3.064]      [3.113]
Current job social score                       -14.885           -0.893       5.141        -6.880       -0.703       2.960
                                               [7.529]**         [4.744]      [4.745]      [8.638]      [4.660]      [4.764]
Availability of job characteristics
Employer would allow part-time                  0.053            -0.064       -0.065       -0.078       -0.002       -0.034
                                                [0.048]          [0.033]*    [0.033]**     [0.053]      [0.033]      [0.033]
Employer would allow flexible hours             0.204            0.031        -0.006       0.058        0.000        -0.009
                                               [0.052]***        [0.031]      [0.031]      [0.052]      [0.031]      [0.030]
Can work from home                              -6.146           -7.390       -9.734       -7.168       -9.402       -7.684
                                                [3.354]*        [2.163]***   [2.145]***    [3.789]*    [2.123]***   [2.148]***
Commute less than 60 min a day                  1.291            1.152        2.273        -0.262       2.345        3.316
                                                [2.902]          [1.860]      [1.878]      [3.275]      [1.849]      [1.868]*
Female                                          -7.402           2.790        1.104        0.454        1.766        3.607
                                               [3.123]**         [1.999]      [2.010]      [3.600]      [1.987]      [1.998]*
High school or less                               ref.            ref.         ref.         ref.         ref.         ref.
Some college                                    -6.737           9.981        6.624        9.027        0.111        7.726
                                                [3.842]*        [2.485]***   [2.497]***   [4.378]**     [2.451]     [2.492]***
College or more                                 -2.914           8.540        5.909        14.149       0.394        5.978
                                                [4.138]         [2.577]***   [2.608]**    [4.626]***    [2.561]     [2.584]**
Health excellent                                1.526            -3.409       -3.546       -6.187       -4.311       -4.851
                                                [4.857]          [3.076]      [3.122]      [5.521]      [3.081]      [3.064]
Health very good                                1.125            -3.883       -5.326       -9.603       2.789        -4.843
                                                [3.184]          [2.060]*    [2.071]**    [3.657]***    [2.054]     [2.057]**
Health good                                       ref.             ref.         ref.         ref.         ref.        ref.
Health fair                                     -1.409           -8.841       -4.474       -8.309       -1.683      -12.374


                                                           44
                                                         [5.857]         [3.591]**    [3.629]       [6.721]        [3.574]     [3.586]***
Health poor                                              -9.501          -14.579      -14.810      -10.384        10.334        -12.042
                                                         [16.677]         [7.683]*    [7.660]*      [17.595]       [7.606]       [7.540]
Log family income                                        -1.831           -3.413      -1.303        -1.094         0.802         -2.570
                                                         [2.738]         [1.517]**    [1.524]       [3.148]        [1.488]      [1.544]*
Full-time employee                                         ref.            ref.        ref.          ref.           ref.          ref.
Part-time employee                                       -0.160           3.905       3.927         13.578        -7.257         4.975
                                                         [4.254]          [2.826]     [2.857]     [4.946]***     [2.740]***     [2.802]*
Full-time self-employed                                      -            -3.406      -1.600           -           2.144         -2.273
                                                             -            [3.550]     [3.519]           -          [3.477]       [3.583]
Part-time self-employed                                      -            1.592       1.936            -          -0.260         2.168
                                                             -            [4.083]     [4.090]           -          [4.024]       [4.067]
Number series score                                      -0.126           -1.521      -1.390         2.211         2.456         -1.092
                                                         [1.617]          [1.016]     [1.022]       [1.829]      [1.020]**       [1.010]
Neuroticism                                               2.456           -1.525      -0.495         1.182         2.380         -1.897
                                                         [1.509]          [0.977]     [0.967]       [1.727]      [0.963]**      [0.965]**
Extroversion                                              2.632           0.462       0.312         -3.603        -1.714         2.395
                                                         [1.860]          [1.199]     [1.207]       [2.142]*       [1.198]      [1.191]**
Agreeableness                                            -2.958           0.838       0.314         -0.758         2.463         0.014
                                                         [1.724]*         [1.097]     [1.102]       [1.988]      [1.083]**       [1.106]
Conscientiousness                                        -1.882           1.965       1.005         -0.575        -1.712         1.251
                                                         [1.645]          [1.030]*    [1.036]       [1.870]       [1.021]*       [1.039]
Openness                                                  2.062           -1.739      0.464          2.593         2.739         -2.476
                                                         [1.687]          [1.076]     [1.091]       [1.982]      [1.070]**      [1.083]**
Constant                                                 35.919           37.549      20.269        22.348         4.874        24.856
                                                         [30.594]        [17.264]**   [17.357]      [35.287]      [16.962]      [17.460]
Age, race, marital status controls                        YES             YES         YES            YES           YES           YES
R-squared                                                 0.129           0.134       0.125          0.116         0.080         0.143
N                                                          656             990         975            712           989           972
   Notes: Weighted statistics. See Table 9 for definitions and sample restrictions. A handful of missing job constraints were replaced
   by zero (i.e. not important). Missing job characteristics, typically due to unavailability in certain labor market states, were
   replaced by their respective medians.




                                                                    45
Appendix A: Full output of the regression models


           Table A1. OLS regressions of the subjective probability of working past age 70
                                              [1]          [2]          [3]          [4]          [5]
Job constraints that will be important
Health problems                                          -2.086                                 -1.688
                                                         [2.071]                                [2.066]
Caretaking                                               3.338                                  3.592
                                                         [2.158]                                [2.140]*
Job demands                                              -8.976                                 -9.523
                                                        [2.035]***                             [2.074]***
Employer willingness                                     -0.064                                 1.216
                                                         [2.364]                                [2.377]
Business conditions                                      4.603                                  5.933
                                                        [2.275]**                              [2.282]***
Current and future job features
Future job cognitive score                                            24.119                    22.159
                                                                     [5.091]***                [5.094]***
Current job cognitive score                                           -5.868                    -1.893
                                                                      [4.937]                   [4.938]
Future job physical score                                             -6.212                    -8.426
                                                                      [4.431]                   [4.380]*
Current job physical score                                            4.367                     7.954
                                                                      [3.260]                  [3.355]**
Future job social score                                               7.186                     7.253
                                                                      [5.336]                   [5.258]
Current job social score                                              4.819                     1.936
                                                                      [5.077]                   [5.041]
Availability of job characteristics
Employer would allow part-time                                                     0.049         0.06
                                                                                   [0.033]      [0.033]*
Employer would allow flexible hours                                                0.084        0.077
                                                                                  [0.031]***   [0.031]**
Can work from home                                                                 2.281        -0.647
                                                                                   [2.067]      [2.133]
Commute less than 60 min a day                                                     5.123        5.323
                                                                                  [1.862]***   [1.847]***
Female                                       -5.181      -5.391       -3.929       -5.584       -4.048
                                           [1.977]***   [1.974]***    [2.037]*    [1.971]***   [2.032]**
Black                                        -1.427       -0.58       -0.952       -1.789       0.144
                                             [3.230]     [3.202]      [3.259]      [3.217]      [3.231]
Other race                                   -9.489     -11.534       -7.513       -8.302       -8.874
                                            [3.783]**   [3.787]***   [3.768]**    [3.771]**    [3.759]**
Hispanic                                     -7.373      -7.616       -6.787       -6.582        -6.53


                                                 46
                          [2.710]***   [2.711]***   [2.725]**    [2.693]**    [2.707]**
Age 50-54                    ref.         ref.         ref.         ref.         ref.
Age 55-59                  -0.726       -0.971       -0.701       -1.128       -1.523
                           [1.989]      [1.992]      [1.972]      [1.981]      [1.979]
Age 60-64                  -0.758       -0.935       -0.563       -1.761       -1.651
                           [3.070]      [3.044]      [3.045]      [3.057]      [3.008]
Age 65-69                  25.965       24.795       26.923       25.171       24.821
                          [4.131]***   [4.117]***   [4.116]***   [4.103]***   [4.086]***
High school or less          ref.        ref.         ref.         ref.         ref.
Some college                 2.2        1.874        0.818        1.565        0.421
                           [2.451]      [2.427]      [2.482]      [2.437]      [2.439]
College or more            4.269        3.411        1.847        3.478        0.997
                           [2.476]*     [2.460]      [2.653]      [2.474]      [2.615]
Married                     ref.         ref.         ref.         ref.         ref.
Divorced/separated         4.783         5.03        4.508        4.935        5.348
                           [2.505]*    [2.491]**     [2.491]*    [2.491]**    [2.465]**
Widowed                    16.649       18.411       16.534       14.733       15.744
                          [6.285]***   [6.240]***   [6.273]***   [6.254]**    [6.191]**
Never married              -4.312       -5.071        -4.61       -3.983       -4.835
                           [3.492]      [3.488]      [3.477]      [3.458]      [3.443]
Health excellent           0.236        0.399        0.478        -0.448       0.073
                           [3.160]      [3.127]      [3.140]      [3.135]      [3.086]
Health very good           3.007         2.99          3.4        2.999        3.707
                           [2.076]      [2.058]      [2.068]      [2.063]      [2.040]*
Health good                  ref.         ref.        ref.         ref.         ref.
Health fair                -0.153       -0.516       0.379        0.021        0.101
                           [3.611]      [3.599]      [3.593]      [3.618]      [3.580]
Health poor                1.238        3.223        2.215        -1.035       2.346
                           [7.893]      [7.886]      [7.850]      [7.828]      [7.795]
Log family income          -7.554       -7.567       -7.328       -8.072       -7.086
                          [1.453]***   [1.448]***   [1.504]***   [1.471]***   [1.511]***
Full-time employee          ref.          ref.         ref.        ref.         ref.
Part-time employee        -10.275       -9.747       -9.971      -12.089      -10.772
                          [2.728]***   [2.708]***   [2.768]***   [2.752]***   [2.760]***
Full-time self-employed    9.331        8.946        9.847        6.936        8.466
                          [3.423]***   [3.430]***   [3.439]***   [3.502]**    [3.551]**
Part-time self-employed    -2.179       -2.335       -2.361       -4.102        -2.51
                           [3.966]      [3.936]      [3.959]      [4.059]      [4.042]
Number series score        1.757        2.197         1.41        1.724        1.811
                           [1.029]*    [1.021]**     [1.026]      [1.023]*     [1.015]*
Neuroticism                -0.286        -0.23       -0.118       -0.085       -0.046
                           [0.969]      [0.966]      [0.976]      [0.963]      [0.969]
Extroversion               -1.052       -0.937       -1.527       -1.358       -1.989
                           [1.202]      [1.190]      [1.223]      [1.199]      [1.204]*
Agreeableness              1.919        1.507         1.67        1.959        1.299
                           [1.103]*     [1.099]      [1.115]      [1.092]*     [1.101]
Conscientiousness          -2.335       -2.273       -2.278       -2.229       -2.058


                               47
                                               [1.037]**          [1.028]**        [1.035]**        [1.027]**      [1.020]**
   Openness                                       3.371             3.356           2.305            3.157          2.216
                                               [1.081]***      [1.078]***          [1.111]**       [1.082]***      [1.100]**
   Constant                                    117.631            121.046           97.185          115.336         87.948
                                               [16.280]**      [16.396]**          [17.515]**      [16.547]**      [17.821]**
                                                    *               *                   *               *               *
   R-squared                                      0.131             0.155           0.155            0.152          0.197




   Table A2. OLS regressions of the subjective causal effects of selected job characteristics on the
                                 probability of working past age 70
                                           A.1.            A.2.             A.3.          A.4.            A.6.           A.7.
                                         Flexible      Job not           Not             Self-           Work          Job no
                                         schedule     stressful        physical         employ.          home         concentr.
                                            [1]          [2]             [3]              [4]             [5]            [6]
Job constraints that will be important
(1 if yes, 0 otherwise)
Health problems                           6.372        -0.751           -2.196           -3.795          0.770         -0.379
                                          [3.300]*        [2.069]        [2.090]         [3.823]         [2.064]        [2.079]
Caretaking                                -4.992       -1.825            0.452           7.540           2.433         -0.731
                                          [3.340]         [2.134]        [2.157]         [3.906]*        [2.123]        [2.129]
Job demands                               -5.623          7.766          7.257           9.208           -2.412         7.037
                                          [3.407]*    [2.075]***       [2.089]***       [3.912]**        [2.069]      [2.084]***
Employer willingness                      3.093           0.891          2.850           4.538           2.059          3.496
                                          [3.481]         [2.411]        [2.420]         [4.136]         [2.391]        [2.404]
Business conditions                       7.657           3.319         -0.118           -5.325          -2.976         1.525
                                         [3.568]**        [2.264]        [2.293]         [4.102]         [2.266]        [2.263]
Current job features (0-1 scale)
Current job cognitive score               11.575          7.475          2.032           1.904           -3.102         4.956
                                          [7.776]         [4.846]        [4.906]         [8.893]         [4.754]        [4.844]
Current job physical score                -8.034       -0.469           -2.166           -8.493          0.125         -1.201
                                          [5.090]         [3.091]        [3.106]         [5.997]         [3.064]        [3.113]
Current job social score                 -14.885       -0.893            5.141           -6.880          -0.703         2.960
                                         [7.529]**        [4.744]        [4.745]         [8.638]         [4.660]        [4.764]
Availability of job characteristics
Employer would allow part-time            0.053        -0.064           -0.065           -0.078          -0.002        -0.034
                                          [0.048]      [0.033]*        [0.033]**         [0.053]         [0.033]        [0.033]
Employer would allow flexible hours       0.204           0.031         -0.006           0.058           0.000         -0.009
                                         [0.052]***       [0.031]        [0.031]         [0.052]         [0.031]        [0.030]
Can work from home                        -6.146       -7.390           -9.734           -7.168          -9.402        -7.684
                                          [3.354]*    [2.163]***       [2.145]***        [3.789]*      [2.123]***     [2.148]***
Commute less than 60 min a day            1.291           1.152          2.273           -0.262          2.345          3.316
                                          [2.902]         [1.860]        [1.878]         [3.275]         [1.849]       [1.868]*
Female                                    -7.402          2.790          1.104           0.454           1.766          3.607
                                         [3.123]**        [1.999]        [2.010]         [3.600]         [1.987]       [1.998]*



                                                      48
Black                      20.191       -1.392       -0.717       4.640        3.444        -0.557
                          [5.203]***    [3.230]      [3.262]      [5.726]      [3.179]      [3.208]
Other race                 11.563       11.571       14.718       1.872        0.570        11.702
                          [5.794]**    [3.792]***   [4.064]***    [6.269]      [3.810]     [4.012]***
Hispanic                   -3.707       8.985        9.226        0.650        -1.366       9.376
                           [4.229]     [2.766]***   [2.736]***    [4.834]      [2.701]     [2.755]***
Age 50-54                    ref.        ref.         ref.         ref.          ref.        ref.
Age 55-59                  -2.179       2.154        0.053        2.041        -1.333       1.544
                           [3.136]      [2.007]      [2.010]      [3.546]      [1.980]      [1.999]
Age 60-64                  3.650        6.726        3.960        5.595        2.882        2.940
                           [4.835]     [3.022]**     [3.043]      [5.364]      [2.969]      [3.019]
Age 65-69                  -1.731       -8.879       -9.233      -23.970       -0.992      -15.647
                           [7.918]     [4.080]**    [4.142]**    [8.358]***    [4.072]     [4.051]***
High school or less          ref.        ref.         ref.         ref.         ref.         ref.
Some college               -6.737       9.981        6.624        9.027        0.111        7.726
                           [3.842]*    [2.485]***   [2.497]***   [4.378]**     [2.451]     [2.492]***
College or more            -2.914       8.540        5.909        14.149       0.394        5.978
                           [4.138]     [2.577]***   [2.608]**    [4.626]***    [2.561]     [2.584]**
Married                      ref.         ref.        ref.          ref.         ref.        ref.
Divorced/separated         -2.627       -1.320       1.200        -0.733       -2.938       1.661
                           [3.939]      [2.528]      [2.560]      [4.482]      [2.473]      [2.523]
Widowed                    21.453       -5.907       -5.465      -10.291       6.034        -3.325
                          [9.265]**     [6.201]      [6.230]      [10.842]     [6.043]      [6.189]
Never married              -9.135       -1.242       -2.541       9.182        7.363        -0.729
                           [5.339]*     [3.368]      [3.404]      [6.130]     [3.371]**     [3.562]
Health excellent           1.526        -3.409       -3.546       -6.187       -4.311       -4.851
                           [4.857]      [3.076]      [3.122]      [5.521]      [3.081]      [3.064]
Health very good           1.125        -3.883       -5.326       -9.603       2.789        -4.843
                           [3.184]      [2.060]*    [2.071]**    [3.657]***    [2.054]     [2.057]**
Health good                  ref.         ref.         ref.         ref.         ref.        ref.
Health fair                -1.409       -8.841       -4.474       -8.309       -1.683      -12.374
                           [5.857]     [3.591]**     [3.629]      [6.721]      [3.574]     [3.586]***
Health poor                -9.501      -14.579      -14.810      -10.384       10.334      -12.042
                           [16.677]     [7.683]*     [7.660]*     [17.595]     [7.606]      [7.540]
Log family income          -1.831       -3.413       -1.303       -1.094       0.802        -2.570
                           [2.738]     [1.517]**     [1.524]      [3.148]      [1.488]      [1.544]*
Full-time employee           ref.        ref.         ref.         ref.          ref.        ref.
Part-time employee         -0.160       3.905        3.927        13.578       -7.257       4.975
                           [4.254]      [2.826]      [2.857]     [4.946]***   [2.740]***    [2.802]*
Full-time self-employed       -         -3.406       -1.600          -         2.144        -2.273
                              -         [3.550]      [3.519]         -         [3.477]      [3.583]
Part-time self-employed       -         1.592        1.936           -         -0.260       2.168
                              -         [4.083]      [4.090]         -         [4.024]      [4.067]
Number series score        -0.126       -1.521       -1.390       2.211        2.456        -1.092
                           [1.617]      [1.016]      [1.022]      [1.829]     [1.020]**     [1.010]
Neuroticism                2.456        -1.525       -0.495       1.182        2.380        -1.897
                           [1.509]      [0.977]      [0.967]      [1.727]     [0.963]**    [0.965]**


                                       49
Extroversion                                        2.632         0.462       0.312      -3.603     -1.714       2.395
                                                    [1.860]       [1.199]     [1.207]    [2.142]*    [1.198]    [1.191]**
Agreeableness                                       -2.958        0.838       0.314      -0.758      2.463       0.014
                                                   [1.724]*       [1.097]     [1.102]    [1.988]    [1.083]**    [1.106]
Conscientiousness                                   -1.882        1.965       1.005      -0.575     -1.712       1.251
                                                    [1.645]      [1.030]*     [1.036]    [1.870]    [1.021]*     [1.039]
Openness                                            2.062         -1.739      0.464      2.593       2.739      -2.476
                                                    [1.687]       [1.076]     [1.091]    [1.982]    [1.070]**   [1.083]**
Constant                                           35.919        37.549       20.269     22.348      4.874      24.856
                                                   [30.594]     [17.264]**    [17.357]   [35.287]   [16.962]    [17.460]
R-squared                                           0.129         0.134       0.125      0.116       0.080       0.143
N                                                    656           990         975        712         989         972
 Notes: ALP, weighted. See Table 9 for definitions and sample restrictions.




                                                               50
        Appendix B: Additional tables


                       Table B1. Reported ratings (0-10) of different work-to-retirement pathways
                                                                                                                                     Not
                                                 All        Males      Females        Employees             Self-employed          currently
                                                                                                                                   working
                                                                                   Full-t.    Part-t.       Full-t.      Part-t.
Work full time, retire at age 62                 5.60        5.59         5.60      5.98       4.80          4.69         3.84       5.75
Work full time, retire at age 65                 5.32        5.15         5.49      5.74       4.32          4.63         3.78       5.42
Work full time, retire at age 70                 4.08        3.94         4.22      4.18       3.70          4.76         3.74       3.96
Start part time at 62, retire at 65              4.51        4.18         4.84      4.78       4.32          4.97         4.31       4.01
Start part time at 62, retire at 70              4.02        3.72         4.33      3.97       4.37          4.25         3.95       3.91
Start part time at 65, retire at 70              3.98        3.67         4.30      4.11       4.12          4.05         4.11       3.64
Start self-emp. at 62, retire at 70              3.74        3.72         3.76      3.65       3.13          5.61         5.00       3.57
Never retire                                     2.80        2.78         2.83      2.46       3.55          4.64         3.30       2.59
Stop work at 62, start 65, stop 70               3.02        2.82         3.22      3.11       3.28          2.15         2.93       2.94
        Note: ALP, age 50-80, N = 2,013. Weighted averages.




                        Table B2. OLS regressions of the preferred work-to-retirement pathways

                                               Full-time         Some            Some self-      Never
                                                to retire       part-time          emp.          retire       Unretire
                                                   [1]             [2]              [3]           [4]           [5]
          Female                                 -0.053              0.105        -0.013         -0.054         0.014
                                                [0.024]**       [0.021]***         [0.013]     [0.015]***      [0.010]
          Black                                  -0.027             -0.007         0.012         -0.066         0.088
                                                 [0.040]             [0.034]       [0.021]     [0.025]***     [0.016]***
          Other race                             -0.010              0.040         0.036         -0.065        -0.001
                                                 [0.050]             [0.043]       [0.026]      [0.031]**      [0.020]
          Hispanic                               -0.053              0.047         0.009         -0.017         0.014
                                                 [0.032]*           [0.028]*       [0.017]       [0.020]       [0.013]
          Age 50-54                                ref.               ref.          ref.          ref.           ref.
          Age 55-59                               0.078             -0.055        -0.037         0.050         -0.036
                                                [0.027]***          [0.023]**    [0.014]***    [0.017]***     [0.011]***
          Age 60-64                               0.029             -0.023        -0.038         0.044         -0.012
                                                 [0.038]             [0.032]      [0.020]*      [0.024]*       [0.015]
          Age 65-69                               0.022             -0.046        -0.073         0.078          0.018
                                                 [0.044]             [0.038]     [0.023]***    [0.028]***      [0.018]
          Age 70-74                               0.039             -0.110        -0.086         0.143          0.014
                                                 [0.051]            [0.044]**    [0.027]***    [0.032]***      [0.020]



                                                                       51
Age 75-80                          0.023        -0.083       -0.070       0.119        0.010
                                   [0.066]      [0.057]     [0.035]**    [0.042]***    [0.026]
High school or less                  ref.         ref.        ref.         ref.         ref.
Some college                       -0.037       -0.091       0.047        0.073        0.008
                                   [0.029]     [0.025]***   [0.016]***   [0.019]***    [0.012]
College or more                    -0.058       -0.080       0.041        0.111        -0.013
                                   [0.032]*    [0.027]***   [0.017]**    [0.020]***    [0.013]
Married                              ref.        ref.          ref.        ref.          ref.
Divorced/separated                 -0.009       0.035        -0.008       0.011        -0.029
                                   [0.031]      [0.026]      [0.016]      [0.019]     [0.012]**
Widowed                            -0.096       0.091        -0.013       0.015        0.003
                                   [0.055]*     [0.047]*     [0.029]      [0.034]      [0.022]
Never married                      0.010        0.006        0.013        -0.029       -0.001
                                   [0.042]      [0.036]      [0.022]      [0.026]      [0.017]
Health excellent                   0.003        -0.042       -0.038       0.035        0.042
                                   [0.040]      [0.035]      [0.022]*     [0.025]     [0.016]***
Health very good                   0.035        -0.033       -0.008       -0.028       0.034
                                   [0.026]      [0.022]      [0.014]      [0.016]*    [0.010]***
Health good                         ref.          ref.         ref.        ref.          ref.
Health fair                        0.074        -0.088       -0.033       0.049        -0.002
                                   [0.038]*    [0.033]***    [0.020]     [0.024]**     [0.015]
Health poor                        -0.062       -0.028       -0.080       0.068        0.102
                                   [0.066]      [0.057]     [0.035]**     [0.042]     [0.026]***
Log family income                  0.034        0.008        0.006        -0.040       -0.008
                                  [0.017]**     [0.014]      [0.009]     [0.011]***    [0.007]
Full-time employee                   ref.        ref.         ref.          ref.        ref.
Part-time employee                 -0.152       0.119        0.045        -0.034       0.023
                                  [0.037]***   [0.032]***   [0.020]**     [0.023]      [0.015]
Full-time self-employed            -0.214       -0.069       0.187        0.119        -0.023
                                  [0.047]***    [0.041]*    [0.025]***   [0.030]***    [0.019]
Part-time self-employed            -0.259       -0.011       0.246        -0.004       0.028
                                  [0.056]***    [0.048]     [0.030]***    [0.035]      [0.022]
Not working                        0.061        0.011        0.052        -0.090       -0.033
                                   [0.033]*     [0.029]     [0.018]***   [0.021]***   [0.013]**
Cognitive job (current or last)    0.102        0.013        -0.001       -0.103       -0.011
                                   [0.056]*     [0.048]      [0.030]     [0.035]***    [0.022]
Physical job (current or last)     -0.037       -0.019       0.022        0.023        0.011
                                   [0.035]      [0.031]      [0.019]      [0.022]      [0.014]
Social job (current or last)       0.072        -0.056       -0.049       0.046        -0.012
                                   [0.056]      [0.048]      [0.030]*     [0.035]      [0.022]
Number series score                -0.063       0.062        0.016        -0.013       -0.003
                                  [0.012]***   [0.010]***   [0.006]**     [0.008]*     [0.005]
Neuroticism                        0.003        0.020        -0.014       -0.018       0.009
                                   [0.012]     [0.010]**    [0.006]**    [0.008]**     [0.005]*
Extroversion                       -0.017       0.001        -0.011       0.024        0.002
                                   [0.015]      [0.013]      [0.008]     [0.009]***    [0.006]
Agreeableness                      0.007        -0.007       0.012        -0.003       -0.009


                                                  52
                                             [0.013]          [0.012]          [0.007]          [0.008]         [0.005]*
 Conscientiousness                            0.011           0.028            -0.023           -0.019           0.004
                                             [0.012]         [0.011]**       [0.007]***        [0.008]**         [0.005]
 Openness                                    -0.043           0.013            0.013            0.008            0.010
                                           [0.013]***         [0.011]         [0.007]*          [0.008]         [0.005]*
 Constant                                     0.096           0.223            0.016            0.539            0.126
                                             [0.192]          [0.165]          [0.102]         [0.121]***       [0.076]*
 R-squared                                    0.080           0.069            0.091            0.082            0.058
Notes: ALP, age 50-80, N = 2,013. Weighted. *,**, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
The outcome variables are indicators that the person gave the highest rating for the particular pathway. Table 2 provides details
of the variables. "Full-time to retire" refers to any of the "Work full time, then retire at age X" type pathways. "Some part -time"
refers to any of the "Start part time at X, then retire at Y" type pathways. "Some self-emp." refers to "Start self-emp. at 62, then
retire at 70." "Unretire" refers to "Stop work at 62, start at 65, stop at 70."




                                Table B3. Current and future job features by sector
                                                       Private sector                     Public sector                  Non-profit sector
                                                   current         future            current         future            current         future
                                                     job            job                job            job                job            job
 Cognitive job features
 Monitor information                                0.771          0.543              0.738          0.518              0.827          0.602
 Thinking                                           0.735          0.569              0.781          0.542              0.789          0.673
 Variety of skills                                  0.821          0.674              0.761          0.625              0.888          0.719
 High level skills                                  0.601          0.519              0.612          0.512              0.696          0.561
 Not simple tasks                                   0.589          0.448              0.571          0.376              0.619          0.470
 Solve problems                                     0.554          0.595              0.519          0.559              0.613          0.621
   Average cognitive                                0.678          0.558              0.664          0.522              0.738          0.608
 Physical job features
 Muscular strength                                  0.289          0.129              0.324          0.164              0.208          0.149
 Physical effort                                    0.383          0.226              0.384          0.206              0.351          0.175
   Average physical                                 0.336          0.177              0.354          0.185              0.279          0.162
 Social job features
 Coworkers friendly                                 0.771          0.867              0.760          0.851              0.755          0.896
 Can get to know other people                       0.799          0.765              0.822          0.751              0.848          0.812
 Can develop friendships                            0.573          0.634              0.616          0.644              0.659          0.656
 Coworkers take personal interest                   0.602          0.614              0.564          0.599              0.648          0.648
   Average social                                   0.686          0.720              0.691          0.711              0.727          0.753
 Other job features
 Comfortable temperature                            0.683          0.788              0.649          0.757              0.707          0.694
 Flexible schedule                                  0.595          0.712              0.514          0.677              0.531          0.672
Note: ALP, age 50-80, workers with non-missing imputed sector information. N = 864. Survey MS487 did not ask about
workers' sector. This table imputes sectors from the closest ALP surveys from MS457, MS444, or MS436. Weighted averages.




                                                                 53
   Table B4. OLS regressions of the difference between desired future and current actual job
                                            features
                              Cognitive    Physical      Social
                                [1]          [2]          [3]
Female                         -0.038       0.025        0.007
                              [0.014]***    [0.019]      [0.013]
Black                           0.067       0.046        -0.067
                              [0.023]***    [0.031]     [0.021]***
Other race                     -0.077       -0.040       0.011
                              [0.028]***    [0.038]      [0.026]
Hispanic                       -0.020       -0.089       -0.075
                               [0.019]     [0.026]***   [0.018]***
Age 50-54                        ref.         ref.        ref.
Age 55-59                      -0.006       -0.004       0.001
                               [0.015]      [0.020]      [0.014]
Age 60-64                      -0.004       -0.010       -0.006
                               [0.022]      [0.030]      [0.021]
Age 65-69                      -0.059       -0.021       -0.025
                               [0.030]*     [0.041]      [0.028]
Age 70-74                      -0.039       0.055        0.004
                               [0.040]      [0.054]      [0.037]
Age 75-80                      -0.065       0.054        0.112
                               [0.064]      [0.087]      [0.060]*
High school or less              ref.        ref.         ref.
Some college                    0.020       0.035        0.015
                               [0.018]      [0.024]      [0.016]
College or more                 0.034       0.132        0.027
                               [0.018]*    [0.024]***    [0.017]
Married                          ref.        ref.          ref.
Divorced/separated              0.008       0.019        -0.025
                               [0.018]      [0.024]      [0.017]
Widowed                         0.053       -0.101       0.053
                               [0.039]      [0.053]*     [0.037]
Never married                  -0.011       0.070        -0.035
                               [0.024]     [0.033]**     [0.023]
Health excellent                0.034       0.100        -0.002
                               [0.022]     [0.030]***    [0.021]
Health very good                0.015       0.026        -0.005
                               [0.015]      [0.020]      [0.014]
Health good                      ref.         ref.         ref.
Health fair                    -0.057       -0.034       -0.034
                              [0.025]**     [0.034]      [0.024]
Health poor                     0.066       -0.066       0.082
                               [0.055]      [0.074]      [0.051]
Log family income              -0.047       0.043        -0.053
                              [0.010]***   [0.014]***   [0.010]***



                                               54
 Full-time employee                       ref.           ref.        ref.
 Part-time employee                      0.099         -0.014       0.025
                                       [0.019]***       [0.025]     [0.018]
 Full-time self-employed                 0.000         -0.028       0.022
                                         [0.024]        [0.033]     [0.023]
 Part-time self-employed                 0.098         -0.001       0.016
                                       [0.028]***       [0.038]     [0.026]
 Private Sector                            ref.          ref.         ref.
 Public sector                           -0.021        -0.006       -0.014
                                         [0.017]        [0.023]     [0.016]
 Non-profit sector                       -0.011         0.008       -0.013
                                         [0.027]        [0.036]     [0.025]
 Works, sector missing                   -0.012        -0.017       -0.026
                                         [0.016]        [0.022]     [0.015]*
 Number series score                     0.021         -0.005       0.006
                                       [0.007]***       [0.010]     [0.007]
 Neuroticism                             -0.011        -0.007       0.027
                                         [0.007]        [0.009]    [0.007]***
 Extroversion                            -0.020        -0.064       -0.008
                                        [0.009]**     [0.012]***    [0.008]
 Agreeableness                           -0.006         0.022       0.026
                                         [0.008]      [0.011]**    [0.007]***
 Conscientiousness                       -0.010         0.028       -0.016
                                         [0.007]      [0.010]***   [0.007]**
 Openness                                0.014          0.012       0.000
                                        [0.008]*        [0.010]     [0.007]
 Constant                                0.384         -0.724       0.639
                                       [0.114]***     [0.155]***   [0.107]***
 R-squared                               0.097          0.149       0.096
Notes: ALP, age 50-80, Working for pay, N = 1,288. Weighted.




                                                           55
                Table B5. OLS regressions of current and desired future job features
                                   Cognitive job              Physical job               Social job
                                 current    future         current     future        current     future
                                   [1]        [2]            [3]         [4]           [5]         [5]
Female                           -0.033       -0.073       -0.107       -0.083       0.010        0.015
                                [0.012]***   [0.012]***   [0.019]***   [0.014]***    [0.012]      [0.011]
Black                            -0.100       -0.035       -0.002       0.044        0.069        0.003
                                [0.019]***    [0.019]*     [0.030]      [0.023]*    [0.019]***    [0.018]
Other race                       0.012        -0.065       0.027        -0.016       -0.034      -0.028
                                 [0.024]     [0.023]***    [0.037]      [0.028]      [0.024]      [0.022]
Hispanic                         -0.035       -0.054       0.028        -0.061       0.040       -0.034
                                [0.016]**    [0.016]***    [0.025]     [0.019]***   [0.016]**    [0.015]**
Age 50-54                          ref.         ref.         ref.         ref.        ref.         ref.
Age 55-59                        -0.008       -0.013       -0.001       -0.005       0.022        0.024
                                 [0.012]      [0.012]      [0.019]      [0.015]      [0.012]*    [0.012]**
Age 60-64                        -0.023       -0.028       -0.026       -0.035       0.024        0.018
                                 [0.019]      [0.019]      [0.030]      [0.022]      [0.019]      [0.018]
Age 65-69                        0.010        -0.049       -0.072       -0.094       0.024       -0.002
                                 [0.025]      [0.025]*     [0.040]*    [0.030]***    [0.025]      [0.024]
Age 70-74                        -0.031       -0.070       -0.125       -0.072       0.051        0.053
                                 [0.033]     [0.033]**    [0.052]**     [0.040]*     [0.033]     [0.032]*
Age 75-80                        -0.022       -0.089       -0.139       -0.095       -0.088       0.011
                                 [0.053]      [0.053]*     [0.084]*     [0.064]      [0.054]      [0.051]
High school or less               ref.         ref.          ref.         ref.         ref.        ref.
Some college                     0.046        0.067        -0.102       -0.066       -0.001       0.015
                                [0.015]***   [0.015]***   [0.023]***   [0.018]***    [0.015]      [0.014]
College or more                  0.102        0.137        -0.214       -0.080       -0.011       0.017
                                [0.015]***   [0.015]***   [0.024]***   [0.018]***    [0.015]      [0.014]
Married                           ref.         ref.         ref.         ref.          ref.        ref.
Divorced/separated               0.012        0.020        0.006        0.025        -0.001      -0.026
                                 [0.015]      [0.015]      [0.023]      [0.018]      [0.015]     [0.014]*
Widowed                          -0.026       0.029        -0.016       -0.117       -0.067      -0.014
                                 [0.033]      [0.033]      [0.052]     [0.039]***   [0.033]**     [0.031]
Never married                    0.071        0.059        -0.025       0.045        0.010       -0.026
                                [0.020]***   [0.020]***    [0.032]      [0.024]*     [0.020]      [0.019]
Health excellent                 -0.027       0.008        -0.015       0.085        0.001        0.000
                                 [0.019]      [0.019]      [0.030]     [0.022]***    [0.019]      [0.018]
Health very good                 -0.025       -0.008       0.015        0.042        -0.003      -0.007
                                [0.012]**     [0.012]      [0.020]     [0.015]***    [0.013]      [0.012]
Health good                       ref.          ref.         ref.         ref.         ref.        ref.
Health fair                      0.037        -0.021       -0.016       -0.050       -0.003      -0.037
                                 [0.021]*     [0.021]      [0.034]     [0.025]**     [0.021]     [0.020]*
Health poor                      -0.127       -0.062       -0.008       -0.075       -0.085      -0.003
                                [0.046]***    [0.046]      [0.073]      [0.055]      [0.046]*     [0.044]
Log family income                0.050        0.003        -0.086       -0.042       0.040       -0.013
                                [0.009]***    [0.009]     [0.013]***   [0.010]***   [0.009]***    [0.008]



                                                   56
 Full-time employee                       ref.         ref.       ref.         ref.          ref.        ref.
 Part-time employee                     -0.132       -0.034      0.018        0.004        -0.013       0.011
                                      [0.016]***    [0.016]**    [0.025]      [0.019]      [0.016]      [0.015]
 Full-time self-employed                -0.062       -0.060      0.119        0.089        0.002        0.023
                                      [0.020]***   [0.020]***   [0.032]***   [0.024]***    [0.020]      [0.019]
 Part-time self-employed                -0.105       -0.004      0.044        0.040        -0.020       -0.005
                                      [0.024]***     [0.023]     [0.037]      [0.028]      [0.024]      [0.022]
 Number series score                    0.002        0.023       -0.003       -0.008       -0.017       -0.011
                                        [0.006]    [0.006]***    [0.010]      [0.007]     [0.006]***    [0.006]*
 Neuroticism                            0.012        0.000       -0.002       -0.009       -0.028       -0.001
                                       [0.006]**     [0.006]     [0.009]      [0.007]     [0.006]***    [0.006]
 Extroversion                           0.015        -0.005      0.073        0.009        0.034        0.026
                                       [0.007]**     [0.007]    [0.011]***    [0.009]     [0.007]***   [0.007]***
 Agreeableness                          0.006        0.000       -0.020       0.002        0.021        0.047
                                        [0.007]      [0.007]     [0.011]*     [0.008]     [0.007]***   [0.006]***
 Conscientiousness                      0.022        0.013       -0.014       0.015        0.002        -0.012
                                      [0.006]***    [0.006]**    [0.010]     [0.007]**     [0.006]     [0.006]**
 Openness                               0.040        0.053       -0.008       0.004        0.001        0.000
                                      [0.006]***   [0.006]***    [0.010]      [0.008]      [0.006]      [0.006]
 Constant                               0.140        0.514       1.453        0.720        0.224        0.849
                                        [0.096]    [0.095]***   [0.151]***   [0.114]***   [0.096]**    [0.091]***
 R-squared                              0.293        0.259       0.248        0.159        0.149        0.140
Notes: ALP, Age 50-80, Working for pay, N = 1,288. Weighted.




                                                          57
             Table B6. OLS regressions of the availability of various working conditions

                                                  Flexible      Work from       Commute
                                  Part-time        hours         home             time
                                     [1]            [2]            [3]             [4]
Female                              9.658          -0.337          0.026          -3.833
                                   [3.187]***         [2.718]      [0.029]        [6.111]
Black                               -5.033            7.259        0.144          10.527
                                    [5.139]        [4.360]*      [0.046]***       [9.955]
Other race                          -7.450         -2.502          0.079          21.275
                                    [5.710]           [5.079]      [0.056]       [11.896]*
Hispanic                            -4.598            0.571        0.009          24.155
                                    [4.228]           [3.709]      [0.039]       [8.147]***
Age 50-54                            ref.              ref.         ref.            ref.
Age 55-59                           6.699             3.921       -0.079          -3.292
                                   [3.133]**          [2.671]    [0.029]***       [6.131]
Age 60-64                           12.609            7.668       -0.070          2.084
                                   [4.962]**       [4.136]*        [0.044]        [9.369]
Age 65-69                           11.530            6.492       -0.151          -0.391
                                    [8.686]           [6.372]     [0.060]**       [12.743]
High school or less                  ref.              ref.         ref.           ref.
Some college                        6.389             7.165        0.011          0.168
                                    [3.919]       [3.387]**        [0.036]        [7.576]
College or more                     3.959          13.253          0.042         -11.638
                                    [4.168]       [3.613]***       [0.038]        [18.501]
Married                               ref.             ref.         ref.           ref.
Divorced/separated                  -0.049            4.002        0.062          29.752
                                    [3.935]           [3.459]     [0.036]*      [10.326]***
Widowed                             18.671         25.363          0.067          -6.811
                                    [9.585]*      [7.717]***       [0.087]        [9.607]
Never married                       -6.210         -0.041          0.072          -7.557
                                    [5.629]           [4.700]      [0.049]        [6.387]
Health excellent                    6.777          -0.594          0.094         -20.380
                                    [5.064]           [4.352]     [0.045]**      [10.786]*
Health very good                    -2.240         -4.945          0.094         -23.338
                                    [3.260]        [2.831]*      [0.030]***       [23.238]
Health good                          ref.            ref.           ref.           ref.
Health fair                        -15.106         -11.693         0.144         -18.195
                                   [5.886]**      [4.860]**      [0.051]***      [4.529]***
Health poor                         5.767             6.956        0.104          0.000
                                    [18.262]       [11.069]        [0.110]          [.]
Log family income                   -1.731            6.751        0.082          -1.628
                                    [2.984]       [2.248]***     [0.021]***       [8.312]
Full-time employee                     -            ref.            ref.            ref.
Part-time employee                     -           20.177          0.050          -1.628
                                       -          [3.572]***       [0.039]        [8.312]
Full-time self-employed                -                 -         0.453          -1.961


                                                 58
                                  -                -      [0.049]***    [10.419]
Part-time self-employed           -                -       0.555        -19.460
                                  -                -      [0.059]***    [12.543]
Current job cognitive score   -14.229       -16.330        0.254         0.368
                               [7.844]*     [6.542]**     [0.069]***    [14.596]
Current job physical score     15.108       -4.646         -0.284       25.789
                              [5.074]***        [4.229]   [0.043]***   [9.135]***
Current job social score       20.036       15.392         -0.022       -9.465
                              [7.342]***    [6.303]**      [0.069]      [14.504]
Number series score            2.399        -2.614         0.001        -3.674
                               [1.695]      [1.408]*       [0.015]       [3.092]
Neuroticism                    -3.696       -2.741         -0.014       -3.735
                              [1.536]**     [1.311]**      [0.014]       [3.026]
Extroversion                   3.994            3.540      -0.011       14.905
                              [1.912]**     [1.654]**      [0.018]     [3.777]***
Agreeableness                  1.388            0.767      -0.016       -4.294
                               [1.688]          [1.527]    [0.016]       [3.422]
Conscientiousness              1.798        -0.429         -0.023        4.030
                               [1.706]          [1.487]    [0.015]       [3.189]
Openness                       0.434            1.483      0.062        -10.649
                               [1.676]          [1.434]   [0.016]***   [3.301]***
Constant                       43.361       -45.875        -0.697       247.072
                               [33.292]     [25.106]*     [0.240]***   [50.713]***
R-squared                      0.151            0.158      0.246         0.103
N                               647              866       1158          1154




                                           59
             Table B7. The distribution of the subjective conditional probabilities of working past age 70
                                                                              Without condition                             With condition
                                                      N               P=0        0<P<100         P=100              P=0        0<P<100        P=100
  Panel A: Job characteristics                       [1]              [2]          [3]            [4]               [5]          [6]           [7]
A.1. Employer offers flexible schedule               656             0.602         0.351          0.047            0.299         0.660        0.073
A.2. Job not stressful                               990             0.198         0.731          0.071            0.145         0.788        0.127
A.3. Job requires no physical effort                 975             0.203         0.726          0.071            0.162         0.771        0.122
A.4. Become self-employed                            712             0.329         0.611          0.060            0.239         0.708        0.135
A.5. Short commute                                   243             0.251         0.712          0.037            0.235         0.733        0.082
A.6. Work from home                                  989             0.218         0.713          0.069            0.180         0.753        0.108
A.7. Job requires no concentration                   972             0.201         0.729          0.070            0.166         0.771        0.096
A.8. Switch to part-time at current emp.             543             0.278         0.643          0.079            0.247         0.680        0.101
 Panel B: Other factors
B.1. Health: good or better                         1018             0.380         0.595          0.025            0.164         0.811        0.102
B.2. Wealth: $500k more                             1007             0.204         0.725          0.071            0.465         0.482        0.031
B.3. Wage: 20% more                                 338              0.172         0.793          0.036            0.180         0.784        0.092
B.4. Longevity: 10 more years                       662              0.204         0.736          0.060            0.233         0.710        0.089
         Notes: ALP, age 50-69, Working for pay, Unweighted. The table shows the fraction of the sample that gave different types of
         probability answers. The probabilities are the subjective probabilities of working past age 70 conditional on having or not having
         certain job characteristics.




           Table B8. The distribution of the sign of the subjective causal effects of work characteristics on
                                          probabilities of working past age 70
                                                                   N                P0<P1        P0=P1         P0>P1
             Panel A: Job characteristics                         [1]                [2]          [3]           [4]
           A.1. Employer offers flexible schedule                 656               0.465        0.424         0.111
           A.2. Job not stressful                                 990               0.487        0.320         0.193
           A.3. Job requires no physical effort                   975               0.470        0.343         0.188
           A.4. Become self-employed                              712               0.448        0.298         0.254
           A.5. Short commute                                     243               0.461        0.346         0.193
           A.6. Work from home                                    989               0.450        0.344         0.206
           A.7. Job requires no concentration                     972               0.425        0.333         0.242
           A.8. Switch to part-time at current emp.               543               0.341        0.396         0.263
            Panel B: Other factors
           B.1. Health: good or better                            1018              0.729        0.256         0.015
           B.2. Wealth: $500k more                                1007              0.111        0.280         0.609
           B.3. Wage: 20% more                                     338              0.642        0.325         0.033
           B.4. Longevity: 10 more years                           662              0.364        0.329         0.307
         Notes: ALP, age 50-69, Working for pay, Unweighted. P 0 and P1 refer to the conditional probabilities without and with the
         condition respectively.




                                                                         60
References


Baird, M. D., & Pollard, M. (2017). The RAND American Life Panel: Technical Description.

       RR-1651, 2017, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR1651.html.

Barnes-Farrell, J. L. (2003). Beyond Health and Wealth: Attitudinal and Other Influences on

       Retirement Decision-making. In G.A. Adams & T.A. Beehr (eds.), Retirement: Reasons,

       processes, and results. New York, NY: Springer, 159-187.

Beehr, T. A., & Bennett, M. M. (2015). Working After Retirement: Features of Bridge

       Employment and Research Directions. Work, Aging and Retirement, 1(1), 112­128.

Belbase, A., Sanzenbacher, G. T., & Gillis, C. M. (2016). How Do Job Skills that Decline with

       Age Affect White-collar Workers? Issue brief, 16-6.

Blundell, R., French, E., & Tetlow, G. (2016). Retirement Incentives and Labor Supply.

       Handbook of the Economics of Population Aging, Elsevier.

Borghans, L., Duckworth, A. L., Heckman, J. J., & Ter Weel, B. (2008). The Economics and

       Psychology of Personality Traits. Journal of Human Resources, 43(4), 972-1059.

Börsch-Supan, A., & Winter, J. (2004). How to Make Internet Surveys Representative: A Case

       Study of a Two-step Weighting Procedure. MEA Discussion Paper, No. 04067. Munich

       Center for the Economics of Aging (MEA) at the Max Planck Institute for Social Law

       and Social Policy.

Bound, J., Cullen, J., Nichols, A., & Schmidt, L. (2004). The Welfare Implications of Changing

       Disability Insurance Benefit Generosity. Journal of Public Economics. 88(12), 2487-

       2514.




                                              61
Bound, J., Stinebrickner, T., & Waidmann, T. (2010). Health, Economic Resources and the

       Work Decisions of Older Men. Journal of Econometrics, 156(1), 106-129.

Feldman, D. C., & Beehr, T. A. (2011). A Three-phase Model of Retirement Decision-making.

       American Psychologist, 66(3), 193-203.

Fisher, G. G., Chaffee, D. S., & Sonnega, A. (2016). Retirement Timing: A Review and

       Recommendations for Future Research. Work, Aging and Retirement, 2(2), 230-261.

Fisher, G. G., McArdle, J. J., McCammon, R. J., Sonnega, A., & Weir, D. (2013). New Measures

       of Fluid Intelligence in the HRS. Ann Arbor, Michigan: Institute for Social Research,

       University of Michigan.

French, E., & Jones, J. B. (2011). The Effects of Health Insurance and SelfInsurance on

       Retirement Behavior. Econometrica, 79(3), 693-732.

Gruber J., & Wise D.A. (eds.) (2004). Social Security Programs and Retirement Around the

       World: Micro-estimation. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Gustman, A. L., & Steinmeier, T. L. (2005). The Social Security Early Entitlement Age in a

       Structural Model of Retirement and Wealth. Journal of Public Economics, 89(2-3), 441-

       463.

Hudomiet, P., Hurd, M., Rohwedder, S., & Willis, R. J. (2018a). The Effect of Physical and

       Cognitive Decline at Older Ages on Work and Retirement: Evidence from Occupational

       Job Demands and Job Mismatch. Michigan Retirement Research Center Research

       Paper, No. 2017-372.

Hudomiet, P., Hurd, M., & Rohwedder, S. (2018b). The Causal Effects of Economic Incentives,

       Health and Job Characteristics on Retirement: Estimates Based on Subjective Conditional




                                                62
       Probabilities. Working Paper, presented at the 2018 Working Longer and Retirement

       Conference at SIEPR.

Hudomiet, P., Parker, A. M., & Rohwedder, S. (2018c). Cognitive Ability, Personality, and

       Pathways to Retirement: An Exploratory Study. Work, Aging and Retirement, 4(1), 52-

       66.

John, O. P., & Srivastava, S. (1999). The Big Five Trait Taxonomy: History, Measurement and

       Theoretical Perspectives. In L. A. Pervin and O. P. John (eds.), Handbook of Personality:

       Theory and Research, New York, NY: The Guilford Press, 102­38.

Kantarci, T. & van Soest, A. (2008). Gradual Retirement: Preferences and Limitations. De

       Economist, Springer, 156, 113­144.

Karoly, L. A. & Zissimopoulos, J. M. (2004). Self-Employment Among Older U.S. Workers.

       Monthly Labor Review. 127(7), 24-47.

Katz, L.F. & Krueger, A.B. (2016). The Rise and Nature of Alternative Work Arrangements in

       the United States, 1995-2015. NBER Working Papers 22667. Boston, MA: National

       Bureau of Economic Research.

Maestas, N. (2010). Back to Work: Expectations and Realizations of Work After Retirement.

       Journal of Human Resources, 45, 718-748.

Maestas, N., Mullen, K., Powell, D., von Wachter, T., & Wenger, J. (2018). The Value of

       Working Conditions in the United States and Implications for the Structure of Wages.

       NBER Working Paper, No. 25204.

Maestas, N., Mullen, K., & Strand, A. (2013). Does Disability Insurance Receipt Discourage

       Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of SSDI Receipt.

       American Economic Review, 103(5), 1797-1829.




                                              63
Mather, M., Jacobsen, L. A., & Pollard, K. M. (2015). Aging in the United States. Population

       Reference Bureau.

McArdle, J., Smith J. P., & Willis R. J. (2009). Cognition and Economic Outcomes in the Health

       and Retirement Survey, NBER Working Paper, No. 15266.

Morgeson, F. P. & Humphrey, S. E. (2006). The Work Design Questionnaire (WDQ):

       Developing and Validating a Comprehensive Measure for Assessing Job Design and the

       Nature of Work. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91(6):1321­1339.

Quinn, J. F. (1996). The Role of Bridge Job in the Retirement Patterns of Older Americans in the

       1990s. MA: Boston College Economics Working Paper, No. 324.

Salthouse, T. (2012). Consequences of Age-Related Cognitive Declines. Annual Review of

       Psychology, 63, 201-226.

Smith, J., Fisher, G., Ryan, L., Clarke, P., House, J., & Weir, D. (2013). Psychosocial and

       Lifestyle Questionnaire, 2006­2010 (Documentation Report, Core Section LB).

       Retrieved from the University of Michigan. Institute for Social Research website:

       Accessed September 20, 2015: http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/sitedocs/userg/HRS2006-

       2010SAQdoc.pdf.

Spirduso, W. W., Francis, K. L., & MacRae, P. G. (2005). Physical Dimensions of Aging.

       Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics, 275-287.

Van Soest, A., Kapteyn, A., & Zissimopoulos, J. (2007). Using Stated Preferences Data to

       Analyze Preferences for Full and Partial Retirement, IZA Discussion Paper, No. 2785.




                                                64
