                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   TAX POLICY AND LUMPY INVESTMENT BEHAVIOR:
                        EVIDENCE FROM CHINA'S VAT REFORM

                                            Zhao Chen
                                            Xian Jiang
                                            Zhikuo Liu
                                     Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
                                            Daniel Xu

                                        Working Paper 26336
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26336


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                                              October 2019
We are very grateful for comments from Claudio Agostini, James Albertus, Pat Bayer, Youssef
Benzarti, Peter Blair, Richard Blundell, Dorian Carloni, David Cashin, Raj Chetty, Wei Cui, Mike
Devereux, Mark Duggan, Naomi Feldman, Erin Ferris, Amy Finkelstein, John Friedman, Dan Garrett,
Brent Glover, Austan Goolsbee, Francois Gourio, Irem Guceri, Nathaniel Hendren, Jim Hines,
Caroline Hoxby, Hilary Hoynes, Wojciech Kopczuk, Brian Kovak, Camille Landais, Andrea Lanteri,
Attila Lindner, Li Liu, Byron Lutz, Andrew MacCallum, Neale Mahoney, Joana Naritomi, Eric Ohrn,
Emily Oster, Andreas Peichl, Petra Persson, Emmanuel Saez, David Seim, Nicolas Serrano-Velarde,
Jesse Shapiro, John Shoven, Sebastian Siegloch, Joel Slemrod, Bryce Steinberg, Alisa Tazhitdinova,
Matt Turner, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, Peter Zorn, Gabriel Zucman, and Eric Zwick, as well as from
seminar participants at ASSA, Berkeley, Brown, Carnegie Mellon, the Chicago Fed, Duke, the Federal
Reserve Board, LSE/UCL, the Michigan-Columbia-World Bank VAT Conference, NBER Public
Economics, Oslo, Oxford University CBT, Stanford, Stockholm, the Triangle Applied
Microeconomics Conference, UCSB, University of Munich, University of Utah UTAXI Conference,
and ZEW. Yuxuan He and Kelly Yang provided outstanding research assistance. This project is
funded by NSF grant #17300024. All errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Zhao Chen, Xian Jiang, Zhikuo Liu, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Daniel Xu. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tax Policy and Lumpy Investment Behavior: Evidence from China's VAT Reform
Zhao Chen, Xian Jiang, Zhikuo Liu, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Daniel Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 26336
October 2019, Revised June 2020
JEL No. D25,E22,H25

                                         ABSTRACT

We incorporate the lumpy nature of firm-level investment into the study of how tax policy affects
investment behavior. We show that tax policies can directly impact the lumpiness of investment.
Extensive-margin responses to tax policy are key to understanding the effects of different tax
reforms and to designing effective stimulus policies. We illustrate these results by studying
China's 2009 VAT reform, which lowered the tax cost of investment and reduced partial
irreversibility|the price gap between new and used capital. Using administrative tax data and a
difference-in-differences design, we estimate a 36%investment increase. This effect is driven by
investment spikes, which is consistent with the reduction of VAT-induced partial irreversibility.
Using a dynamic investment model that fits the reduced-form effects of the reform, we show that
policies that directly reduce the likelihood of firm inaction are more effective at stimulating
investment.

Zhao Chen                                       Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
China Center for Economic Studies               Department of Economics
Fudan University                                Duke University
Shanghai, 200433                                213 Social Sciences Building
China                                           Box 90097
zhaochen@fudan.edu.cn                           Durham, NC 27708
                                                and NBER
Xian Jiang                                      jc@jcsuarez.com
Duke University
Department of Economics                       Daniel Xu
Durham, NC                                    Department of Economics
xian.jiang@duke.edu                           Duke University
                                              213 Social Science Bldg
Zhikuo Liu                                    419 Chapel Drive
School of Public Economics and Administration Box 90097
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics Durham, NC 27708-0097
207 Fenghuang Bldg                            and NBER
777 Guoding Rd, Shanghai                      daniel.xu@duke.edu
China
lzhikuo@gmail.com
    This paper improves our understanding of how tax policy affects investment behavior by incor-
porating the lumpy nature of investment. Lumpy investment behavior is evident in most microdata,
with firms either replacing a considerable fraction of their existing capital (spikes) or not investing at
all (inaction). The prevalence of lumpy investment patterns suggests that extensive-margin invest-
ment decisions--i.e., whether to invest or not--are important determinants of overall investment.
It is therefore surprising that research on how tax policy impacts investment has not systemati-
cally integrated extensive-margin decisions. This paper shows that extensive-margin responses to
tax policy are key to understanding the effects of different tax reforms and to designing effective
stimulus policies.
    We illustrate theoretically, empirically, and quantitatively that tax policy can impact extensive-
margin investment decisions and that the effects of tax policy are shaped by investment frictions.
Firms invest in lumpy increments because adjusting the physical stock of capital can entail fixed
disruption costs and because investment is partially irreversible--i.e., the price of new capital is
greater than the resale price of used capital. We integrate various tax policies into a model with
these frictions. Tax policies can be a source of partial irreversibility, since input taxes and tax
credits impact the wedge between the purchase and resale prices of capital. Other policies, such
as income taxes and depreciation deductions, indirectly affect lumpiness by changing the after-tax
value of fixed disruption costs. Different tax incentives have distinct effects on the frictions that
determine whether firms undertake investment projects. As a result, policies that change the user
cost of capital by the same degree can have different implications for firm investment.
    Our analysis is grounded in one of the largest tax incentives for investment in recent history:
China's 2009 value-added tax (VAT) reform. Understanding how tax policy impacts investment
in China is of first-order importance since corporate investment comprises 30% of China's GDP
and since--as shown in Figure 1--investment in China has long surpassed investment levels in the
United States and the European Union. The reform unexpectedly allowed domestic firms to deduct
input VAT on purchases of new equipment. This policy change lowered the user cost of capital
by 15% and reduced the wedge between the after-tax prices of new and used capital.1 We use
administrative tax data to shed light on this stimulus program and to develop insights into how tax
policy interacts with the frictions that generate lumpy investment.
    We show that lumpy investment matters for tax policy using two sets of empirical analyses.
We first use a difference-in-differences research design to document the effects of China's 2009 VAT
reform. We find that affected firms increased investment relative to control firms by 36%. The
majority of this increase was driven by additional investment spikes, which is consistent with a
reduction in the after-tax price gap between new and used capital. Second, we estimate a dynamic
investment model that quantifies the interactions between investment frictions and tax policy. The

   1
     By way of comparison, the recent tax reform in the United States lowered the user cost of capital by about 4%
(Barro and Furman, 2018). The VAT reform lowered partial irreversibility since, prior to the reform, firms paid VAT
on equipment but did not collect VAT on the sale of used equipment.

                                                        1
model matches the reduced-form effects of the reform as well as the surge in investment spikes. We
use the model to compare alternative tax policies and find that policies that increase the likelihood
of investment spells are more effective at stimulating investment. In our empirical example, the VAT
reform was more effective than an income tax cut at stimulating investment since the reduction in
partial irreversibility decreased the likelihood of firm inaction. This lesson is relevant for tax policy
in other countries that rely on sales taxes, VATs, and investment tax credits since such measures
directly impact the extensive margin of investment.
   We develop these insights in four steps. We start by embedding important tax policies--income
tax, VAT, and depreciation deductions--into a standard model of dynamic investment that is rich
enough to characterize our empirical setting. As in Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006), fixed costs and
partial irreversibility rationalize lumpy investment patterns, and convex costs dampen investment
responses to changes in taxes or productivity. We then provide intuition for how different tax
policies interact with these frictions. While the VAT reform lowered the after-tax cost of capital
and reduced the degree of partial irreversibility, it did not directly interact with adjustment costs.
In comparison, while a corporate income tax (CIT) cut has a smaller effect on partial irreversibility,
it lowers the after-tax cost of capital and affects the after-tax value of adjustment costs. Overall,
the model shows that, to fully grasp how tax policy affects investment, it is necessary to account
for the dual effects of tax policy on adjustment frictions and the cost of capital.
   The second step of our analysis uses a novel dataset of administrative tax records from the
Chinese State Administration of Tax and a difference-in-differences identification strategy to study
how firms respond to the VAT reform. Since foreign firms with preferential treatment were able to
deduct input VAT on equipment prior to the reform, our research design uses these foreign firms as
a control group for domestic firms. We find substantial effects of the reform on firm investment. On
the extensive margin, the fraction of firms investing in equipment increased by 5 percentage points,
or a 10% increase. On the intensive margin, investment increased by 3.6% of the existing capital
stock, for a 36% increase in investment. We then provide three pieces of evidence that these effects
are driven by the impact of the reform on partial irreversibility. First, we find that the majority of
the investment response was due to a surge in the number of firms that went from not investing to
undertaking investment projects that were greater than 20% of their capital (investment spikes).
Second, we use the fact that firms with excess VAT payments continued to face a gap between the
purchase and resale prices of capital. The reform had much smaller effects on the extensive-margin
response of these firms. Finally, we test whether the reform had different effects on industries that
rely on specifically tailored assets. We show that, since the pre-reform price wedge induced by the
VAT was less important in industries with more asset specificity, the reform leads to smaller effects
on investment in these industries.
   The validity of this research design rests on the assumption that, absent the reform, domestic
firms would have had the same investment patterns as foreign firms. Three sets of auxiliary results
suggest that foreign firms are a suitable control for domestic firms. First, we show that both sets

                                                   2
of firms had similar investment trends prior to the reform. Second, the results are robust to a
number of checks including using alternative measures of investment, different sample restrictions,
reweighting the data to match the characteristics of foreign and domestic firms, and controlling for
firm-level characteristics and other changes in tax policy. Finally, we conduct two placebo tests to
further validate our identifying assumption. The first placebo test uses domestic and foreign firms
that were included in a pilot program allowing firms to deduct input VAT from new investments
starting in 2004. We find no evidence that the 2009 reform differentially affected foreign and
domestic firms in the pilot program. This result suggests that domestic and foreign firms were not
subject to time-varying shocks, including other stimulus policies implemented in response to the
financial crisis, that might confound our estimates. In a second placebo test, we use the fact that
the VAT reform did not impact the tax treatment of investment in structures. Because the reform
did not differentially affect how foreign and domestic firms invested in structures, it is unlikely
that our results are confounded by differential shocks to foreign and domestic firms. Additionally,
triple-difference specifications that use these placebos as additional controls yield similar estimates
of the reform. These results significantly limit the risk that our main results are a spurious feature
of the data and are not driven by the tax reform.
    We estimate a dynamic model of investment in the third step of our analysis. Our estimation
relies on the method of simulated moments (MSM) to recover fixed and convex adjustment costs
while allowing the VAT reform to influence partial irreversibility. Our model targets two sets of
moments: (1) pre-reform statistics on investment patterns, such as measures of lumpiness and the
autocorrelation of investment, and (2) the reduced-form estimates of the effects of the reform. We
validate our model of investment by showing that it can match the reduced-form effects of an
actual reform, including untargeted moments such as the effects of the reform on investment spikes.
Simultaneously matching both of these sets of moments indicates that the VAT-induced price gap
between used and new capital was the major source of partial irreversibility.2
    The fourth and final step of our analysis uses the estimated model to simulate the effects of
alternative tax policies on investment, tax revenue, and firm value. We measure the effectiveness
of a given policy by comparing the tax revenue cost to the change in investment. Lowering the
VAT distortion is more effective at stimulating investment than lowering the corporate income tax
rate. One reason a corporate income tax cut is less effective is that a large fraction of firms are
inframarginal to the tax cut--their investment is unaffected, but they benefit from the lower tax
rate. In addition to having a large effect on the extensive margin of investment, policies that shrink
the price gap between new and used capital--such as an investment tax credit (ITC)--only benefit
firms that increase their investment. For this reason, introducing an ITC is just as effective as
lowering the VAT. We also find that China's 2009 VAT reform stimulated more investment relative
    2
     While the empirical investment literature relies on the asymmetry between the positive and negative ranges of
the investment distribution to separately identify fixed costs from partial irreversibility, the lack of asset sales in tax
data makes this approach infeasible. We instead use a reform that reduced the price gap between new and used
capital to measure the relative importance of partial irreversibility for extensive-margin investment decisions.

                                                            3
to lost tax revenue than a counterfactual policy that mirrors the 2017 Tax Cut and Jobs Act in the
United States.3
    This paper is related to a long line of research in public finance dating to Hall and Jorgenson
(1967). Recent work has revolutionized our understanding of how firms respond to taxation by
exploiting credible identification strategies with administrative tax data (e.g., Yagan, 2015; Maffini,
Xing and Devereux, 2016; Rao, 2016; Zwick and Mahon, 2017; Ohrn, 2018a,b; Moon, 2019).4 Papers
that study how Chinese firms respond to tax incentives include Cai and Harrison (2019), Liu and
                                                        arez Serrato and Xu (2019).5 The main
Mao (2018), Chen, He and Zhang (2016), and Chen, Liu, Su´
contribution of our paper is to improve our understanding of how tax policy impacts investment by
providing a coherent framework to interpret the intensive- and extensive-margin effects that have
been documented in quasi-experimental studies. Deploying this framework to measure the effects of
a large natural experiment using administrative tax data, we highlight the importance of investment
spikes in understanding the effects of tax reforms as well as the potential for tax policy to generate
partial irreversibility.
    This paper also contributes to the investment literature by investigating a real-world tax reform
through the lens of a workhorse model of investment (e.g., Caballero and Engel, 1999; Cooper and
Haltiwanger, 2006; Gourio and Kashyap, 2007; Khan and Thomas, 2008; David and Venkateswaran,
2019; Lanteri, 2018; Winberry, 2020). Previous research in this literature has simulated the effects of
tax policy changes through their effects on the after-tax cost of investment (e.g., Winberry, 2020).
We highlight the importance of accounting for interactions between tax policy and the frictions
that generate lumpy investment. In particular, we show that tax policies that have the same effect
on the after-tax cost of capital can have different effects on firm investment.6 We also contribute
to this literature by using quasi-experimental estimates of the effects of tax reform to estimate
adjustment costs. As argued by Cummins, Hassett and Hubbard (1994), tax reforms generate large

    3
      Our quantitative results are robust to alternative assumptions regarding the supply of capital goods and effects
of the reform on interest rates, concomitant aggregate productivity shocks, additional sources of partial irreversibility,
and interactions between income taxes, adjustment costs, and interest costs.
    4
      Our paper is also related to classic papers that follow a model-centric estimation approach. For instance,
Abel (1980), Salinger and Summers (1981), Summers (1981), and Hayashi (1982) rely on a q-theory approach for
quantifying the roles of taxes on investment. Dynamic models with adjustment costs have also been considered by
Auerbach (1986), Auerbach (1989), and Auerbach and Hines (1988).
    5
      Cai and Harrison (2019) and Chen et al. (2016) use manufacturing survey data to study the effects of the pilot
reform in 2004. In concurrent work, Liu and Mao (2018) use tax data to study the reduced-form effects of the rollout
of the reform from 2004 to 2009 using small taxpayers as a control for large domestic firms. Using different empirical
strategies, we find comparable effects of the reform on investment. Relative to Liu and Mao (2018), this paper
contributes to the literature by uncovering the importance of lumpy responses to the tax reform and by providing
a coherent model that synthesizes the effects of different tax policies on the intensive and extensive margins of
investment.
    6
      The focus of this paper is the interaction between tax instruments and producer-level investment behavior.
Recent papers (e.g., Khan and Thomas, 2008; Bachmann, Caballero and Engel, 2013; Winberry, 2020) have clarified
the conditions under which micro-level investment frictions have aggregate implications in general equilibrium. In
particular, Winberry (2020) shows that lumpy investments have aggregate implications when interest-rate dynamics
match the observed covariance with productivity. In Appendix F, we show that our main conclusions are robust to
allowing for potential equilibrium effects on the interest rate or on the price of capital goods.

                                                            4
and plausibly exogenous shifts in economic fundamentals and are useful in uncovering the nature
of investment frictions. Our unified approach is therefore well suited to simulating the effects of
potential tax reforms and comparing their effectiveness at stimulating investment.
    The results of this paper have implications beyond China. First, policymakers can generate
partial irreversibility through indirect taxation. This can occur when VATs do not allow for the
deductibility of investment or when businesses pay indirect taxes on investment goods (e.g., Desai,
Foley and Hines, 2004). In the United States, Cline, Mikesell, Neubig and Phillips (2005) document
that businesses pay over $100 billion in state sales taxes on inputs, including investment purchases.
Second, VATs can generate partial irreversibility when credits are not refundable. Our reduced-
form results show that firms with excess VAT credits are subject to partial irreversibility after the
reform. While China started refunding excess VAT credits in 2019 (Ministry of Finance, 2019),
excess credits are not refundable in 24 other countries (EY, 2017). Finally, interactions between
different tax policies influence the effectiveness of different forms of stimulus. For instance, a
corporate income tax cut can be more effective at stimulating investment when other policies, such
as an investment tax credits (e.g., Chirinko and Wilson, 2008), are simultaneously used to lower
the price gap between new and used capital.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 develops the intuition for how tax policies interact
with firm frictions and culminates by detailing an empirical model of investment. Section 2 discusses
China's 2009 VAT reform. Section 3 describes the administrative tax data, and Section 4 documents
the reduced-form effects of the reform. Section 5 estimates the model, Section 6 simulates the effects
of potential tax reforms, and Section 7 concludes.


1     Modeling Tax Policy and Lumpy Investment
Empirical models of investment use adjustment costs to rationalize two empirical features of in-
vestment data. First, the observed pattern of infrequent and lumpy investment suggests firms face
fixed costs and partial irreversibility. Second, the sluggish response of investment to changes in
economic fundamentals suggests that investment is subject to convex costs of adjustment. We first
characterize how these frictions affect the effectiveness of different tax policies in a simple, static
model. We then describe a dynamic investment model and show that the intuition from the static
model carries over to the dynamic world. Appendix A presents detailed derivations.


1.1    Theoretical Motivation
Consider a firm with preexisting capital K0 , productivity A, and profit function A1- K  , where
 < 1 is the curvature of the profit function. The firm pays a corporate tax rate  on profits. We
model the after-tax price of capital p = pk (1 +  )(1 -  pv ), where pk is the capital goods price, 
is any form of sales tax related to capital purchase, and pv  1 is the discounted present value of


                                                  5
depreciation deductions.7 Absent additional frictions, the firm solves the problem:
                                                                                                        1-
                                                                                                         -
                                                                                                           1


                                                      1 pk (1 +  )(1 -  pv ) 
             max (1 -  )A1- K  - p(K - K0 ) = K  = A                                                           .       (1)
              K                                                (1 -  )       
                                                                                         UCC


Equation 1 implies that the firm will adjust its capital in response to all changes in taxes or
productivity. There is no inaction or scope for an extensive-margin response.8 The user cost of
                                 pk (1+ )(1- pv )
capital (UCC) is given by              (1- )
                                                  .   The symmetric effect of pk and the tax term of the UCC
(1+ )(1- pv )
   (1- )
                is one reason the empirical public finance literature estimates the user cost elasticity of
investment. In this model, this elasticity is governed by the curvature of the profit function and
         -1 9
equals   1-
            .

Partial Irreversibility

Partial irreversibility occurs when firms face different prices to purchase and sell equipment. This
distortion can arise from imperfections in the market for used capital or from tax policies. For
instance, sales taxes on equipment purchases increase partial irreversibility and have been shown
to affect the investment of US firms (e.g., Desai et al., 2004). On the other hand, investment tax
credits at the state level in the US (e.g., Chirinko and Wilson, 2008) decrease partial irreversibility.
In the case of China, the pre-2009 VAT system increased the purchase price of capital by a factor
of (1 +  ), where  is the VAT rate. Firms selling used capital could not charge the VAT rate.
The effective after-tax purchase price is then pb = pk (1 +  -  (1 +  )pv ) and the sales price is
ps = pk (1 -  (1 +  )pv ).10
    Partial irreversibility generates inaction--a range of productivity in which firms do not adjust
their capital stock in response to small changes in economic fundamentals. While firms usually set
the after-tax marginal product of capital (MPK) equal to the price of capital, firms do not adjust
their capital when the MPK of their existing capital falls in the range [ps , pb ]. The dashed line
in Panel A of Figure 2 shows how the MPK increases with productivity. The two horizontal lines
denote pb and ps . The inaction region is the range of productivity where the MPK falls between



    7
      pv is determined by the tax depreciation schedule of capital. We provide more details of how the tax depreciation
schedule maps into pv in the dynamic model. While this static model abstracts away from how real depreciation
impacts investment, this important force is present in our dynamic model, and we estimate the rate of depreciation
in our structural model in Section 5.
    8
      By an extensive-margin response, we refer to a firm's decision to invest in a given year relative to a counterfactual
of not investing. Our empirical analysis focuses on a balanced panel of existing firms, and we do not study firm entry
as part of a broader extensive-margin response.
    9
      As an example, when firms face a downward-sloping residual demand curve, assuming  = 0.75 implies a markup
excluding capital costs of 25% and results in 1-  1
                                                 - = 4.
   10
      Note that the VAT also increases the value of depreciation deductions.

                                                             6
these two lines and is given by:
                                                           1                       1

                               ¯]             ps          1-             pb       1-
                           [A, A                               K0 ,                    K0 .
                                            (1 -  )                    (1 -  )

Panel B of Figure 2 shows how pb , ps , and the inaction region affect the firm's policy function--the
relation between productivity and capital.
   To see how tax policies influence the inaction region, note that:
                                                                                   1
                                                                                       
                                                      1
                                                                       1          1-
                                           UCC       1-                  -  pv
                            ¯-A =
                            A                             1 -         1+                K0 .
                                                                      1 -  pv

This formulation makes it clear that the UCC is not a sufficient statistic to capture the extensive-
margin effects of tax policy changes. To see this, consider two policies that lower the UCC by the
same amount by either decreasing  or increasing pv . A reduction in  will narrow the inaction
                                                                                                         1
                                                                                            1
                                                                                              - pv      1-
region both by lowering the UCC and by closing the price gap 1 -                           1+
                                                                                            1- pv
                                                                                                              . In contrast,
increasing pv has two countervailing effects on the inaction region. While increasing pv lowers
the UCC, this change also widens the price gap. For this reason, we would expect to see smaller
extensive-margin responses from policies that increase pv --such as bonus depreciation--than from
policies that lower  .11

Fixed Costs

In addition to partial irreversibility, fixed costs also generate inaction. Following the literature (e.g.,
Caballero and Engel, 1999; Cooper and Haltiwanger, 2006), we interpret fixed costs as technological
constraints, including production disruptions and short-run capacity limits that firms face when they
replace machinery. We therefore assume that the firm has to pay a non-tax-deductible fraction 
of its desired capital stock (K  ) to adjust its capital stock. To highlight the role of fixed costs, we
abstract from partial irreversibility by assuming that ps = pb = pk (1 +  -  (1 +  )).
   A firm decides to adjust its capital if its profits after making the adjustment, (1 -  )A1- K  -
p(K  - K0 ) - K  , are greater than the profits from inaction, (1 -  )A1- K0
                                                                           
                                                                             . Comparing the
relative profit levels from these two alternatives, we have:

                   Profit conditional on adjusting to optimal capital K 
                                                                                  Profit using initial capital K0
                                                      1/(1-)
              (1 - )                                                                         1-
                     UCC -                                       A + UCCK0 =               K0 A .                        (2)
                           1-                UCC
                                  Slope                               Intercept

  11
      A similar argument shows that changes in  and  that affect the UCC by the same amount generally have
different effects on the inaction region. In the range of policy parameters that we study, a cut in  has larger
extensive-margin effects than a cut in  .

                                                             7
                                                             ¯ that satisfy this indifference con-
The inaction region is characterized by the two values A and A
dition. The solid black line in Panel A of Figure 3 plots the after-tax profit in the case of no
adjustment costs. The fixed cost  flattens the slope and rotates this line clockwise (shown by the
                                          ¯] is defined by the intersection of this rotated line and
dot-dashed line). The inaction region [A, A
the curved profit line (in dashes) that holds capital at the initial level. The optimal profit with
fixed costs is the red envelope of these two lines. Panel B shows how fixed costs generate inaction
in capital adjustment.
    Equation 2 can be used to illustrate the dual effects of tax policy on the cost of capital and
adjustment frictions. Consider first a policy that reduces the UCC through changes in pv or .
These policies would shrink the inaction region by lowering the intercept and increasing the slope.
However, a cut in  that lowers the UCC by the same amount as changes in pv or  will further
increase the slope by reducing the after-tax value of the fixed cost. This discussion shows that, even
without partial irreversibility, the UCC is not a sufficient statistic to gauge the effects of tax policy.
Finally, because fixed costs and partial irreversibility have different interactions with tax policies,
measuring the relative importance of these frictions is crucial for understanding the effects of tax
policy.

Convex Costs

We now introduce convex adjustment costs and show how they help dampen the response of in-
vestment to changes in tax policy. While convex costs directly impact the intensive margin of
investment, properly accounting for this mechanism is crucial to quantifying forces that affect the
extensive margin. We assume that firms pay a non-tax-deductible convex cost, D(K ), to adjust
their capital. The firm's optimal capital level is now:
                                                                          -1
                                           1              D (K )         1-
                                     K = A          UCC +                      ,
                                                          1-

                                                                                                      D (K )
where the total marginal cost of investment is the UCC plus the marginal convex cost,                  1-
                                                                                                             .   Since
 enters separately from the UCC in this expression, the latter is not a sufficient statistic for the
effects of tax policy on investment.12
    Overall, these simple models yield two insights. First, the models clarify how investment fric-
tions help match empirical investment patterns. Convex costs help match the sluggish response
of investment to tax changes. Fixed costs and partial irreversibility generate lumpy investment.
Together, these frictions yield coherent interpretations of the intensive- and extensive-margin in-
vestment responses to tax changes that have been documented in empirical studies.

  12
     In Appendix A.1, we formally show that the UCC is not a sufficient statistic when at least a portion of the
convex costs are not tax deductible. In Section 6, we show that our quantitative results are robust to assuming that
adjustment costs are tax deductible.

                                                         8
    Second, these models show that accounting for interactions between tax policies and the frictions
that generate lumpy investment is crucial to characterizing the effects of tax policy on investment. In
particular, changes in the UCC are not sufficient statistics for tax policy. These static models suggest
that, holding changes in the UCC constant, increasing pv through accelerated depreciation has the
smallest impact on extensive margin decisions. While the effects of cuts to  and  are theoretically
ambiguous, our models suggest that cuts to  have larger effects on the extensive margin when
partial irreversibility is a more important driver of inaction than fixed adjustment costs. This
result highlights the importance of quantitatively measuring the relative magnitudes of these two
frictions. The fact that tax policy can directly influence firms' extensive-margin investment decisions
should be taken into account when modeling the effects of tax policy changes.


1.2     A Dynamic Model of Tax Policy and Lumpy Investment
We now incorporate how investment frictions interact with tax policy in a dynamic model built on
Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006) that is rich enough to characterize our empirical setting.13

Pre-Tax Profit Function

Firms have a profit function given by:

                                            (K, A ) = (A )1- K  ,                                                 (3)

where K is the predetermined capital stock and A is a profit shock that is realized at the beginning
of the period.14 ait  log(Ait ) denotes a firm's log profitability, which has three components:


                                                ait = bt + i + it ,                                               (4)

where bt is an aggregate shock, i captures firm-specific permanent heterogeneity, and it is an
idiosyncratic transitory shock. Firms draw their permanent productivity i from a normal dis-
tribution. The aggregate shock bt and the transitory shock it evolve over time following AR(1)
processes.




  13
      To focus on the role of adjustment costs and lumpy investment, we abstract from the role of financial frictions.
Combining financial frictions and lumpy investment raises additional modeling and identification challenges. Recent
models that focus on financial frictions but abstract from lumpy investment include Hennesy and Whited (2007);
Arellano, Bai and Zhang (2012); Ottonello and Winberry (2019).
   14
      We view this as a reduced-form way to model the profit function, but it is easy to microfound it as the result
of a static profit-optimization problem. We give an example using a decreasing-returns-to-scale (DRTS) production
function and competitive final good market in Appendix A.2. An alternative is to assume a monopolistic competitive
environment with constant-returns-to-scale (CRTS) technology.

                                                          9
Taxes

As in the static model, firms pay the VAT rate  on purchases of new equipment. Consistent with
the Chinese institutional setting, we assume that new capital purchases cannot be deducted from
output VAT. Firms pay the CIT at rate  on profits and depreciate a fixed fraction ^ of the end-of-
year book value of the capital stock in each period. We summarize the impact of the depreciation
schedule on the effective capital purchase price with the sufficient statistic pv : the present discounted
value of depreciation deductions.15 The depreciation schedule interacts with both the CIT and the
VAT since depreciation is deductible from the CIT base and the VAT affects the book value of
capital.

Adjustment Costs

Firms face three types of adjustment frictions: a convex adjustment cost, a fixed disruption cost,
and partial irreversibilty. We assume that the only source of irreversibility is the non-deductible
VAT on equipment purchases, so the resale price is set to one.16 Firms incur a fixed disruption cost
K  when adjusting the capital stock.  is assumed to be independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) across firms and over time and is drawn from the distribution G( ).17 Finally, the convex
                                            I 2
cost follows the quadratic form         2   K
                                                  K.

Normalization and Recursive Formulation

We normalize the firm problem relative to a given permanent productivity by defining k = K/ exp( ).
This normalization reduces the state space to (k, b, ,  ).18 In any given period, the firm's value is
the maximum of the value from buying capital, selling capital, or inaction:

                          v (k, b, ,  ) = max{v b (k, b, ,  ), v s (k, b, ,  ), v i (k, b, ,  )},




   15
      By abstracting from the depreciation schedule, this assumption allows us to study the firm's problem recursively.
pv =  ^ + (1 -  ^) E[p ]. Assuming a fixed and exogenous real interest rate r,  E[p ] = pv . This formulation builds
                       v                                                              v      1+r
on arguments in Winberry (2020). We show that this result holds in our setting in Appendix A.3.2.
   16
      Partial irreversibility arises naturally from the fact that firms need to pay VAT to sellers when purchasing
capital but do not retain VAT payment when selling capital. Section 6 shows our results are robust to allowing for
additional sources of partial irreversibility.
   17
      We represent the units of the fixed disruption cost in terms of the "desired capital level" K  , as in the frictionless
                                                                                          -1/(1- )
                                                                   1 pk (1+ )(1- pv )
benchmark in Equation 1. In the dynamic setting, K  = E[A |A]              1-              with pk = r +  , where
r is the interest rate defined by r = 1/ - 1, and  is the economic depreciation rate.
   18
      This normalization allows us to account for firm-level permanent heterogeneity in firm-level productivity or
unmodeled frictions (see, e.g., David and Venkateswaran, 2019). This result follows from the fact that the profit
function (Equation (3)) and the costs of investment are homogeneous of degree one in the pair (K, A) and thus on
(K, exp( )). The value function is also homogeneous of degree one in the pair (K, exp( )). See Appendix A.3.3 for
additional details.

                                                             10
where
                                                                                      2
                                                                                  i
v b (k, b, ,  ) = max (1 -  ) (k, b, ) - [1 +  -  pv (1 +  )]i +                          k + k  +  E v 0 (k , b ,  ) |b,  ,
                 i>0                                                        2     k
                                                                                      2
                                                                                  i
v s (k, b, ,  ) = max (1 -  ) (k, b, ) - [1         -  pv (1 +  )]i +                     k + k  +  E v 0 (k , b ,  ) |b,  ,
                 i<0                                                        2     k
v i (k, b, ,  ) = (1 -  ) (k, b, ) +  E v 0 (k (1 -  ), b ,  ) |b,  ,

where k = (1 -  )k + i,  is the economic rate of depreciation, and where the ex ante value function
(before the fixed cost draw is realized) is given by:
                                                        ¯
                                                        
                                      0
                                     v (k, b, ) =           v (k, b, ,  )dG( ).
                                                    0


v b (k, b, ,  ) is the value function conditional on investing. The costs of investing include convex
and fixed adjustment costs, as well as the VAT-inclusive price of capital (1 +  ) minus depreciation
deductions  pv (1 +  ). When the firm decides to disinvest, the value function v s (k, b, ,  ) differs by
not including  in the resale price. This difference is the source of partial irreversibility. In the last
case, that of inaction, the firm collects profits and transitions to the next period with depreciated
capital. Notice that our model embeds a "time-to-build" assumption since investment in this period
does not affect current profits.

Implications for Policy Reform

While it is not possible to analytically characterize the effects of tax policy in the dynamic model,
we can solve the model numerically. This allows us to characterize how different policies affect
the investment policy function and to confirm that many of the lessons from the static model are
applicable in the dynamic setting.
   Figure 4 plots the policy function against the firm's transitory productivity shock to illustrate
how various policy reforms affect the firm's investment decisions. Panel A plots the pre-reform
baseline. The dotted line is the firm's optimal capital choice in a frictionless environment without
adjustment costs. In this case, the optimal capital choice is log-linear in the firm's transitory
productivity shock. The slope is determined by the return-to-capital parameter  and the persistence
of the idiosyncratic shock .
   The dashed line in Figure 4 plots the optimal policy in the presence of all investment frictions.
Both the partial irreversibility generated from the VAT and the fixed investment cost create an
inaction region where firms do not respond to small productivity shocks. When the productivity
shocks are large enough, firms adjust their capital. However, the convex adjustment cost and
partial irreversibility prevent firms from directly adjusting to the optimal capital level, which gives


                                                        11
the policy function a flatter slope with respect to productivity shocks.
    Panels B-D compare the effects of different tax policies on the firm's policy function. For
comparability, we consider three policies that have the same impact on the tax term of the UCC.
The red solid line in Panel B of Figure 4 shows a VAT cut from 17% to 12.9%.19 This VAT cut
reduces the asymmetry between the purchase and sale price of capital. This change shrinks the
inaction region and allows firms to adjust their capital under more modest productivity shocks. The
reform generates extensive-margin responses from firms with productivity shocks that fall outside
of the red inaction region but that would otherwise be inside the black dashed inaction region. In
addition to changing which firms respond to productivity shocks, a VAT cut directly reduces the
UCC, which also affects investment along the intensive margin. The joint effects of reducing the
UCC and narrowing the inaction region are key building blocks for understanding the effectiveness
of the VAT reform on investment.
    In Panel C, we report the policy function following a CIT cut. To match the UCC effect of the
small VAT cut in Panel B, we consider the effect of reducing  from the average effective rate in our
data from 15.4% to 0%. Based on the insights from our static model, we would expect that a CIT
cut would also have a large effect on the inaction region if fixed costs were the primary driver of
inaction. Relative to Panel B, we find that the CIT cut has a smaller effect on the inaction region,
primarily driven by the lack of response by firms with low productivity shocks. Whether a cut in 
or  has a larger effect on the likelihood that firms undertake investment projects is ultimately an
empirical question, which motivates the structural estimation of Section 5.
    Panel D reports the effects of a policy of bonus depreciation--which accelerates the timing of
depreciation deductions and increases the value of pv . By shifting the red line to the left, this reform
affects the investment decisions of firms with low and high productivity shocks. Consistent with
our theoretical insight, the inaction region does not narrow considerably, and a significant fraction
of firms do not respond to this incentive.
    While these reforms have similar effects on the UCC, the fiscal effectiveness of different policies is
partly driven by extensive-margin responses. Because all firms--even those in the inaction region--
benefit from a CIT cut, the government collects less revenue from a large fraction of firms that do
not undertake new investment projects. In contrast, only firms that invest benefit from a VAT cut
or from bonus depreciation. Because the fiscal costs of all these policies depend on the effects of
investment on future tax revenue, the degree to which different policies stimulate firms to undertake
investment projects also shapes the fiscal effectiveness of different policies.
    Figure 4 shows that different tax reforms have distinct interactions with adjustment costs. These
interactions are the source of the different intensive- and extensive-margin responses documented in
empirical studies. While the red lines in Figure 4 compare reforms with similar effects on the UCC,
the blue line in Panel B shows the effects of the actual VAT reform. This figure shows that the

  19
     For simplicity, we assume that, after the reform, firms use the post-reform VAT rate when calculating the present
value of their depreciation deductions.

                                                         12
VAT reform would lead to a more substantial reduction in the inaction region than the elimination
of the corporate income tax. This figure also shows how the VAT reform--which eliminated the
source of partial irreversibility in our model--allows us to pin down the importance of fixed costs
for extensive-margin decisions. In Section 5, we estimate an empirical version of this model that
is consistent with the reduced-form effects of the reform to quantitatively compare the effects of
alternative tax policies. Based on this discussion, an important test that our model correctly
measures the relative importance of fixed costs and partial irreversibility is whether it matches the
extensive-margin effects of China's VAT reform, including spikes in investment.


2        Policy Background: China's 2009 VAT Reform
China's 2009 reform was one of the largest tax incentives for investment in recent history. This
section describes the reform and how it generated quasi-experimental variation in the after-tax cost
of investment.
     The VAT is the largest source of tax revenue in China. In 2016, VAT revenues comprised 39%
of overall tax revenue. By comparison, corporate and personal income taxes accounted for 22% and
8% of tax revenue, respectively (NBS China, 2018). Note that China's reliance on the VAT for tax
revenues mirrors much of the developed and developing world. China has a standard VAT rate of
17%, which applies to the majority of sales.20

The Reform as a Natural Experiment

One of the purported benefits of the VAT is that it does not distort the choice of production
inputs--that is, it preserves "production efficiency." In practice, however, VATs can distort input
choices depending on how they are implemented (Ebrill, Keen, Bodin and Summers, 2001). Before
2004, China's "production-based" VAT allowed firms to offset output VAT on sales with VAT paid
on inputs such as materials and factory expenses. In contrast, firms were not allowed to deduct the
VAT on fixed investment from their VAT base. This lack of deductibility discouraged investment,
which works against the production efficiency of the VAT. To correct this distortion, China launched
a reform to transition to a "consumption-based" VAT that allows for the deductibility of investment.
Because this reform was part of long-term central government plans dating to 2003, firms deemed
the chance of policy reversal to be extremely low.21
     The Chinese government experimented with this transition starting in 2004. The reform was first
piloted on firms in selected industries in Northeastern China.22 As with most other reforms in China,
    20
      The VAT is calculated using a credit-invoice method. Exports are zero-rated and some selected goods face a
lower rate of 13%. Most of the goods affected by the reform face a 17% rate.
   21
      The Chinese government announced the gradual transition from the production-based VAT to consumption-
based one at the Third Plenary Session in October 2003. Plenary sessions are among the highest-level government
meetings. Decisions made at these meetings are meant to be permanent and are very rarely revoked.
   22
      The initial provinces included Heilongjiang, Jilin, Liaoning, and the city of Dalian. From 2004 to 2008, the pilot

                                                          13
the reform was designed to follow a slow rollout to allow for trial and error. However, the government
unexpectedly announced on December 19, 2008, that the reform would be extended nationwide
in 2009. This announcement broke with existing expansion plans. Prior to this announcement,
authorities had last announced on July 30, 2008, that the rollout of the program would continue in
two additional provinces. Starting on January 1, 2009, all firms were able to deduct the input VAT
on equipment from the VAT on sales.23
    The reform was an unexpected and permanent change to firms' after-tax cost of investment.
Because the reform was unexpected, it is unlikely that firms delayed their investment plans in
anticipation of the reform. Because the reform was permanent, the effects we measure are likely
not due to other forms of inter-temporal substitution.
    The reform generated a natural experiment since it had no effect on the after-tax cost of in-
vestment for a group of foreign firms. Specifically, foreign firms in industries categorized by the
government as encouraged had previously been allowed to deduct equipment purchases from VAT
on sales.24 Our research strategy uses foreign firms in encouraged industries as a control group for
domestic firms. The identifying assumption behind this strategy is that treated and control firms
are not subject to differential shocks in this time period.
    One set of potential concerns is related to the fact that the Chinese government implemented
a broad stimulus package in responses to the financial crisis, which was colloquially known as the
4 trillion yuan package. Through this program, the central government provided low-cost credit
through the local financing vehicles of regional governments. As Bai, Hsieh and Song (2016) show,
these loans were used for railways, roads and other infrastructure (38%), reconstruction following
the Wenchuan earthquake (25%), affordable housing (10%), and social welfare projects (27%).
Importantly, these loans did not target the manufacturing sector. In contrast, the 2009 VAT
reform--which was also part of this stimulus package--directly affected the manufacturing sector.
For these reasons, we do not expect that other aspects of the stimulus package would confound the
effects of the VAT reform.
    Nevertheless, we conduct a number of checks to ensure that our results are driven by the VAT
reform and not by other aspects of the stimulus package that may differentially affect foreign and
domestic firms. First, because the credit provision was channelled through regional governments, we
was extended to Inner Mongolia and to areas affected by earthquakes in the province of Wenchuan. Appendix B
documents the legislative background and timeline for the reform from 2004 through 2009. Cai and Harrison (2019)
and Chen et al. (2016) study the effects of the pilot reform.
    23
       Equipment includes machinery, mechanical apparatus, means of transportation, and other equipment, tools, and
fixtures related to production and business operations that are used for over 12 months. Purchased and self-made
housing, buildings, and other real estate were not included in the reform.
    24
       Qualified foreign firms were able to deduct input VAT on purchases of equipment starting in 1999. Starting on
April 1, 2002, the government classified foreign investment projects as encouraged, allowed, restricted or prohibited.
The Catalogue for the Guidance of Foreign Investment Industries lists the encouraged, restricted and prohibited
projects. If a foreign project is not included in the previous three categories in the Catalogue, it is considered as
falling within the allowed category. Additionally, firms participating in the Midwest Advantageous Project list also
qualified for preferential treatment. As a robustness check, we also use all foreign firms as controls, and we find
similar results. This suggests that selection into the encouraged category is not central for our results.

                                                         14
control for province-by-year fixed effects in our baseline specifications. Second, because Cong, Gao,
Ponticelli and Yang (2019) show that the credit expansion disproportionately benefited state-owned
enterprises (SOEs), we show that our results are robust to excluding SOEs or listed firms. Finally,
we conduct two sets of placebo tests to show that we are capturing the effects of the VAT reform.
Because the reform did not impact the investment incentives of domestic firms that were part of the
2004 pilot, we would not expect investment in these firms to be affected by the reform. Similarly,
we leverage the fact that, apart from minor affiliated structures, the VAT reform did not change the
tax treatment of investment in major structures. We find that the 2009 reform did not significantly
impact investment in pilot firms or on major structures. Additionally, we obtain similar results in
triple-difference analyses relative to these placebos. We provide more details behind this identifying
variation in Section 4, where we also discuss different strategies that support the assumption that
foreign firms' investment is a suitable counterfactual for domestic firms' investment.25

The VAT and the After-Tax Cost of Investment

To see how the reform affected the after-tax cost of investment, consider a domestic firm purchasing
equipment at a price of 1,000 RMB. Table 1 shows that, prior to the reform, the VAT-included cost
would be 1,170 RMB, since the firm would pay a 17% VAT on the purchase. The asset generates
depreciation deductions according to Chinese accounting standards, which have a discounted present
value of 984 RMB.26 At a corporate income tax rate of 25%, these deductions reduce the firm's
corporate income tax obligations by 237 RMB. The after-tax cost of the equipment purchase is
therefore 932 RMB.
    The reform modifies this calculation in two ways. First, the firm's direct cost of investment
decreases by 170 RMB, since the VAT paid on the equipment is deducted from the VAT on sales.
Second, depreciation deductions only lower corporate income tax obligations by 202.7 RMB since
the book value no longer includes the VAT payment. Because the direct effect is larger than the
effect on depreciation deductions, the after-tax cost of investment drops to 797.3 RMB. In total,
the reform lowered the after-tax cost of investment by close to 15%.27
    The results of Table 1 can also be expressed by extending the framework of Hall and Jorgenson
(1967) to include the effect of the VAT:

                                                                1 -  pv
                                            TUCC = (1 +  )              ,                                          (5)
                                                                 1-
  25
      An alternative research strategy would be to use small-scale taxpayers as controls since the reform only targeted
general taxpayers (as in Liu and Mao, 2018). We focus on large firms since they conduct over 99% of overall
investment in China. In general, we avoid issues related to selection into VAT by excluding small-scale taxpayers
from the analysis. Because small-scale taxpayers only constitute 0.58% of the data, we do not expect to find
significantly different results by including these observations.
   26
      This calculation assumes a discount rate of 5%. According to Chinese accounting standards, the book value of
the asset would be depreciated over 10 years using the straight-line depreciation method.
   27
      Equivalently, the non-deductibility of investment purchases (prior to the reform) raised the after-tax cost of
investment by 17%, relative to the post-reform value.

                                                          15
where TUCC is the tax component of the user cost of capital, which depends on the VAT rate  ,
the CIT rate  , and the present value of depreciation deductions pv . As in Table 1, the VAT has
a direct effect on the purchase price of equipment, (1 +  ), and an indirect effect on the value of
depreciation deductions, (1 +  ) pv .
   While Equation 5 is not a sufficient statistic for tax policy, we can use it to compare the VAT
reform to potential policies and recent reforms. One approach to lowering the TUCC is to accelerate
the depreciation schedule with the goal of increasing pv . However, setting pv = 1 through a policy of
expensing (or 100% bonus depreciation) only lowers the TUCC by 6%. Recent bonus depreciation
policies in the US decreased the TUCC by 2.4%­3.8% (Zwick and Mahon, 2017). Alternatively,
consider the effects of changing the corporate income tax. Eliminating the income tax would only
lower the TUCC by 6%. Barro and Furman (2018) calibrate that the recent US tax reform reduced
the average TUCC by 4%. Finally, consider that undoing the effect of the VAT distortion on the
TUCC would require an investment tax credit (ITC) of 13.6%. This rate is greater than the last
federal ITC in the US (the 8% ITC was eliminated in 1986, Cummins et al., 1994) as well as current
state-level ITCs (which average 4%, Chirinko and Wilson, 2008). These calculations give context
to the claim that the VAT reform comprised one of the largest incentives for investment in history.
They also highlight the importance of studying the effects of indirect taxes on investment (e.g.,
Desai et al., 2004; Cline et al., 2005).
   One potential concern with our identification strategy is that other reforms may also affect the
after-tax cost of investment of foreign and domestic firms. In particular, the VAT reform occurred
shortly after a reform of the corporate income tax system in 2008. While this reform harmonized the
statutory income tax for foreign and domestic corporations, it had almost no effect on the TUCC
of foreign and domestic firms. We observe almost no change in the TUCC of foreign and domestic
firms before 2008. In 2009, we see that the VAT reform lowered the TUCC of domestic firms by
15%.28 The fact that the TUCC is not affected by the CIT reform is reassuring for our analysis
focused on the VAT reform. In addition, we report robustness checks that control for firms' CIT
rates in our empirical analysis.
   Finally, we note that these calculations ignore a practical and important aspect of how the VAT
is administered. Specifically, countries differ in how they process excess VAT credits. Ideally, tax
authorities would automatically refund excess credits to firms. In China, as in many other countries
(EY, 2017), firms can carry over credits to future tax periods. The degree to which firms are able
to claim these credits varies in practice, however, and firms may view excess credits as completely
foregone. For this reason, firms with excess VAT credits may still view investment as partially
irreversible even after the reform. In our empirical analysis in Section 4, we test whether the lack
of refundability of excess VAT payments hampers the effects of the reform.

  28
     Table F.1 shows these calculations by year and ownership. We implement Equation 5 using firms' effective tax
rates. We also assume r = 5.26%, which implies pv = 80%. The TUCC for foreign firms increases from 1.023 to
1.035 between 2007 and 2009, a 1% difference. In contrast, the TUCC of domestic firms drops from 1.22 to 1.042.

                                                       16
3        Administrative Data from Corporate Tax Returns
The main dataset we use comes from the administrative tax records of the Chinese State Adminis-
tration of Tax (SAT) from 2007 to 2011. The sampling of our dataset ensures that large firms are
included every year and that smaller firms are included on a rotating basis. This dataset contains
detailed information on VAT payments and investment in fixed assets. We restrict our analysis
to firms with non-negative values of fixed assets for production and to firms that do not change
ownership type in our sample. Importantly, these data directly measure investment and separate
investments in buildings and structures, which are not part of the reform, from other types of invest-
ment. Finally, the dataset includes a flag that identifies firms that were part of the pilot program
as of 2007. Appendix C provides additional details on our data sources.
     Table 2 reports summary statistics of the firms in our sample, where we winsorize all variables
at the 1% level. Our sample includes data on close to 315,000 firm-year observations. Because our
main analysis relies on a balanced panel of firms that stay in the data for all five years and that
have non-missing investment in all years, the number of observations used in our estimations is
smaller. For robustness, we compare our results with a sample that also includes firms with missing
investment spells. Average total investment is 4.7 million RMB. The policy we study affected the
after-tax cost of equipment investment, which constitutes 67% of total investment. Table 2 shows
that, while foreign firms invest more on average, the average investment rate (equipment investment
relative to the stock of fixed assets) is 10% for both domestic and foreign firms.
     As in many other countries, investment data in China is lumpy. Panel A of Figure 5 shows
the distribution of investment rates and shows that 49% of firms do not invest in a given year. In
addition, 17% of firms replace more than 20% of their capital stock in a given year. These lumpy
data patterns suggest that investment decisions are subject to fixed costs or partial irreversibility
and motivate our study of how taxes affect lumpy investment decisions. By way of comparison,
Zwick and Mahon (2017) report that 34% of firms in the US replace less than 1% of their capital
and that 16% of firms replace more than 20%.29 As in other settings that rely on tax data to
measure investment, we do not observe equipment sales.30
     Panel B of Figure 5 shows that, despite the large number of firms that do not invest in a given
year, the investment rate has a serial correlation of 0.20. The positive correlation suggests firm
investment is also subject to convex adjustment costs. The comparable number for the US is 0.40
(Zwick and Mahon, 2017), which reflects a lower likelihood of inaction.
     Table 2 also reports data on firm sales, fixed assets, cash flow, and debt for both domestic

    29
      Similarly, Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) report that about 60% of Chilean firms replace less than 1% of their
capital. Additional data for the US can be found in Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006). Since we use firm-level tax data
as opposed to plant-level data, the statistics from Zwick and Mahon (2017) are more comparable to our setting.
   30
      One concern is that this limits us from studying the role of partial irreversibility. However, as we discuss in
Section 1, the VAT reform reduced partial irreversibility by decreasing the gap between the purchase and resale price
of equipment. We use the fact that this change in partial irreversibility impacts the fraction of firms that make large
investment decisions to quantify the role of partial irreversibility in lumpy investment decisions.

                                                          17
and foreign firms. We use these variables as controls in some specifications. Since these variables
show that foreign firms are larger than domestic firms, we follow Yagan (2015) by showing that our
results are robust to reweighting our data to match the distribution of firm characteristics between
domestic and foreign firms. Specifically, we first estimate a propensity score model that controls
for firm industry, region, exporting status, sales, and interaction terms between these variables. We
then generate estimation weights following DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996). As we show in
Figure F.2, this inverse probability weighting (IPW) method ensures that our treatment and control
groups are comparable (see Appendix D.1 for details).
    We complement these tax data with two additional datasets. First, we use data on foreign direct
investment records from the Ministry of Commerce (MOC). This dataset contains information on
the type of foreign firms: encouraged, restricted, or whether the project is considered advantageous
under the Midwest program. We merge this dataset with our main dataset from SAT to identify
the foreign firms that enjoyed the preferential VAT prior to the reform. Second, we merge our
tax return data with survey responses from the Chinese Annual Survey of Manufacturing (ASM)
from 2005 to 2007. This merge allows us to confirm that foreign and domestic firms have similar
investment trends for a longer period of time.
    Finally, we discuss the role of SOEs in the Chinese economy. SOEs make up 8.4% of all firms,
account for 4% of large manufacturing firms (those with sales above 5 million RMB), and have an
investment rate of 11%, which is similar to other firms. In our estimation sample, SOEs account
for 3% of observations and 5.2% of total investment in equipment. Our empirical results are robust
to excluding SOEs.


4     Reduced-Form Effects of China's VAT Reform
We now estimate the reduced-form effects of the reform on investment. Our main results rely on a
difference-in-differences research strategy that exploits the different policy treatments of domestic
and foreign firms prior to the reform. As detailed in Section 2, most domestic firms were not able
to deduct input VAT on equipment before 2009. In contrast, foreign firms in encouraged sectors
enjoyed preferential treatment that allowed them to deduct equipment from VAT. For this reason,
the reform significantly reduced the investment cost for domestic firms, but it did not affect foreign
firms. We then show that our main results are robust to a number of checks and to two alternative
triple-differences strategies that rely on pilot firms and investment in non-eligible structures as
additional controls. Finally, we provide evidence that interactions between tax policy and partial
irreversibility were important drivers of the effects of the reform.




                                                  18
4.1     Estimation Strategy and Baseline Results
We begin our analysis by estimating the following difference-in-differences specification:

                                     Yijt = Gi t + µi + jt + Xit  + ijt ,                                       (6)

where Yijt is a firm-level measure of investment for firm i in industry j in year t.31 We measure
extensive-margin responses with the fraction of firms with positive investment and intensive-margin
responses with the investment rate. Gi is an indicator for treatment that takes a value of 1 for
domestic firms and 0 for foreign firms.32 The parameters of interest--t --measure whether domestic
and foreign firms have different trends prior to the reform as well as how investment in domestic
firms is affected by the reform. µi is a firm fixed effect that controls for firm-specific unobservables.
Industry-year fixed effects jt control for industry-specific trends, which rule out the possibility that
our results are driven by differential growth rates across industries. In some specifications, we also
include province-year fixed effects. These fixed effects assuage concerns that differential growth rates
across provinces--e.g., due to differential concentrations of foreign and domestic firms--impact our
results. Finally, we also show that our results are robust to including firm-level controls, Xit , which
include lagged cash-flow measures and corporate income tax rates, as well as quartic expansions of
sales, firm age, and profit margin. We cluster standard errors at the firm level.
    The key identifying assumption is that no other unobserved ownership-year-specific shocks coin-
cide with the reform. We first show graphical evidence that domestic and foreign firms had similar
investment trends before the reform. Figure 6 plots investment trends from 2005 to 2011. Panel A
plots the fraction of firms investing in any given year and shows that domestic and foreign firms had
similar trends prior to the reform. Panel B plots the same figure for the investment rate.33 Panels C
and D report the coefficients t in Equation 6 and show that the parallel trends observed in Panels A
and B result in statistically insignificant estimates before 2009. These parallel trends are consistent
with our assumption that domestic and foreign firms would have had the same investment patterns
absent the reform. After the reform, however, we see that domestic firms are more likely to invest
(Panels A and C) and that their overall investment rate is also higher (Panels B and D).34
    To quantify the effects of the reform, Table 3 provides estimates of the following difference-in-



  31
      We use CIC (Chinese Industrial Classification) codes, which are comparable to 3-digit NAICS (North American
Industry Classification System) codes.
   32
      Our main specification only includes foreign firms with preferential treatment and excludes domestic firms in
the pilot program.
   33
      To create this figure, we use tax data that has information on equipment investment for years 2007 to 2011 as
well as total investment data in the ASM from 2005 to 2006. Since the ASM only reports total investment, this
figure assumes that firms invest in equipment and other assets proportionately. Finally, we normalize investment
outcomes to domestic levels in 2008.
   34
      We report the coefficients in Figure 6 in Table F.3. Table F.4 shows that these results are robust to the same
robustness checks performed in our difference-in-differences analysis.

                                                        19
differences regression using our tax data:

                                 Yijt = Gi × P ostt + µi + jt + Xit  + ijt .                                       (7)

The first three columns in Panel A show that the reform increased the fraction of domestic firms
reporting positive investment by close to 5 percentage points. This result lines up very well with
the visual evidence in Figure 6. Relative to a base participation of 50%, this increase represents
a 10% increase in the fraction of firms with positive investment. Given this large effect on the
extensive margin of investment, it is crucial to have a model that accounts for firms' decisions to
undertake new investment projects. These columns also show that this result is robust to including
industry-by-year and province-by-year fixed effects.
    The last three columns of Panel A report average effects of the reform on the investment rate.
These columns show that, relative to foreign firms with preferential treatment, domestic firms
increased investment by about 3.6% of the capital stock. Relative to an average investment rate
of 10%, the estimate from Table 3 represents a 36% increase in investment and implies a user-cost
                      36% 35
elasticity of 2.4(    15%
                          ).


4.2     Robustness Checks
Panel B of Table 3 shows that these results are robust to the set of firms used in our estimation.
First, columns (1) and (4) show that our results are robust to weighting observations to ensure
that foreign and domestic firms have similar observable characteristics.36 The remaining columns
of Panel B show that our results are robust to including observations missing investment spells
(Unbalanced) or to using all foreign firms (and not just those in preferential industries) as controls.
    Panel C further shows that our results are robust to the set of firms used in our estimation. Since
foreign firms are also more export intensive, one concern is that they are more severely affected by
the financial crisis. Columns (1) and (4) show that we obtain similar estimates when we restrict the
sample to non-exporters. Another concern is that SOEs differentially benefited from the stimulus
program. Columns (2) and (4) show that we find very similar effects when we exclude SOEs from
the estimation. Finally, our estimates are robust to also excluding publicly listed firms, as we show
in columns (3) and (6).
    Panel D of Table 3 shows that our estimates are also robust to controlling for firm-level char-
acteristics. Columns (1) and (4) include a measure of lagged cash flow, and columns (2) and (5)
  35
      In Appendix D, we also calculate the semi-elasticity of investment with respect to the TUCC. Using the reform
as an instrument for the change in the TUCC, we estimate a semi-elasticity of 0.19. This estimate is significantly
lower than the recent estimate of 1.6 for the US (Zwick and Mahon, 2017) and the range of [0.5, 1] used by Hassett
and Hubbard (2002) to summarize previous studies. One possibility is that recent estimates using variation from
bonus depreciation find larger effects due to interactions with liquidity constraints. In contrast, the VAT reform does
not impact the timing of firms' cash-flow obligations. In Appendix D.4, we show that firms in industries with higher
external finance dependence do not see larger increases in investment.
   36
      We describe this inverse-probability weighting (IPW) strategy in Section 3. See Appendix D.1 for more details.

                                                          20
control for quartics in sales, firm age, and profit margin. Finally, columns (3) and (6) show that
our results are robust to controlling for changes in the corporate income tax rate. As we discuss in
Section 2, while a 2008 reform changed the statutory CIT for foreign and domestic firms, the reform
had very small effects on firms' effective tax rates. These columns show that controlling for this
policy change does not affect our main estimate.37 This panel shows that firm-level characteristics
and other observable policies are not driving our results. By including these controls, we also limit
the number of potential unobservable shocks that can challenge our identifying assumption.
   The last panel in Table 3 shows that our results are robust to how we measure investment out-
comes. Columns (1)­(3) now report the effects of the reform on the logarithm of investment. Pre-
cisely because lumpy investment patterns imply that firms will have zero investment in many years,
using the logarithm of investment limits the number of observations in our regressions. Nonetheless,
we find similar estimates in this selected sample. Specifically, we find that investment increases by
40%­45%, which is close to the 36%­38% increase implied by columns (4)­(6) in Panel A. Finally,
columns (4)­(6) of Panel E report effects on the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) of investment, i.e.,
       
log(I + 1 + I 2 ). The IHS has the advantage that it can deal with zero values of investment, and
it also approximates the logarithm for large values of investment. These estimates imply larger ef-
fects than the log specification, with increases of 63%­72%. However, because the derivative of the
IHS is greater near zero, these estimates place considerable weight on extensive-margin responses.
These results show that the conclusion that the reform led to significant increases in investment by
domestic firms does not rely on how we measure investment outcomes.
   As a final robustness check, we consider whether firms could avoid or evade the VAT on equip-
ment. It is unlikely that firms could evade this tax since China's VAT system with third-party
reporting makes it likely that firms would get caught misreporting, especially when it comes to a
large purchase, such as production equipment. One potential worry is that firms could avoid paying
this tax by leasing instead of owning equipment. To explore this possibility, we estimate the effects
of the reform on a measure of capital utilization that includes changes in leased equipment and
investment. Table F.6 reports the results of these estimates and finds similar estimates to those of
Panel A of Table 3. This result suggests that evasion and avoidance are not important concerns for
the interpretation of our reduced-form results.


4.3       Placebo Tests and Triple-Differences Analyses
To further explore our identifying assumption, we conduct two sets of placebo tests on firms and
types of investment that were not affected by the reform. We first compare foreign firms and
domestic firms that were part of the pilot reform in 2004. Since these firms were already able to
deduct equipment purchases from the VAT, the reform should not have affected their investment
decisions. Columns (2) and (5) of Table 4 report the results of this placebo test. These results show

  37
       This result is also visible in Figure 6, since there is no change in investment patterns in 2008.

                                                            21
that foreign and domestic firms in the pilot had statistically indistinguishable investment patterns.
Moreover, these null effects are precisely estimated and can rule out our main effects in columns
(1) and (4). These results shows that foreign and domestic firms did not face differential shocks at
the time of the reform.
    Our second placebo test uses the fact that the tax treatment of investment in structures was not
affected by the reform. Column (3) of Table 4 estimates the extensive-margin effect of the reform
on structures.38 We find small effects on the extensive margin that are less than half of those on
equipment investment. These results suggest firms may need to retrofit existing structures through
minor investments to accommodate new equipment. Consistent with this conjecture, column (6)
of Table 4 finds no impact on the intensive margin of investment in structures. These results show
that foreign and domestic firms had similar investment patterns in assets that were not affected by
the reform.
    We now expand our specification in Equation 7 by including our two placebo groups as additional
controls. The advantage of these triple difference specifications is that--by absorbing time-varying
shocks--they ensure that the effects of the reform are not confounded by shocks that specifically
affect foreign or domestic firms. Columns (2) and (3) of Table 5 report our triple-difference estimates
on the extensive margin of investment. Relative to pilot firms and investment in structures, we find
effects on equipment investment that are in the range of those in Table 3. Columns (5) and (6) also
show that we obtain very similar estimates on the intensive margin as in our baseline difference-
in-differences specification. Taken together with the two placebo tests, these results support our
identifying assumption that foreign and domestic firms did not face differential shocks that would
confound the effects of the reform.


4.4     Tax Policy and Partial Irreversibility
We now provide three pieces of evidence that the effects of the VAT reform were driven by in-
teractions between tax policy and partial irreversibility. First, we show that, consistent with the
predictions of our model in Section 1, the VAT reform led to an increase in investment spikes.
Second, we show that firms with excess VAT credits did not experience a reduction in partial ir-
reversibility and therefore have smaller increases in investment. Finally, we explore heterogeneous
effects across industries with different degrees of partial irreversibility.

Investment Spikes

We now show that the majority of the investment increase was due to the stimulus of additional in-
vestment spikes. We follow the literature (e.g., Cooper and Haltiwanger, 2006; Gourio and Kashyap,
  38
      To focus on major investment in structures and exclude minor investments in affiliated facilities to buildings
(e.g., pipes and elevators), we define the extensive margin of investment on structures in Table 4 as expansions of the
capital stock by more than 1%. Table F.7 shows that our results are robust to using different thresholds to define
the extensive margin.

                                                          22
2007) in defining investment spikes as events when the investment rate is greater than 20%. We
generate three new measures of investment responses to measure the importance of spikes. First,
we define a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 when the investment rate is greater than 20%
        spike
(i.e., Dit    = 1{IKit  0.2}) to capture the effect of the reform on the likelihood of an invest-
ment spike. Second, we define the spike investment rate as the product of the investment rate and
                                    spike
the investment spike dummy, i.e., IKit    = IKit × 1{IKit  0.2}. Finally, we also consider the
                                   non-spike
non-spike investment rate, i.e., IKit        = IKit × 1{IKit < 0.2}.
    Table 6 reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effects of the reform on these outcomes.
Columns (1)­(3) show that the fraction of firms undergoing investment spikes increased by 7.3
percentage points, which is greater than the effect on the likelihood that firms report positive
investment (4.6 percentage points). This effect increases the spike rate from 16.6% to 23.9%.
Columns (4)­(6) report effects on the spike investment rate and columns (7)­(9) report effects on
the non-spike investment rate. Algebraically, the sum of the effects on the spike and non-spike
investment rates add up to the total effect in Panel A of Table 3 (columns (4)­(6)). Comparing the
spike investment rate to the total effect, we find that the 23.9% of firms with a spike are responsible
                    0.031 0.035
for 86%­92%(             ­
                    0.036 0.038
                                )   of the effect on the investment rate. These results further show the
importance of accounting for extensive-margin responses when studying the effects of tax policy on
investment behavior.

Excess VAT Payments and Partial Irreversibility

While the reform allowed domestic firms to deduct VAT payments on equipment, firms with excess
VAT payments did not receive refunds from the government. This feature allows for an additional
test of the role of partial irreversibility, since firms with excess VAT payments that decide to invest
would face a higher purchase price.39 We define a firm to be in a positive tax position if it has
a positive potential VAT credit, defined by an excess VAT credit ignoring the input credit from
investment.40 After the reform, 13.38% of domestic firms have a positive tax position.
    Table 7 reports heterogeneous effects of the reform on investment by tax position. Columns (1)
and (4) show the results for all firms,41 columns (2) and (5) for firms without a positive VAT credit,
and columns (3) and (6) for firms with a positive VAT credit. These results show that investment
responses, especially at the extensive margin, are driven by firms without excess VAT credits. Firms
that will not recover the VAT payment on equipment in this period are still subject to tax-driven
partial irreversibility and display much smaller investment effects.42
   39
      In theory, firms could carry excess credits forward. However, even if firms are able to use these credits in the
future, the interest cost of carrying the credits forward impacts the partial irreversibility of investment.
   40
      Specifically, the potential VAT credit equals InputVATit - OutputVATit + Crediti,t-1 for domestic firms prior
the reform. For foreign firms prior to the reform or all firms after the reform, the potential VAT credit equals
InputVATit - OutputVATit + Crediti,t-1 - 17% × Iit .
   41
      The numbers of observations for columns (1) and (4) are different from the baseline results in Table 3 because
this table restricts the sample to a balanced panel of firms with a non-missing tax position.
   42
      While this is an important result for the study of tax administration (e.g., Ebrill et al., 2001), we do not model

                                                          23
Heterogeneous Response by Redeployability

To further shed light on the role of irreversibility, we now explore whether the reform had hetero-
geneous effects depending on non-tax sources of partial irreversibility. Intuitively, firms that use
assets that are specifically tailored to their needs are likely to face additional partial irreversibility.
Eliminating tax-driven sources of partial irreversibility would then have smaller effects on firms in
industries with high asset specificity.
    To measure the importance of irreversibility, we use an industry-level index of asset redeploy-
ability developed by Kim and Kung (2017). The index takes into account the industry's asset
composition as well as how each asset is used within and across industries.43 Industries with higher
redeployability are less likely to face additional (non-tax) partial irreversibility. To test this hypoth-
esis, we add an interaction with the redeployability index to our difference-in-differences regression.
Table 8 reports the results of this analysis, where we normalize the redeployability index to have a
zero mean and unit standard deviation. This table shows that industries with redeployability that
is one standard deviation higher than average see larger increases in the fraction of firms investing
in equipment (i.e., the extensive margin), the fraction of firms replacing more than 20% of their
capital stock (i.e., investment spikes), and the investment rate (i.e., the intensive margin). These
results further confirm the importance of considering the interactions between tax policy and partial
irreversibility.
    Overall, the results of this section show that China's 2009 VAT reform had a large effect on the
investment of domestic firms. Relative to the magnitude of the reform, however, the estimates imply
elasticities in the lower range of the previous literature (Hassett and Hubbard, 2002). Moreover, we
find that spikes in investment account for the majority of the investment response to the reform.
While these estimates evaluate the current reform, the results from Section 1 suggest that the
estimated effects are not sufficient to evaluate the effects of other reforms.


5     Estimating a Dynamic Investment Model
The previous section provides evidence that taxes interact with investment frictions. To quantify
the importance of these interactions and to study the fiscal effectiveness of alternative policy tools,
we now estimate the dynamic model of investment outlined in Section 1. We estimate this model
in two steps. First, we use the dynamic panel data model of Blundell and Bond (2000) to estimate
the parameters that govern firms' static profit functions and productivity processes. Second, we
estimate adjustment frictions using a simulated method of moments approach that targets pre-
reform investment statistics as well as the reduced-form effects estimated in Section 4. By showing

the refundability of VAT payments in our baseline structural model. We find similar effects when we include the tax
position as a feature of the structural model.
   43
      For example, printing--which relies on customized machines--has a lower redeployability index, while leather
manufacturing has a higher index.

                                                        24
that our model can reproduce the effects of an actual reform, we ensure that the model predicts
reasonable investment responses to tax changes.


5.1     Estimating the Profit Function and Decomposing Productivity
Recall that our model of firm profit (Equations 3­4) implies:

                           it = kit + (1 - )ait = kit + (1 - )(bt + i + it ),                                     (8)

where it is log profit and kit is log capital. The profitability term ait is composed of an aggregate
term bt , an idiosyncratic transitory shock it , and a firm-specific permanent term i . i captures
unobserved firm-level heterogeneity as well as unmodeled frictions.44 it follows an AR(1) process
with persistence and standard deviation ( ,  ). bt also follows an AR(1) process with parameters
(b , b ). i is normally distributed with mean zero and standard deviation  . The main parameters
of this equation are the curvature of the profit function, , and the parameters governing productivity
( ,  , b , b ,  ).
    Two sets of challenges prevent us from estimating Equation (8) directly. First, it is hard to
measure economic profit using accounting data. To overcome this issue, we follow Cooper and
Haltiwanger (2006) by assuming that profits are proportional to revenue.45
    A second set of concerns with Equation (8) is that capital may be measured with error and that
it may also be correlated with productivity. We address these concerns by using the system GMM
estimator of Blundell and Bond (2000). This estimator uses the assumption that the idiosyncratic
productivity term it is an AR(1) process to rewrite Equation (8) in a more favorable form. Specif-
ically, using the fact that it =  i,t-1 + eit , where eit is an innovation term independently and
identically distributed across firms and over time, and that i,t-1 can be expressed as a function of
lagged capital and revenue, we obtain the following equation:

                 rit =  ri,t-1 + kit -  ki,t-1 + b    
                                                  t + i + mi,t -  mi,t-1 + (1 -  )eit ,                           (9)

where we replaced it with rit (log-revenue), where mit is a classical measurement error (or an
unexpected optimization error), and where b      
                                           t and i are year and firm-level fixed effects.
                                                                                          46
                                                                                             We can


  44
      As in Hsieh and Klenow (2009), firms may face different wedges that impact effective prices. Section 5.2
augments our model to account for heterogeneity in i in firms' dynamic investment decisions.
   45
      Appendix A.2 gives examples where this assumption holds either with a DRTS production function and perfect
competition or with constant-elasticity-of-substitution (CES) demand and monopolistic competition--two cases that
are commonly analyzed in the macro investment literature. In addition, without loss of generality, we can also
decompose revenue shocks as aR   it = bt + i + it . When logarithms are taken, the profit and revenue shocks differ by
a constant, which implies that aR  it and ait have the same persistence and variance.
   46
      This follows from writing Equation (8) in terms of revenue (rit = kit + (1 - )bt + (1 - )i + (1 - )it + mit ),
replacing it with  i,t-1 + eit , then replacing i,t-1 with (rit-1 - kit-1 )/(1 - ) - bt-1 - (1 - )i - mit-1 /(1 - ),
and finally setting b                                     
                      t = (1 -  )bt -  (1 -  )bt-1 and i = (1 -  )(1 -  )i . See Appendix E for more details.


                                                         25
then write this equation in first differences to obtain:

           rit =  ri,t-1 + kit -  ki,t-1 + bt + mi,t -  mi,t-1 + (1 -  )eit .                                 (10)

To avoid problems arising from endogenous capital, we instrument this equation using lagged rev-
enue rit-s and capital kit-s , s  3. Finally, to avoid potential problems of weak instruments, we
use the system GMM estimator of Blundell and Bond (2000), which jointly estimates Equation (9)
using changes in lagged revenue rit-s and capital kit-s , s  2 as additional instruments.47
    Panel B of Table 9 reports the results of this estimation. This procedure delivers an estimate
of  = 0.734. To better understand how  affects the curvature of the profit function, we compute
the implied markup in a simple model of monopolistic competition. Our estimate of  yields a
markup of 1.224, which is comparable to values used in the literature.48 We use this estimate of 
                                               ^ it .
                                   ^it = rit - k
to compute firm-level productivity a
    The system GMM estimator also delivers an estimate of the persistence coefficient  of 0.860.49
We then recover the distributions of bt , i , and it by decomposing the variance of the estimated
productivity a
             ^it --see Appendix E.3 for more details. Due to the short panel nature of our data,
aggregate shocks play a relatively small role. Our estimate of the standard deviation of aggregate
shocks b is 0.010, and the estimate of its persistence b is 0.009. Nonetheless, including aggregate
productivity shocks in our framework allows us to consider counterfactual scenarios where changes to
tax policy coincide with shocks to aggregate productivity. We estimate that the standard deviation
of transitory shocks  equals 0.529 and that the permanent heterogeneity term has a standard
deviation of  = 0.854. As a result, a large fraction of the dispersion in profitability comes from
permanent heterogeneity across firms.50 However, despite the fact that the distributions of the
capital stock and firm size depend on permanent heterogeneity, investment dynamics are mostly
determined by transitory shocks.


5.2     Estimating Adjustment Costs
We now estimate the adjustments costs of investment using the method of simulated moments
(MSM). This approach simulates the investment decisions of a large number of firms by numerically
solving the dynamic investment model in Section 1 subject to the profit function and productivity

   47
      The exclusion restriction is that eit is uncorrelated with the twice-lagged values of revenue and capital and
that eit is uncorrelated with the twice-lagged changes in revenue and capital.
   48
      We show this in Appendix E.2 by assuming that the firm has a CRTS production function and faces CES
                                                                                      1    (1- )
demand. In this case, the markup excluding the capital cost is constant and equals      (1-)(1- )+ + 1, where  is
the share of capital in value added and  is the share of materials. Assuming  = 0.5 (Bai, Hsieh, Qian et al., 2006)
and  = 0.7 (Jones, 2011), the implied markup is 1.224. For comparison, the ratio of total sales to major business
costs in the data is 1.223.
   49
      Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006) estimate a value of 0.85, and Winberry (2020) fixes this parameter at 0.9.
   50
      As in David and Venkateswaran (2019), accounting for permanent heterogeneity is important when estimating
investment models with adjustment costs.

                                                        26
shocks estimated in the previous section. We simulate these firms until the distribution reaches
the steady state. We then measure key investment statistics in the simulated data, and we also
simulate a VAT reform mirroring the difference-in-differences research design of Section 4.51 Finally,
the estimated adjustment cost parameters are those that best reconcile the simulated data with the
actual data.
    Before we detail the MSM estimator, we first discuss three sets of fixed parameters. First, we
set the discount factor  to 0.95. Second, we set the CIT rate to the average effective rate in the
data, 15.4%, and we set the VAT rate to 17%--the statutory rate before the reform. Third, we set
the present value of depreciation deductions pv to 0.803.52
    We estimate two models that differ by the distribution of fixed costs. The first model is based
on Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006) and assumes a degenerate distribution G( ) with a single mass
point at   ¯. The second model assumes that  is drawn from a uniform distribution over the interval
[0, ¯], as in Caballero and Engel (1999); Khan and Thomas (2008); Winberry (2020). We estimate
three parameters for each model: the economic rate of depreciation  , the convex adjustment cost
parameter  , and the parameter of the fixed cost distribution ¯.
  We now form the criterion function for the MSM estimator. Denote  = {, , ¯}, m
                                                                               ^ as the data
                                                          ^
moments and m() as the simulated moments. The estimate  minimizes the criterion function:

                                               ^ - m()] W [m
                                       g () = [m           ^ - m()].

We include two sets of moments in m
                                  ^:

   1) The first set of moments (mA ) is based on pre-reform stationary moments (as in Figure 5):

        (a) the mean and the standard deviation of the investment rate;
       (b) the empirical distribution of the investment rate, defined by the fraction of firms with
            an investment rate below 10%, 20% (i.e., 1-spike rate), and 30%; and
        (c) the 1-year autocorrelation of the investment rate.

       These moments are widely used to identify adjustment costs in the investment literature.53 As
       in other settings that rely on tax data (e.g., Zwick and Mahon, 2017; Winberry, 2020), we do
       not observe equipment sales. Since asset sales are often used to disentangle the roles of fixed
       costs and partial irreversibility (e.g., Cooper and Haltiwanger, 2006), a potential concern is
  51
      We simulate two sets of 10,000 firms for the simulated difference-in-differences: a set of treatment firms that
experience a drop in the VAT rate from  = 17% to zero and a set of control firms unaffected by the reform. We
assume the reform is unexpected and permanent and occurs at the initial steady state. To match our empirical
analysis, the simulated difference-in-differences measure effects on investment over a three-year period.
   52
      This value follows from using an interest rate r = 5.26%(= 1/ - 1) to depreciate deductions using a straight-line
depreciation rule over a 10-year period.
   53
      For example, among other moments, Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006) use the spike rate and the autocorrelation
coefficient; Winberry (2020) uses the standard deviation of the investment rate and the spike rate; and Clementi and
Palazzo (2016) use the standard deviation and autocorrelation of the investment rate.

                                                          27
       that excluding sales data will impact our estimates of fixed costs. Because China's 2009 VAT
       reform reduced partial irreversibility by lowering the purchase price of equipment, we use the
       effects of the reform on the intensive and extensive margins of investment to overcome this
       concern.

  2) The second set of moments (mB ) is based on the difference-in-difference (DID) estimates
       reported in Table 3:

       (a) the DID estimate of the effect of the reform on the investment rate; and
       (b) the DID estimate of the effect of the reform on the fraction of firms with positive invest-
            ment.

       We use these reduced-form moments to validate our adjustment-cost estimates based on the
       moments in mA and as a way to provide overidentifying restrictions.

To compute the simulated moments, m(), we simulate the investment statistics for each value of
. Similarly, we mirror the actual reform by measuring the effects of a simulated VAT reform for
three years after the tax change.
    We use the identity weighting matrix in our estimation. This allows the estimate ^ to be
informed by both mA and mB .54

Identification

We briefly discuss the identification of the model parameters since they follow standard arguments
in the investment literature. The first set of stationary moments (mA ) is sufficient to identify
the three structural parameters. The economic depreciation rate  is closely tied to the average
investment rate.
    The convex adjustment cost  affects investment moments through two channels. First, a higher
 increases the serial correlation of investment by incentivizing firms to smooth investment over
time. It also decreases the likelihood of an investment spike. Second, a higher  lowers firms' steady-
state capital levels and--by increasing the relative importance of fixed costs--leads to less frequent
investment spells. When  is sufficiently large, the second channel dominates and a higher  leads
to a smaller serial correlation of investment (see Figure F.4). In contrast, a higher ¯ increases the
fraction of firms with lumpy investment as well as the standard deviation of the investment rate.
At the same time, a higher ¯ also reduces the serial correlation of investment.
   One concern is that additional sources of partial irreversibility may bias our estimates of 
and ¯ that only rely on the moments in mA . The reduced-form moments mB help assuage this
  54
     Models that rely on mA moments result in similar estimates when W is the identity matrix or when we use
the bootstrapped variance-covariance matrix of the moments. While the moments mB are precisely estimated (with
t-stats around 4 or 8), the cross-sectional moments in mA have very small variances (with t-stats between 100-500).
For this reason, models that weight mA and mB using the variance-covariance matrix give very little weight to the
moments in mB .

                                                        28
concern. As we discuss in Section 1,  and  ¯ both lower the effect of a VAT cut on the investment
rate. In addition, a lower ¯ would increase the effect of the reform on the extensive margin. By
simultaneously matching a reform that eliminated an important source of partial irreversibility,
these moments help us evaluate the robustness of our estimates.
    As a complement to this discussion, we conduct a systematic analysis of how these moments af-
      ^
fect (, ^, ^
           ¯) in Appendix E.4 by calculating the sensitivity measure proposed by Andrews, Gentzkow
and Shapiro (2017).

Estimates of Adjustment Costs

Table 10 reports estimates of the adjustment costs  and ¯ and the depreciation rate  and compares
the data moments with the simulated moments. The second row reports estimates from a model
that only uses the pre-reform stationary statistics mA as target moments and where  is fixed at a
single value. While this model does a relatively good job of matching the spike rate and the average
investment rate, it overpredicts the fraction of firms with an investment rate below 10% as well
as the standard deviation of the investment rate. The low convex cost and high fixed cost in this
model result in a "bang-bang" investment function where firms either do not invest at all or replace
more than 30% of their capital. Notably, there are no firms with investment rates in the 10%-30%
range. As a consequence, the model predicts that the VAT reform would have increased both the
fraction of firms investing and the investment rate by 15 percentage points. These effects are 3­4
times larger than our reduced-form estimates.
    The third row of Table 10 reports estimates of a model that only targets pre-reform stationary
statistics mA and that allows  to be i.i.d. with a uniform distribution. The estimate of ¯ implies a
larger upper bound for the fixed costs, and we also estimate a larger value of  relative to the first
model. The randomness of the fixed cost lowers the serial correlation of investment and results in
an overall better match of the whole investment rate distribution. In particular, the model implies
that 14% of firms have investment rates between 10% and 30% (relative to 17% in the data).55
One potential concern is that the lack of data on equipment sales makes it hard to estimate fixed
costs separately from the role of partial irreversibility. Because the VAT reform decreased partial
irreversibility by lowering the price of new equipment, we can validate our baseline model estimates
using the reduced-form effects of the reform. While this model does not target the difference-in-
differences estimates, it does a relatively good job of matching the effects of the reform. The model
predicts slightly smaller increases in the fraction of firms investing (3 percentage points) and in the
investment rate (2.8 percentage points) than those measured in the data.
    The fourth row of Table 10 reports estimates of a model that targets both mA and mB . This
model results in very similar estimates of the structural parameters. However, the small changes
in the estimates result in an improved fit of the standard deviation and the serial correlation of
  55
     Baley and Blanco (2019) show that it is important to match cross-sectional investment patterns to characterize
the role of lumpy investment in aggregate impulse response functions to a policy reform.

                                                        29
investment. Not surprisingly, the model results in a slightly better fit of the moments mB .56 The
model predicts an increase of 4.2 percentage points in the fraction of firms investing and an increase
of 3.3 percentage points in the investment rate. It is worth noting that the last two models have
slightly lower average investment rates. Overall, relative to the average investment rate, the last two
models predict that the VAT reform would increase investment by 35%­40%, which is remarkably
close to our reduced-form estimates.
     As we discuss in Section 4, the majority of the increase in the investment rate following the
reform was due to additional investment spikes. We use the estimated effect of the reform on
investment spikes as additional overidentifying moments. Table F.11 reports that the model predicts
a 6.4-percentage-point increase in the likelihood of an investment spike (relative to a measured 7.3
percentage points). Similarly, the model predicts an increase in the spike investment rate of 3.6
percentage points (relative to a measured 3.5 percentage points). These results show that our model
is able to quantitatively match the empirical finding that the extensive margins of investment are
key determinants of the effects of the VAT reform. Moreover, because the effects of tax policy
depend on the relative magnitudes of fixed costs and partial irreversibility, this overidentification
check is evidence that our estimated model properly captures the importance of these frictions.
     Finally, we now consider the economic magnitude of the estimated adjustment costs. The
estimated convex cost parameter ^ is 1.432. Given the model's average investment rate of 8%, the
                                                                                                     1.432
convex adjustment cost at the average investment rate would amount to 0.45%(=                          2
                                                                                                             × (0.08)2 )
of capital. To grasp the magnitude of the fixed adjustment, note that the estimated upper bound
of 0.119 implies an average fixed cost of 5.95% of the desired capital stock. However, since firms
select into investment, the average fixed cost paid by firms with positive investment is only 2.4% of
the desired capital stock. Table 9 collects all of the parameters that define our model.
     Overall, the model does a remarkable job of matching stationary investment statistics and the
effects of an actual tax reform as well as untargeted moments that highlight the importance of
investment spikes. Given these results, we expect the estimated model to provide a solid foundation
to compare the effects of alternative tax policies.


6         Simulating Alternative Tax Reforms
As we show in Section 1, the effectiveness of different types of tax incentives at stimulating invest-
ment depends on how tax policies impact the extensive margin of investment. We now use the
estimated dynamic model to quantify which policies are more effective at stimulating investment
and firm value relative to their total fiscal cost. We first build intuition by studying the effects of
different changes to the VAT rate and the CIT rate and by considering the introduction of an invest-
ment tax credit (ITC). We then quantify the effects of potential reforms that are closely modeled

    56
         Figure F.3 shows that the criterion function is concave and rises sharply around the estimated parameters.

                                                            30
on the recent US tax reform. Throughout, we consider the effects of unexpected and permanent
tax policy changes.


6.1     Extensive-Margin Responses and Fiscal Effectiveness
One of the benefits of our model is that it allows us to provide a menu of policy options for
government officials who want to stimulate investment. Figure 7 allows a government official to
compare reforms that result in a similar loss of tax revenue. Panel A of Figure 7 compares the
effects on investment of a CIT cut versus those of a VAT cut. The solid blue line reports the effects
of reducing the CIT rate from 15.4% to 1%. Each marker in the line represents the simulated effects
of reducing the CIT rate to a given rate, where we calculate the effects over a 10-year window. For
example, the x-axis shows that reducing the CIT rate to 10% results in a tax revenue loss of 20%
(which includes VAT and CIT revenue). The y-axis shows that this reform results in an investment
increase of close to 15%. The dashed red line allows us to compare this CIT cut with a VAT cut
that has the same effect on tax revenue. Specifically, cutting the VAT rate to 3% would result in a
similar revenue loss as the CIT cut discussed above, but would increase investment by 35%.
    By comparing investment and tax revenues, Figure 7 helps us determine which policies are more
effective at stimulating investment.57 The blue line in Panel A shows that the effect on investment
is always smaller than the effect on tax revenue and implies an investment-to-tax-revenue elasticity
of close to 0.67.58 Because the dashed red line is always above the 45-degree line, the investment-to-
tax-revenue elasticity is always greater than one. These simulations show that a VAT cut is more
effective at stimulating investment for a given revenue cost than a CIT cut.
    The superior fiscal effectiveness of the VAT reform is driven by extensive-margin responses,
as they impact both the cost of these reforms and their effects on investment. First, extensive-
margin responses drive the costs of different policies. CIT cuts are more costly since they benefit
all firms--even those in the inaction region--while only firms that invest benefit from a VAT cut.
Second, following the intuition from Figure 4 in Section 1, cuts to the VAT rate narrow the inaction
region, leading more firms to undertake new investment projects. To illustrate the importance of
this mechanism, we use our simulated data to study the composition of investment responses. In
the case of the VAT reform (setting  = 0), of the overall 43% increase in investment, 64% was
driven by extensive-margin responses. In contrast, while cutting the CIT rate to 7.4%--at the cost
of a similar impact on revenue--increases investment by 20%, only 34% of this increase was due to
extensive-margin responses.
    Panel B of Figure 7 compares the effects of a VAT cut to those of introducing an investment
   57
       In contrast, approaches that rely on TUCC elasticities to forecast the effects of different stimulus policies may
not correctly capture extensive-margin responses. This result is partly driven by the fact that policies with similar
effects on the TUCC can lead to different extensive-margin effects. As we show in Appendix F, VAT and CIT cuts
with the same TUCC change can have different investment elasticities and differ in their fiscal effectiveness.
    58
       Given that the different CIT cuts fall in a straight line, this investment-to-tax-revenue elasticity is constant
across the different rate cuts.

                                                          31
tax credit (ITC).59 In contrast to Panel A, this graph shows that the effects of an investment tax
credit mirror those of a VAT cut very closely. The reason for this result is that the ITC also lowers
the partial irreversibility of investment. The slight difference in the effectiveness of these policies is
due to the fact that the VAT cut reduces the value of depreciation deductions while the ITC does
not. Importantly, this graph shows that the lessons of China's 2009 VAT reform are applicable to
other countries or states that already have enacted or will enact an ITC.


6.2     Simulating Tax Reforms
We now build on the intuition from Figure 7 by studying a broader menu of policy alternatives,
including ones recently enacted as part of the US tax reform. We consider the effects of the following
policies:

   1. the VAT reform with a 17% tax rate reduction (our baseline);

   2. a CIT cut from the current effective tax rate of 15.4% to 10%60 ;

   3. 100% bonus depreciation (expensing), which allows firms to deduct capital expenditures im-
       mediately;

   4. a version of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA) that combines expensing with the CIT cut;
       and

   5. a 17% investment tax credit.

    Table 11 simulates the effects of these policies on investment, firm value, and tax revenues.61
Column (1) shows that the baseline VAT cut increased aggregate investment by 43%. We also find
a relatively large increase of 10% in the fraction of firms investing and an increase of 11% in firm
value. Because the VAT on equipment purchases raised a considerable amount of revenue, this
simulation entails a revenue loss of 28%. To compare the fiscal effectiveness of different policies,
we also report the ratios of the percentage changes in investment and firm value to the percentage
change in tax revenue. In the case of the VAT reform, we find that investment increases by 1.6% for
every 1% loss in tax revenue. Similarly, firm value increases by 0.41% for a 1% loss in tax revenue.
    We now consider the effects of tax policies that are modeled after the recent US tax reform
but that have a similar tax cost to the VAT reform. Column (2) reports the effects of a CIT cut,
which has smaller effects on both investment and the fraction of firms that invest in any given
year. Column (3) studies the effects of a bonus depreciation policy that allows firms to immediately
  59
      We model the effect of an ITC on the purchase price of capital as follows: TUCC = (1+ )(1-       pv )-IT C
                                                                                                     1-          . Note
that an ITC does not affect the book value of capital or its resale price. Similar to a VAT cut, an ITC reduces the
gap between the purchase and resale price of capital.
   60
      This 35% reduction in  is comparable to the decrease in the CIT following the TCJA in the US.
   61
      As in Winberry (2020), firm value is the sum of the value function and the tax value of depreciation allowances.
Figure F.5 compares the effects of different VAT, CIT, and ITC incentives on firm value.

                                                          32
deduct the full cost of investment. This policy has similar effects on investment to those of the CIT
cut but is less effective at raising firm value. Column (4) combines the effects of a CIT cut and
bonus depreciation, mirroring the TCJA in the US.62 This policy increases aggregate investment by
roughly half of the effect of the VAT reform, even though the tax revenue losses from both policies
are similar. This result shows that addressing distortions that generate partial irreversibility may
be more important for emerging economies like China than lowering the tax cost of investment.
    The last policy we consider is an investment tax credit of 17%. As shown in Figure 7, this policy
is very closely related to a VAT cut since it also reduces the partial irreversibility of investment.
For this reason, it is no surprise that column (5) reports ratios of investment and firm value to the
tax revenue loss that are comparable to those of the VAT cut. This again shows that the result that
tax policy can directly affect the lumpiness of investment is applicable outside the case of China.


6.3     Model Robustness
We now show that our baseline simulation results are robust to a number of extensions.63 First, we
explore the general equilibrium effects of increasing capital prices or interest rates. In our baseline
model, we assume that the pre-tax price of capital goods is constant. One concern is that the
price of capital increases as the demand goes up (e.g., Goolsbee, 1998). We relax this assumption
by calibrating an upward-sloping capital supply curve based on the results of House and Shapiro
(2008). Column (2) of Table F.12 shows that this change results in a slightly smaller aggregate effect
on investment and an investment-to-tax-revenue elasticity of 0.84. Additionally, we also consider
the possibility that borrowing rates increase as a result of the VAT cut. To allow for this possibility,
we assume that interest rates have a proportional increase to the TUCC. Table F.13 simulates the
effects of the VAT cut assuming interest rate elasticities with respect to the TUCC that range from
-0.05 to -0.25. We find slightly smaller effects when we allow for this mitigating effect. However,
even for the largest effect of the TUCC on interest rates, the increase in investment is 80% of the
baseline increase. While a full general equilibrium calculation is beyond the scope of this paper,
these extensions show that our main results are not sensitive to allowing for changes in interest
rates or in the price of capital goods.
    As a second extension, we consider the role of imperfections in the used capital market. A
potential concern is that the resale price is smaller than the purchase price, even without taxes. To
explore this possibility, we increase the degree of partial irreversibility by reducing the resale price
from 1 (as in the baseline model) to 0.80 (as in Cooper and Haltiwanger, 2006; Ramey and Shapiro,
2001). Column (3) of Table F.12 shows that our results are virtually unaffected by this change.
    While we have shown that our empirical results in Section 4 are not affected by other stimulus

  62
      Bonus depreciation has a smaller effect on firm value than a CIT cut since this policy only benefits firms that
invest. Our simulated TCJA raises overall investment by less than the sum of the CIT cut and bonus depreciation,
since the tax cut lowers the value of depreciation deductions.
   63
      Appendix F.1 provides additional discussion of these extensions.

                                                         33
policies, it may be important to account for aggregate productivity shocks related to the financial
crisis in our counterfactual analysis. Column (4) of Table F.12 shows that our results are very
similar when the reform coincides with a (permanent) one-standard-deviation drop in aggregate
productivity.64
     Finally, we address the fact that our simulations of the effects of CIT cuts on investment ab-
stracted from interactions between the CIT rate and both adjustment costs and borrowing costs.65
First, we modify our model to consider the possibility that adjustment costs are tax deductible. In
this case, a CIT cut directly impacts the importance of fixed and convex adjustment costs, making
the pre-tax value of these costs larger. Following this intuition, Table F.14 shows that we find
smaller effects following a CIT cut when we assume that adjustment costs are deductible. Second,
we now consider the fact that debt is a preferred form of financing since interest payments are
tax deductible (Graham, 2000). Because a CIT cut reduces the value of tax-deductible financing,
accounting for this effect on the after-tax cost of financing may reduce the effectiveness of CIT cuts
at stimulating investment. Table F.14 confirms that when a CIT cut affects a firm's financing costs
(through the weighted average cost of capital, WACC), it is less effective at stimulating investment.
Therefore, our main result--that policies that directly impact the extensive margins of investment
are more effective at stimulating investment--is only strengthened by assuming that adjustment
costs or interest costs are tax deductible.


7        Conclusion
The universal fact that firms make lumpy investment decisions has important implications for tax
policy. This paper develops this point in several ways.
     First, the paper shows that models of investment with partial irreversibility or fixed costs of
adjustment are required to generate extensive-margin responses to tax policy changes. In these
models, the user cost of capital is not a sufficient statistic for how tax policy affects investment.
Accounting for how tax policy interacts with investment frictions is necessary to obtain a complete
picture of the effects of tax policy on investment behavior.
     Second, we analyze an important tax policy change in China that reduced the after-tax cost
of investment by close to 15%. We show that this reform directly affected the likelihood of firm
inaction by reducing the degree to which partial irreversibility leads firms to delay adjusting their
capital stock. We use administrative tax data and a difference-in-differences research design to
document that, as a result of the reform, domestic Chinese firms increased investment by 36%
relative to foreign firms. We also find that the majority of the increase in investment was due to
    64
      While the effects of the VAT reform are robust to coincidental productivity shocks, we do not study whether
the effectiveness of fiscal policy depends on the business cycle (Winberry, 2020) or on whether other forms of partial
irreversibility endogenously respond to fiscal policy (Lanteri, 2018).
   65
      Note that these assumptions do not affect our estimation or our simulation of changes to the VAT system.
However, they impact the simulation of changes to the CIT.

                                                         34
extensive-margin responses, including additional investment spikes, and that the non-refundability
of excess VAT credits can also generate partial irreversibility.
   Finally, we estimate an empirical dynamic model of investment that embeds adjustment frictions
and relevant tax parameters. We use the reduced-form estimates of the reform to show that the
model can reproduce the effects of an actual tax reform. The model shows that policies that
limit partial irreversibility, such as eliminating a tax on investment or subsidizing it through an
investment tax credit, are more effective at stimulating investment than policy tools that simply
lower the cost of investment, such as a corporate income tax cut. Because other policies--such as
investment tax credits and sales taxes--can directly impact extensive-margin investment decisions,
these results have important implications for tax policy beyond China.


References
Abel, Andrew B., "Empirical investment equations: An integrative framework," Carnegie-
 Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 1980, 12, 39 ­ 91.
Andrews, Isaiah, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse M Shapiro, "Measuring the sensitivity of
 parameter estimates to estimation moments," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132
 (4), 1553­1592.
Arellano, Cristina, Yan Bai, and Jing Zhang, "Firm dynamics and financial development,"
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 2012, 59 (6), 533 ­ 549.
Auerbach, Alan J, "The Dynamic Effects of Tax Law Asymmetries," The Rreview of economic
 studies, 1986, 53 (2), 205­225.
Auerbach, Alan J., "Tax Reform and Adjustment Costs: The Impact on Investment and Market
 Value," International Economic Review, 1989, 30 (4), 939­962.
Auerbach, Alan J and James R Hines, "Investment Tax Incentives and Frequent Tax Reforms,"
 American Economic Review, 1988, 78 (2), 211­216.
Bachmann, R¨  udiger, Ricardo J. Caballero, and Eduardo M. R. A. Engel, "Aggregate
 Implications of Lumpy Investment: New Evidence and a DSGE Model," American Economic
 Journal: Macroeconomics, October 2013, 5 (4), 29­67.
Bai, Chong-En, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Zheng Song, "The Long Shadow of a Fiscal Expan-
 sion," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2016, pp. 15­16.
  , , Yingyi Qian et al., "The Return to Capital in China," Technical Report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Inc 2006.
Baley, Isaac and Andr´ es Blanco, "Aggregate Dynamics in Lumpy Economies," Technical Re-
 port, Working Paper 2019.
Barro, Robert J. and Jason Furman, "Macroeconomic Effects of the 2017 Tax Reform," Brook-
 ings Papers on Economic Activity, 2018, 49 (1 (Spring), 257­345.
Blundell, Richard and Stephen Bond, "GMM estimation with persistent panel data: an ap-
  plication to production functions," Econometric reviews, 2000, 19 (3), 321­340.


                                                  35
Caballero, Ricardo J and Eduardo MRA Engel, "Explaining investment dynamics in US
 manufacturing: a generalized (S, s) approach," Econometrica, 1999, 67 (4), 783­826.
Cai, Jing and Ann Harrison, "Industrial Policy in China: Some Unintended Consequences?,"
 Industrial and Labor Relations Review, November 2019.
Chen, Yuyu, Zongyan He, and Lei Zhang, "The Effect of Investment Tax Incentives: Evidence
 from China's Value-Added Tax Reform," Working Paper, Peking University., 2016.
Chen, Zhao, Zhikuo Liu, Juan Carlos Su´  arez Serrato, and Daniel Yi Xu, "Notching
 R&D Investment with Corporate Income Tax Cuts in China," Technical Report, mimeo, Duke
 University 2019.
Chirinko, Robert S. and Daniel J. Wilson, "State investment tax incentives: A zero-sum
 game?," Journal of Public Economics, 2008, 92 (12), 2362 ­ 2384. New Directions in Fiscal
 Federalism.
Clementi, Gian Luca and Berardino Palazzo, "Entry, exit, firm dynamics, and aggregate
  fluctuations," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2016, 8 (3), 1­41.
Cline, Robert, John Mikesell, Tom Neubig, and Andrew Phillips, "Sales Taxation of
  Business Inputs Existing Tax Distortions and the Consequences of Extending the Sales Tax to
  Business Services," Technical Report, Council on State Taxation 2005.
Cong, Lin William, Haoyu Gao, Jacopo Ponticelli, and Xiaoguang Yang, "Credit alloca-
 tion under economic stimulus: Evidence from China," The Review of Financial Studies, 2019, 32
 (9), 3412­3460.
Cooper, Russell W and John C Haltiwanger, "On the nature of capital adjustment costs,"
 The Review of Economic Studies, 2006, 73 (3), 611­633.
Cummins, Jason G, Kevin A Hassett, and R Glenn Hubbard, "A reconsideration of
 investment behavior using tax reforms as natural experiments," Brookings papers on economic
 activity, 1994, 1994 (2), 1­74.
David, Joel M. and Venky Venkateswaran, "The Sources of Capital Misallocation," American
 Economic Review, July 2019, 109 (7), 2531­67.
Desai, Mihir A., C.Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines, "Foreign direct investment in a world
 of multiple taxes," Journal of Public Economics, 2004, 88 (12), 2727 ­ 2744.
DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux, "Labor Market Institutions and
 the Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach," Econometrica, 1996, 64 (5),
 1001­1044.
Ebrill, Liam, Michael Keen, Jean-Paul Bodin, and Victoria Summers, The Modern VAT,
 International Monetary Fund, 2001.
EY, "Managing indirect tax refunds," Technical Report, Ernst & Young 2017.
Goolsbee, Austan, "Investment Tax Incentives, Prices, and the Supply of Capital Goods," Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, 1998, (113), 121­148.
Gourio, Francois and Anil K Kashyap, "Investment spikes: New facts and a general equilibrium
 exploration," Journal of Monetary Economics, September 2007, 54 (Supplemen), 1­22.



                                             36
Graham, John R., "How Big Are the Tax Benefits of Debt?," The Journal of Finance, 2000, 55
 (5), 1901­1941.
Hall, Robert E and Dale W Jorgenson, "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior," American
 Economic Review, 1967, 57 (3), 391­414. Reprinted in Bobbs-Merrill Reprint Series in Economics
 , Econ-130. Investment 2, ch. 1, pp 1-26.
Hassett, Kevin A and R Glenn Hubbard, "Tax policy and business investment," in "Handbook
 of public economics," Vol. 3, Elsevier, 2002, pp. 1293­1343.
Hayashi, Fumio, "Tobin's marginal q and average q: A neoclassical interpretation," Econometrica:
 Journal of the Econometric Society, 1982, pp. 213­224.
Hennesy, Christopher A. and Toni M. Whited, "How Costly Is External Financing? Evidence
 from a Structural Estimation," The Journal of Finance, 2007, 62 (4), 1705­1745.
House, Christopher L and Matthew D Shapiro, "Temporary Investment Tax Incentives:
 Theory with Evidence from Bonus Depreciation," The American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (3),
 737­768.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J Klenow, "Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and
 India," The Quarterly journal of economics, 2009, 124 (4), 1403­1448.
Hsu, Po-Hsuan, Xuan Tian, and Yan Xu, "Financial development and innovation: Cross-
 country evidence," Journal of Financial Economics, 2014, 112 (1), 116­135.
Jones, Charles I, "Intermediate goods and weak links in the theory of economic development,"
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2011, 3 (2), 1­28.
Khan, Aubhik and Julia K. Thomas, "Idiosyncratic Shocks and the Role of Nonconvexities in
 Plant and Aggregate Investment Dynamics," Econometrica, 2008, 76 (2), 395­436.
Kim, Hyunseob and Howard Kung, "The asset redeployability channel: How uncertainty
 affects corporate investment," The Review of Financial Studies, 2017, 30 (1), 245­280.
Lanteri, Andrea, "The Market for Used Capital: Endogenous Irreversibility and Reallocation
  over the Business Cycle," American Economic Review, September 2018, 108 (9), 2383­2419.
Levinsohn, James and Amil Petrin, "Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to Control
  for Unobservables," The Review of Economic Studies, 04 2003, 70 (2), 317­341.
Liu, Yongzheng and Jie Mao, "How do Tax Incentives Affect Investment and Productivity?
  Firm-Level Evidence from China," Technical Report, International Center for Public Policy,
  Andrew Young School of Policy Studies, Georgia State University 2018.
Maffini, Giorgia, Jing Xing, and Michael P Devereux, "The impact of investment incentives:
 evidence from UK corporation tax returns," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2016.
Ministry of Finance, "Announcement on deepening VAT reform," 2019.
Moon, Terry S., "Capital Gains Taxes and Real Corporate Investment," Job Market Paper,
 Princeton University, 2019.
NBS China, "China Statistical Yearbook," National Bureau of Statistics of China, 2018.
Ohrn, Eric, "The Effect of Corporate Taxation on Investment and Financial Policy: Evidence
 from the DPAD," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, May 2018, 10 (2), 272­301.

                                              37
  , "The Effect of Tax Incentives on U.S. Manufacturing: Evidence from State Accelerated Depre-
  ciation Policies," Working Paper, February 2018.
Ottonello, Pablo and Thomas Winberry, "Financial Heterogeneity and the Investment Chan-
 nel of Monetary Policy," 2019.
Ramey, ValerieA. and MatthewD. Shapiro, "Displaced Capital: A Study of Aerospace Plant
 Closings," Journal of Political Economy, 2001, 109 (5), 958­992.
Rao, Nirupama, "Do tax credits stimulate R&D spending? The effect of the R&D tax credit in
 its first decade," Journal of Public Economics, 2016, 140, 1­12.
Salinger, Michael A and Lawrence H Summers, "Tax Reform and Corporate Investment: A
  Microeconometric Simulation Study," Working Paper 757, National Bureau of Economic Research
  September 1981.
Summers, Lawrence H, "Taxation and corporate investment: A q-theory approach," Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity, 1981, 1981 (1), 67­140.
Winberry, Thomas, "Lumpy Investment, Business Cycles, and Stimulus Policy," forthcoming,
 American Economic Review, 2020.
Yagan, Danny, "Capital Tax Reform and the Real Economy: The Effects of the 2003 Dividend
 Tax Cut," The American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (12), 3531­3563.
Zwick, Eric and James Mahon, "Tax Policy and Heterogeneous Investment Behavior," The
 American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (1), 217­248.




                                              38
                                                                 Figure 1: Cross-Country Comparison of Investment
                                                          10
             Investment (Trillions US Dollars, PPP-adjusted)
                 2         4          6          8




                                                               2000    2003     2006     2009        2012     2015   2018
                                                                                         Year

                                                                                China           US          EU28


Notes: This figure displays investment in the United States, the European Union, and China from 2000 to
2017 as reported by the OECD. The figure shows that investment in China has long surpassed investment
levels in the US and the European Union and that is has increased drastically since 2000.




                                                                                        39
                             Figure 2: Effects of Partial Irreversibility
                                  A. Marginal Product of Capital




                                           B. Optimal Capital




Notes: These figures plot the marginal product of capital and the optimal capital against productivity in a
simple static model with only partial irreversibility; i.e., the resale price (ps ) is smaller than the purchase
price (pb ). Panel A plots the marginal product of capital (MPK) against productivity. The dashed line
corresponds to the MPK at initial capital stock k0 . The upper horizontal line indicates the purchase price
pb . The lower horizontal line indicates the resale price ps . The red line indicates the MPK at associated
optimal capital levels. In Panel B, the red line plots the optimal capital level against productivity.



                                                      40
                                   Figure 3: Effects of Fixed Costs

                                            A. Optimal Profit




                                           B. Optimal Capital




Notes: These figures plot the optimal profit and capital against productivity in a simple static model with
fixed costs only. In Panel A, the solid line indicates the optimal profit without any frictions ( ). The
dot-dashed line indicates the optimal profit net of fixed cost (  ~  =  - k  ). The dashed line indicates
the profit evaluated at the initial capital level (0 ). The red line indicates the upper envelope of    ~  and
  0
 , which is the optimal profit in the presence of fixed costs. In Panel B, the dot-dashed line indicates the
frictionless optimal capital level (k  ) against productivity. The dashed line indicates the initial capital k0 .
The red line indicates the optimal capital level taking into account the fixed costs.


                                                       41
     Figure 4: Effects of Tax Policy and Investment Frictions on Policy Functions

                 A. Pre-reform                                B. VAT Reform (17% to 12.9%)




        C. CIT Reform (15.4% to 0)                     D. Bonus Depreciation (10 years to 1 year)




Notes: These figures display the policy functions against productivity in a dynamic investment model
before the reform and after VAT reform, CIT reform and bonus depreciation, respectively. The three
reforms generate the same reduction in the tax component of the user cost of capital. In Panel A, the
dotted straight line indicates the optimal policy (the logarithm of the capital stock in the next period as
a function of productivity) in the frictionless case. The dashed line indicates the optimal policy before
the reform in the presence of all investment frictions--convex costs, fixed costs and partial irreversibility.
Panel B adds the policy function (the red line) after reducing the VAT rate from 17% to 12.9%; Panel C
plots the policy function after reducing the CIT rate from 15.4% to 0; Panel D plots the policy function
after a bonus depreciation policy that fully accelerates the timing of depreciation deductions.




                                                     42
           Figure 5: Distribution and Autocorrelation of the Investment Rate
                                                A. Distribution of the Investment Rate
                                   50



                                   40
                     Percentage




                                   30



                                   20



                                   10



                                        0
                                                0.00
                                                0.02
                                                0.04
                                                0.06
                                                0.08
                                                0.10
                                                0.12
                                                0.14
                                                0.16
                                                0.18
                                                0.20
                                                0.22
                                                0.24
                                                0.26
                                                0.28
                                                0.30
                                                0.32
                                                0.34
                                                0.36
                                                0.38
                                                0.40
                                                0.42
                                                0.44
                                                0.46
                                                                    Investment Rate




                                            B. Autocorrelation of the Investment Rate
                                  .25
                                  .2
                     Investment Rate
                           .15    .1
                                  .05




                                            0          .2           .4            .6          .8   1
                                                            1-Period Lagged Investment Rate


Notes: These figures display notable features of the investment in our tax data. Panel A plots the distri-
bution of the investment rate of domestic firms before the reform. We winsorize the investment rate at the
top 5%. Panel B plots the investment rate against the one-period-lagged investment rate. We group the
lagged investment rate into equally sized bins from 0 to 1 and then calculate the average investment rate
for each bin. The red line is the OLS linear fit line.




                                                                      43
                                                Figure 6: Reduced-Form Effects of China's 2009 VAT Reform

                                             A. Extensive Margin                                                                                               B. Investment Rate
                              0.70                                                                                                              0.17
                                                    Before Reform                      After Reform
                                                                                                                                                0.15
Fraction of Firms Investing




                              0.65                                                                                                                                    Before Reform                      After Reform




                                                                                                                  Investment Rate
                                                                                                                                                0.13

                              0.60
                                                                                                                                                0.11


                                                                                                                                                0.09
                              0.55

                                                                                                                                                0.07
                              0.50
                                                                                                                                                0.05
                                     2005    2006        2007       2008       2009          2010     2011                                             2005    2006        2007       2008       2009          2010     2011
                                                                    Year                                                                                                              Year

                                                          Treatment Group (Domestic Firms)                                                                                  Treatment Group (Domestic Firms)
                                                          Control Group (Foreign Firms)                                                                                     Control Group (Foreign Firms)




                                             C. Extensive Margin                                                                                               D. Investment Rate
                              0.08                                                                                                              0.06


                              0.06
Fraction of Firms Investing




                                                                                                                  Fraction of Firms Investing




                                                                                                                                                0.04

                              0.04
                                                                                                                                                0.02
                              0.02

                                                                                                                                                0.00
                              0.00


                              -0.02                                                                                                             -0.02

                                      2005   2006        2007        2008      2009          2010     2011                                              2005   2006        2007        2008      2009          2010     2011
                                                                     Year                                                                                                              Year

                                                     Baseline: Estimate           ASM: Estimate                                                                        Baseline: Estimate           ASM: Estimate
                                                     Baseline: 95% CI             ASM: 95% CI                                                                          Baseline: 95% CI             ASM: 95% CI


Notes: These figures show the effects of the VAT reform on the investment of domestic and foreign firms.
To construct these figures, we first use tax data to calculate the average investment rate in equipment
for each year from 2007 to 2011 for domestic firms (the treatment group) and foreign firms (the control
group). For easier comparison, we set 2008 as the base year and align the investment rate of equipment for
domestic and foreign firms to the pooled average rate in 2008. In addition, we complement the tax data
with Chinese Annual Survey of Manufacturing (ASM) data. That is, we merge the 2005-2006 ASM data
with the 2007-2008 tax data and calculate the average rate of total investment for each year from 2005 to
2008 for domestic and foreign firms. Similarly, we align the rates of total investment of the two groups to
the pooled average investment rate of equipment in 2008. To do so, we subtract the average rate of total
investment in 2008 from each average rate and add the pooled average investment rate of equipment that
we obtained from the tax data.




                                                                                                             44
                        Figure 7: Simulating Alternative Tax Reforms:
                           Elasticity of Investment to Tax Revenue

                                    A. VAT Cuts vs. CIT Cuts




                                        B. VAT Cuts vs. ITC




Notes: These figures plot the simulated percentage change in aggregate investment to the percentage loss
in tax revenue at different rates of VAT cut, CIT cut and investment tax credit (ITC) policies. For each tax
rate, we solve the model, simulate investment and tax revenue, and calculate the corresponding changes in
each outcome. Panel A plots the percentage change in aggregate investment against the percentage change
in tax revenue. The red solid curve corresponds to VAT cuts from 17% to different rates. The blue dotted
line corresponds to CIT cuts from 15.4% to different rates. Similarly, Panel B compares the percentage
change in tax revenue from VAT cuts with that from an ITC.



                                                    45
           Table 1: VAT Reform and Investment Costs:
          Example of a 1,000 RMB Equipment Purchase

                                        Pre-reform     Post-reform    Change
 VAT-Included Cost                            1170            1170
 Deductible from VAT                               0           170    + 170
 Book Value                                    1170           1000       -170
 PV of Total Depreciation                     948.6           810.8    -137.8
 Deductible from CIT                          237.2           202.7     -34.5
 After-Tax Cost of Investment                 932.8          797.3     -135.5
 Notes : This calculation assumes a discount rate of 5% and a marginal corpo-
rate income tax rate of 25%. According to Chinese accounting standards, the
book value of the asset would be depreciated over 10 years using a straight-line
depreciation method. This calculation assumes a zero salvage value.




                                      46
                                          Table 2: Summary Statistics

                                    All Firms                  Domestic Firms                Foreign Firms
                            Mean       SD         N       Mean       SD         N       Mean       SD         N
      Equipment Investment (million RMB)
      Investment             3.15     12.37     221,069    2.61     11.02    202,155     9.01     21.27    18,914
      Investment Rate        0.10     0.19      215,813    0.10      0.19    197,050     0.10      0.16    18,763
      Log Investment         6.50     2.31      118,913    6.36      2.27    104,929     7.54      2.36    13,984
      Other Characteristics (million RMB)
      Total Investment       4.70     17.27     258,736    4.00     15.71    234,475    11.40     27.33    24,261
      Fixed Assets          33.77    100.32     310,003   28.85     91.57    282,582    84.48    156.65    27,421
      Sales                133.80    390.83     314,595   114.79   351.52    287,033    331.77   643.16    27,562




47
      Cash Inflow          126.74    384.06     283,694   106.45   344.23    257,280    324.38   622.06    26,414
      Debt                  85.13    241.28     313,074   77.58    228.86    285,570    163.49   334.81    27,504
      Notes: This table presents summary statistics of equipment investment and other variables from tax data
     that are used in the analysis. Investment is reported in million RMB and deflated by the national price in-
     dex of equipment investment. The investment rate is defined as the ratio of investment to the capital stock
     measured in terms of the book value of net fixed assets. Total investment includes investments in equip-
     ment, buildings and structures, and other productive capital. Fixed assets are measured in terms of the
     book value, deflated by the national price index of fixed-asset investment. Sales are the total sales including
     domestic and export sales. Cash flow is the business cash inflow from the cash-flow statement. Debt is the
     total debt at the end of the year. Variables are winsorized at the 1% level.
                 Table 3: Estimates of Difference-in-Difference Regressions

                                    Extensive Margin: % Firms             Intensive Margin: Investment Rate
                              (1)             (2)             (3)          (4)            (5)             (6)
  A. Main Results
  Domestic × Post          0.058            0.044          0.046        0.036          0.037           0.038
                            (0.010)          (0.010)        (0.010)      (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.004)
  N                         86870            86870          86870        81270          81270           81270
  Industry × Year FE          Y                               Y            Y                              Y
  Province × Year FE                           Y              Y                           Y               Y
  B. Robustness Checks: Sample Selection
                          IPW        Unbalanced           All Foreign     IPW        Unbalanced      All Foreign
  Domestic × Post          0.060            0.053          0.045        0.033          0.044           0.039
                            (0.021)          (0.008)        (0.006)      (0.008)        (0.003)         (0.003)
  N                         82785            221069         107255       79195          215813         100980
  Industry × Year FE          Y                Y              Y            Y              Y              Y
  Province × Year FE          Y                Y              Y            Y              Y              Y
  C. Robustness Checks: Different Samples
                          Non-          Non-                Non-          Non-           Non-           Non-
                        Exporters       SOE                 Public      Exporters        SOE            Public
  Domestic × Post          0.067            0.046          0.046        0.037          0.037           0.038
                            (0.020)          (0.010)        (0.010)      (0.009)        (0.004)         (0.004)
  N                         61195            83559          85298        56445          78152           79798
  Industry × Year FE          Y                Y              Y            Y              Y               Y
  Province × Year FE          Y                Y              Y            Y              Y               Y
  D. Additional Firm-Level Controls
                           CF       Firm Controls            CIT           CF       Firm Controls        CIT
  Domestic × Post          0.055            0.060          0.061        0.036          0.037           0.036
                            (0.010)          (0.010)        (0.011)      (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.005)
  N                         83418            86284          86870        79547          80823           81270
  Industry × Year FE          Y                Y              Y            Y              Y               Y
  Province × Year FE          Y                Y              Y            Y              Y               Y
  E. Alternative Investment Measures
                                    Log Investment                                  IHS Investment
                                                                             
  Domestic × Post          0.449            0.404          0.414        0.716          0.633           0.653
                            (0.052)          (0.054)        (0.054)      (0.083)        (0.086)         (0.087)
  N                         20720            20720          20720        86870          86870           86870
  Industry × Year FE          Y                               Y            Y                              Y
  Province × Year FE                           Y              Y                           Y               Y
Notes: This table uses tax data to estimate difference-in-difference regressions of the form:
                                      Yit = Gi × P ostt + µi + jt + Xit  + ijt ,
where Yit is equipment investment, Gi is the treatment indicator set to 1 for domestic firms and 0 for foreign
firms, and P ostt is the post-reform indicator set to 1 for years since 2009. µi is the firm fixed effect. Panel A
reports the baseline results. The dependent variable for columns (1)­(3) is a dummy variable set to 1 if a firm
makes an investment; the dependent variable for columns (4)­(6) is firm's investment rate. Columns (1) and
(4) control for industry-year fixed effects. Columns (2) and (5) control for province-year fixed effects. Columns
(3) and (6) include both fixed effects. Panel B reports robustness checks: column (1) weights observations by
the inverse probability weighting (IPW); column (2) uses an unbalanced panel; column (3) uses all foreign firms
as the control group. Panel C reports another set of robustness checks: column (1) exclude exporters; column
(2) exclude state-owned firms (SOEs); column (3) excludes public firms. Panel D augments the regression with
additional controls. Column (1) controls for firms' net cash flow scaled by the capital stock. Column (2) adds
quadratics in sales, profit margin, and age. Column (3) adds the statutory CIT rate. Panel E runs the baseline
specification with the log and inverse hyperbolic sine of investment as dependent variables. All regressions include
                                                          48 level.
firm fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm
                             Table 4: Estimates of Placebo Tests

                         Extensive Margin: % Firms Investing        Intensive Margin: Investment Rate

                             (1)            (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)
                          Baseline         Pilot      Structures    Baseline       Pilot     Structures
 Domestic × Post          0.046            -0.010      0.023        0.038          0.017        -0.002
                          (0.010)         (0.032)      (0.011)       (0.004)      (0.013)       (0.003)
 N                         86955           13932          81270       86955       13932         81270
 Industry × Year FE          Y               Y             Y            Y           Y             Y
 Province × Year FE          Y               Y             Y            Y           Y             Y
Notes: This table uses tax data to estimate difference-in-difference regressions of the form:
                                   Yit = Gi × P ostt + µi + jt + st + it ,
where Yit is a measure of investment, Gi is the treatment indicator set to 1 for domestic firms and 0 for
foreign firms, and P ostt is the post-reform indicator set to 1 for years since 2009. µi is the firm fixed
effect. jt and st are industry-year and province-year fixed effects, respectively. Panel A uses domes-
tic firms and foreign firms in the pilot program as the treatment and control groups, respectively. The
dependent variable for columns (1)­(3) is a dummy variable set to 1 if a firm makes an investment
in equipment; the dependent variable for columns (4)­(6) is firm's equipment investment rate. Panel
B uses investment in buildings/structures as dependent variables. The treatment and control groups
are the same as those in the baseline analysis, where the non-pilot domestic firms are the treatment
group and foreign firms with preferential treatment are the control group. All regressions include firm
fixed effects as well as industry-year and province-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at
the firm level.




                                                     49
                       Table 5: Estimates of Triple-Differences Regressions

                                   Extensive Margin: % Firms Investing     Intensive Margin: Investment Rate

                                      (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)         (5)          (6)
                                   Baseline      Pilot       Structures     Baseline      Pilot     Structures
 Domestic × Post                   0.046         -0.036     0.028           0.038         0.011       0.002
                                    (0.010)     (0.030)     (0.011)          (0.004)     (0.012)     (0.003)
 Domestic × Post × Non-Pilot                    0.080                                    0.030
                                                (0.032)                                  (0.013)
 Domestic × Post× Equipment                                 0.036                                    0.033
                                                            (0.015)                                  (0.005)

 N                                  86955       100040      162540           81355        92875      162540
 Industry × Year FE                   Y            Y           Y               Y            Y           Y
 Province × Year FE                   Y            Y           Y               Y            Y           Y
Notes: This table uses tax data to estimate triple-differences regressions. For comparison, columns (1) and
(4) report the baseline estimates from difference-in-difference regressions. Columns (2) and (5) use firms in the
pilot program as an additional control group and estimate the triple-differences regression of the form:

                 Yit = 1 Gi × P ostt + 2 Pi × P ostt + 3 Gi × Pi × P ostt + µi + jt + st + it ,

where Yit is equipment investment, Pi is an indicator set to 1 for pilot firms and 0 for non-pilot firms, Gi is
the treatment indicator set to 1 for domestic firms and 0 for foreign firms, and P ostt is the post-reform indi-
cator set to 1 for years since 2009. µi is the firm fixed effect. jt and st are industry-year and province-year
fixed effects, respectively. Columns (3) and (6) use investment in structures as an additional control group and
estimate the triple-differences regression of the form:

         Ykit = 1 Gi × P ostt + 2 Ak × P ostt + 3 Gi × Ak × P ostt + 4 Gi × Ak + µi + jt + st + kit ,

where k denotes the investment type, i.e., equipment and structures. Ak is an indicator set to 1 for investment
in equipment and 0 for investment in structures. The other variables are defined the same as above. The de-
pendent variable for columns (1)­(3) is a dummy variable set to 1 if a firm makes an investment; the dependent
variable for columns (4)­(6) is the firm's investment rate. All regressions include firm fixed effects as well as
industry-year and province-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.




                                                    50
                     Table 6: Estimates of Difference-in-Difference Regressions: Investment Spikes

                                         Extensive Margin:                                    Intensive Margin:
                               % Firms Investing with IK  0.2             Spike Investment Rate         Non-Spike Investment Rate
                                 (1)         (2)            (3)           (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)        (9)

      Domestic × Post          0.070       0.071          0.073        0.031      0.034       0.035     0.005     0.003      0.003
                               (0.009)     (0.009)        (0.010)       (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)

      N                         81270       81270          81270         81270     81270       81270    81270      81270      81270
      Industry × Year FE          Y                          Y             Y                     Y        Y                     Y
      Province × Year FE                      Y              Y                       Y           Y                   Y         Y
     Notes: This table uses tax data to estimate difference-in-difference regressions of the form:




51
                                                    Yit = Gi × P ostt + µi + jt + st + it ,
     where Yit is a measure regarding investment spikes, Gi is the treatment indicator set to 1 for domestic firms and 0 for foreign
     firms, and P ostt is the post-reform indicator set to 1 for years since 2009. µi is the firm fixed effect. jt and st are industry-
     year and province-year fixed effects, respectively. The dependent variable for columns (1)­(3) is a dummy variable set to 1 if
                                                    spike
     the investment rate is larger than 0.2, i.e., Dit    = 1{IKit  0.2}, where IKit is the investment rate of firm i at time t. The
                                                                                           spike
     dependent variable for columns (4)­(6) is the spike investment rate, defined by IKit        = IKit × 1{IKit  0.2}; the dependent
                                                                                    non-spike
     variable for columns (7)­(9) is the nonspike investment rate, defined by IKit             = IKit × 1{IKit < 0.2}. All regressions
     include firm fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.
                         Table 7: Estimates of Difference-in-Difference Regressions: VAT Refundability

                                        Extensive Margin: % Firms Investing                        Intensive Margin: Investment Rate
                               All Firms No VAT Credit          Positive VAT Credit      All Firms     No VAT Credit      Positive VAT Credit
                                   (1)             (2)                    (3)                (4)              (5)                   (6)
      Domestic × Post           0.043            0.065                  -0.009            0.034            0.040                  0.019
                                 (0.010)         (0.013)                (0.024)            (0.004)         (0.006)                (0.008)
      N                          82880            66309                 11145               79098           63142                  10781
      P-val of difference                                                0.00                                                       0.00
      Firm Controls                 Y               Y                      Y                  Y               Y                      Y
      Industry × Year FE            Y               Y                      Y                  Y               Y                      Y
      Province × Year FE            Y               Y                      Y                  Y               Y                      Y




52
     Notes: This table uses tax data to estimate difference-in-difference regressions of the form:
                                                   Yit = Gi × P ostt + µi + jt + st + Xit  + ijt ,
     where Yit is equipment investment, Gi is the treatment indicator set to 1 for domestic firms and 0 for foreign firms, and P ostt is the
     post-reform indicator set to 1 for years since 2009. µi is the firm fixed effect. jt and st are industry-year and province-year fixed effects,
     respectively. We conduct the analysis separately for three sets of firms depending on their tax position. A firm is said to be in a positive
     tax position if it has a positive potential VAT credit. Particularly, the VAT credit of firm i at time t = InputVATit - OutputVATit +
     Crediti,t-1 for domestic firms prior the reform and = InputVATit - OutputVATit + Crediti,t-1 - 17% × Iit otherwise (i.e., foreign firms
     prior the reform or all firms after the reform). We report results in columns (1) and (4) using all firms; in columns (2) and (5) using
     firms with no VAT credit; and in columns (3) and (6) using firms with positive VAT credits. The dependent variable for columns (1)­(3)
     is a dummy variable set to 1 if a firm makes a positive investment, i.e., Dit = 1{IKit > 0}, where IKit is the investment rate of firm i
     at time t. The dependent variable for columns (4) to (6) is the investment rate IKit . All regressions include firm controls (i.e., net cash
     flow scaled by capital stock and quadratics in sales, profit margin, and age), firm fixed effects, and industry-year and province-year fixed
     effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.
      Table 8: Estimates of Difference-in-Difference Regressions: Redeployability

                                           Extensive Margin       Investment Spikes    Intensive Margin
                                             (1)           (2)      (3)       (4)        (5)         (6)
                                                                                                
 Domestic × Post                          0.044       0.044       0.071     0.071      0.037       0.037
                                           (0.010)    (0.010)     (0.009)   (0.009)    (0.004)     (0.004)

 Domestic × Post × Redeployability                        0.005             0.005                  0.003
                                                      (0.003)               (0.003)                (0.001)
 N                                          86870         86870   81270      81270      81270      81270
 Province × Year FE                           Y            Y        Y          Y            Y        Y
Notes: This table shows the heterogeneous responses according to industry irreversibility. We use tax data
to estimate regressions of the form:

                 Yit = 1 Gi × P ostt + 2 Gi × P ostt × Redeployabilityj + µi + st + ijt ,

where Yit is equipment investment, Gi is the treatment indicator set to 1 for domestic firms and 0 for for-
eign firms, and P ostt is the post-reform indicator set to 1 for years since 2009. Redeployabilityj is the
redeployability index of industry j from Kim and Kung (2017), which measures industry-level irreversibil-
ity. µi is the firm fixed effect, and st is the province-year fixed effect. For comparison, columns (1), (3)
and (5) report the baseline estimates from difference-in-difference regressions. The dependent variable for
columns (1) and (2) is a dummy variable set to 1 if a firm makes a positive investment. The dependent
variable for columns (3) and (4) is a dummy variable set to 1 if the investment rate is larger than 0.2. The
dependent variable for columns (5) and (6) is the firm's investment rate. All regressions include firm fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.




                                                     53
Table 9: Summary of Assigned and Estimated Parameters

 Description                                            Value (S.E)
 Panel A. Fixed Parameters
 Discount factor                                            0.950
 VAT rate                                                   0.170
 CIT rate                                                   0.154
 PV depreciation schedule                         pv        0.803

 Panel B. Parameters Estimated via System GMM
 Profit curvature                                      0.734   (0.030)
 Persistence firm transitory shocks                    0.860   (0.012)
 SD firm transitory shocks                             0.529   (0.005)
 SD firm permanent shocks                              0.854   (0.007)
 Persistence aggregate shocks                     b    0.009   (0.152)
 SD aggregate shocks                              b    0.010   (0.001)

 Panel C. Parameters Estimated by MSM
 Convex cost                                           1.432 (0.061)
 Upper bound of fixed cost                         ¯
                                                       0.119 (0.004)
 Economic depreciation rate                            0.071 (0.001)
Notes: This table summarizes the parameters from Section 5. Panel A
displays the parameters we set (i.e., those not estimated) to simulate
the model. Specifically, we set tax parameters to their empirical coun-
terparts. Panel B summarizes the estimated parameters from the first-
stage production function estimation and productivity decomposition.
In particular, we estimate the profit curvature () and the persistence
of firm transitory shocks ( ) using system GMM. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses. The rest of the parameters in Panel B are the
results of the productivity decomposition (see Section 5.1). The stan-
dard errors of those parameters (i.e.,  ,  , b , and b ) are calculated
from 100 bootstrap samples. Panel C displays the estimated adjustment
frictions and depreciation rate using the method of simulated moments
(MSM) (see Section 5.2). Standard errors of those parameters (i.e.,  ,
¯, and  ) are calculated from 100 bootstrap samples.





                                  54
                                                    Table 10: Structural Estimation and Moments

                           Parameters                                                            Moments
      Model
                               ¯
                                                  Avg i     Share i < 0.1   Share i < 0.2   Share i < 0.3   Corr(i, i-1 )    SD i     DID. Ext   DID. Int
                   (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)          (5)             (6)             (7)            (8)           (9)       (10)       (11)

        Data                                      0.102        0.720           0.834           0.892           0.200        0.186      0.046      0.038
                                                  (0.001)      (0.003)         (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.013)       (0.002)    (0.010)    (0.004)
       Fixed      0.427      0.074      0.087     0.092        0.861           0.861           0.863           0.271        0.228      0.149      0.151
        (A)      (0.141)    (0.012)     (0.001)
      Uniform     1.594      0.118      0.071     0.080        0.742           0.793           0.879           0.198        0.137      0.030      0.028
        (A)      (0.090)    (0.003)     (0.001)
      Uniform     1.432      0.119      0.071     0.081        0.748           0.795           0.875           0.208        0.140      0.042      0.033




55
       (A+B)     (0.061)    (0.004)   (0.001)
      Average Fixed Cost (conditional on investing): 0.024

     Notes: This table displays estimates of the convex adjustment cost  , upper bound of fixed cost       ¯, and economic depreciation rate  using the
     method of simulated moments. Columns (4)­(11) show the simulated moments: 1) Set A includes pre-reform static moments, namely, the aver-
     age investment rate; the fraction of firms with an investment rate smaller than 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3, the one-period serial correlation of the investment
     rate, and the standard deviation of investment rate. 2) Set B includes difference-in-difference estimates at the extensive and intensive margins.
     In particular, we simulate 10,000 firms over 200 periods, with the reform taking place at the 100th period. We use the last 20 periods before
     the reform to calculate the pre-reform static moments. Meanwhile, we simulate another counterfactual economy where the reform does not take
     place. The difference-in-difference moments are calculated by taking the difference between the two simulated economies. The first row reports
     the data moments with standard errors in parentheses calculated using 100 bootstrap samples. The second row assumes the fixed cost is non-
     random and uses the pre-reform static moments for estimation. The third and the fourth rows (i.e., Uniform (A) and Uniform (A+B)) assume
     that the fixed cost is independently and identically distributed across firms and over time, following a uniform distribution over [0,   ¯]. The third
     row uses pre-reform static moments for estimation. The fourth row uses both pre-reform static moments and the difference-in-difference mo-
     ments for estimation. In the last row, using model Uniform (A+B), we report the average fixed cost for firms making a positive investment. The
     standard errors of the estimates are reported in parentheses below the point estimates.
                                 Table 11: Simulating Tax Reforms


                                           Baseline         CIT Cut         Bonus        TCJA:        ITC
                                             17%          15.4% to 10%   Depreciation   BD+CIT        17%
 Percentage Change in                         (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)       (5)

 Aggregate Investment                        0.434           0.147          0.098         0.215      0.495
 Fraction of Firms Investing                 0.098           0.062          0.032         0.084      0.101


 Tax Revenue                                -0.279           -0.191         -0.131        -0.286     -0.319
 Firm Value                                  0.114           0.103          0.017         0.116      0.132


 Ratio of Investment to Tax Revenue          1.557           0.767          0.744         0.753      1.551
 Ratio of Firm Value to Tax Revenue          0.410           0.540          0.133         0.406      0.415

Notes: This table displays the simulated responses to five scenarios: column (1) considers a reduction of the
VAT rate from 17% to zero, i.e., our baseline reform; column (2) considers a reduction of the effective CIT
rate from 15.4% to 10%; column (3) considers a policy that allows firms to fully depreciate capital expenses
immediately, i.e., bonus depreciation; column (4) considers a combination of a CIT cut and bonus deprecia-
tion, i.e., a version of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA); and column (5) considers a policy granting a 17%
investment tax credit (ITC). We report percentage (%) changes in the outcomes of interest. For instance,
our baseline 17% VAT cut increases aggregate investment by 43% over a 10-year window.




                                                     56
                   Online Appendix: Not for Publication
    This appendix includes supplemental information and additional analyses. Appendix A provides
detailed derivations of the model. Appendix B describes additional policy details. Appendix C
describes the data sources. Additional results of reduced-form analysis, structural estimation and
simulations are reported in Appendix D, E and F, respectively.


A       Model Appendix
A.1      Static Model
This section documents derivations of the static models following the setup of the firm problem in
Section 1.

A.1.1      Partial Irreversibility

Assume the purchase price of capital is pb and the resale price is ps < pb . The firm's problem is
now:
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
 max       max (1 -  )A1- K  - pb (K - K0 ), max (1 -  )A1- K  - ps (K - K0 ), (1 -  )A1- K0
                                                                                           
                                                                                             ,
         K>K0                                K<K0                                                 
                                                                                                  
                         Invest                              Disinvest                Inaction


    The optimal capital level K is characterized as follows.

· There exists an upper threshold A¯ such that firms invest if their productivity is sufficiently high
                                                             1/(1-)
  A>A  ¯. In particular, the optimal capital K b = A (1-b
                                                         )
                                                                     and
                                                         p

                                                          1

                                        ¯=    pb         1-
                                        A                     K0 .                               (A.1)
                                           (1 -  )

· There exists a lower threshold A such that firms disinvest if their productivity is sufficiently low
                                                                1/(1-)
                                                       (1- )
  A < A. In particular, the optimal capital K s = A      ps
                                                                         and

                                                          1
                                              ps         1-
                                        A=                    K0 .                               (A.2)
                                           (1 -  )

                                 ¯] remain with K0 .
· Firms with productivity A  [A, A




                                                 57
A.1.2    Fixed Cost

Now assume the firm needs to pay a fixed cost K  to adjust capital. The firm's problem is now:
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                             
                 max    max (1 -  )A1- K  - p(K - K0 ) - K  , (1 -  )A1- K0
                                                                          
                                                                            , ,
                        K = K 0                                              
                                                                             
                                                    Adjust                                   Inaction


where K  is given by Equation 1. The optimal profit conditional on adjusting is:

                                                                            /(1-)
                                                               (1 -  )
                             (1 -  ) (1 - ) -                                         A + pK0 .                             (A.3)
                                               p                   p

   The fixed costs generates a region of inaction where firms would rather produce with the initial
capital stock K0 rather than adjust their capital. This region is defined by two values of productivity
A and A ¯ at which the firm is indifferent between adjusting and inaction. These values are defined
by comparing firm profits from adjusting and inaction:

                                                    /(1-)
                                    (1 -  )                                             1-                            ¯}.
     (1 -  ) (1 - ) -                                        A + pK0 =         (1 -  )K0 A                   , A  {A, A
                       p                p
          Profit conditional on adjusting to optimal capital K             Profit using initial capital K0

                                                                                                                 1
To see how tax reforms interact with the fixed cost, scale both sides by a factor of                            1-
                                                                                                                     and denote
         p
UCC =   1-
           :

                                                                  1/(1-)
                      (1 - )                                                             1-
                             UCC -                                         A + UCCK0 = K0 A .                               (A.4)
                                   1-                   UCC
                                            Slope                                Intercept


A.1.3    Convex Adjustment Cost

In the presence of convex adjustment cost, the firm's problem is:

                                  max(1 -  )A1- K  - p(K - K0 ) - D(K ),
                                    K


where p = pk (1 -  pv ) and where we assume that D (K )  0 and D (K )  0. The firm's FOC is:

                                         (1 -  )A1- K -1 = p + D (K )                                                       (A.5)




                                                               58
Taking logarithms and differentiating FOC (A.5) w.r.t. pk , we have:

                            1 K         1        p            K
                     ( - 1)       =                  + D (K )
                           K pk     p + D (K ) pk             pk
                                        p               D (K )                      D (K )K
                       ( - 1)K,pk =            p,pk +            K,pk
                                    p + D (K )        p + D (K )                     D (K )
                                              sp                                       (K )

                       ( - 1)K,pk = sp p,pk + (1 - sp )K,pk (K )
                                              -sp
                             K,pk =                         ,                                                  (A.6)
                                    1 -  + (1 - sp )(K )

where the second line multiplies by pk and arranges terms into elasticities, the third line introduces
          p                      D (K )K
sp =   p+D (K )
                  and (K ) =      D (K )
                                            0, and the last line solves for K,pk and uses the fact that
p,pk = 1. If there are no convex adjustment costs (sp = 1), K,pk equals the elasticity in the
frictionless case.
    Convex costs dampen how firms respond to changes in pk in two ways. First, convex costs
decrease the relative importance of p in the total marginal cost of investment (sp  1 in the
numerator). Second, firms take into account the fact that larger deviations from the initial capital
impact the marginal cost of investment by moving the firm into more convex regions of the function
D(K ) ((K )  0 in the denominator).
    Similarly, taking logarithms and differentiating FOC (A.5) w.r.t (1 -  ), we have:

                                                   -sp U CC,1- + (1 - sp )
                                       K,1- =                              ,                                   (A.7)
                                                   1 -  + (1 - sp )(K )

where K,1- is the elasticity of UCC with respect to 1 -  .
    To interpret Equations A.6 and A.7, note that sp is the share of the price of capital in the total
marginal cost of investment (p + D (K )).66 By increasing the marginal cost of investment, convex
costs dampen the numerator of these elasticities. In addition, note that (K ) is a measure of the
curvature of the adjustment cost function D (K ).67 Larger deviations of K from K0 also increase
the marginal cost of investment. This indirect effect of the convex costs also dampens the elasticities
by increasing the value of the denominator.
    Comparing Equations A.6 and A.7, we note that changes in 1 -  and pk now have different
effects on investment. To see the nature of this difference, note that changes in 1 -  change the
after-tax cost of D(K ). These adjustment costs are thought to include halts in production. Because
these costs are not tax-deductible, we model D(K ) as being an after-tax expense.
    A particular example of D(K ) is the case of quadratic costs. These costs feature prominently in

  66
     Note sp  [0, 1] as long as D (K )  0.
  67
     In the context of expected utility theory, (K ) is the Arrow-Prat measure of risk aversion, or the coefficient of
relative risk aversion. Note (K )  0 as long as D(K ) is convex.

                                                         59
                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                   K
the literature and we use them in our dynamic model. Assuming D(K ) =                          2   K0
                                                                                                        -1       K0 implies
            1            p              p
(K ) =   1-K0 /K
                   and s =              K
                                                . These facts imply the following elasticities:
                                   p+   K0
                                           -1



                               -1                                                -U CC,1- + p
                                                                                              (K/K0 - 1)
 K,pk =                                                   and K,(1- ) =                                                 .
                                    K                                                                 K
          (1 - ) +   p
                             (2 - ) K 0
                                        - (1 - )                             (1 - ) +      p
                                                                                               (2 - ) K0
                                                                                                         - (1 - )

A.2      Profit Function
In this section, we micro-found the profit function of the form  = (A )1- K  by a simple firm
optimization problem. Assume the final good market is perfectly competitive. Firms use capital,
labor and intermediate goods for production. The production function features decreasing-return-
to-scale (DRTS) with the following form:

                                            Y = A1- [(K  L1- )1- M  ] ,

where  is the span-of-control parameter,  is the share of intermediate goods, and  is the capital
share in value added. Capital K is pre-determined while labor L and intermediate goods M are
chosen contemporaneously after productivity A is realized.
   Given the price of final goods pc which is normalized to one, wage w, the price of intermediate
goods pM and corporate income tax rate  , the firm's problem is:

                                                                         
                         max (1 -  ){A1- (K  L1- )1- M                      - wL - pM M }.
                             L,M


Solving the FOCs, we obtain the optimal labor and intermediate inputs:
                                                                               1
                                                 1-                     1- [(1-)(1- )+ ]
                    (1 - )(1 -  )                                                                  (1- )
           L =                                                    A1-                      K 1-[(1-)(1-)+] ,
                         w                              pM
                      w        
           M =                  L.
               (1 - )(1 -  ) pM




                                                             60
Thus, the optimal revenue and profit are:

                                                   1-         (1 -  )
                                                      1 -  [(1 - )(1 -  ) +  ]
                           1-              
                                                   
     (1 - )(1 -  )          1-            1-                                                    (1- )
 
R =                                            A                                        K 1-[(1-)(1-)+] = (AR )1- K  ,
          w                          pM            
                                                   
                       AR

 = {1 -  [(1 - )(1 -  ) +  ]} R
                                               1-
             1                            1
                                               
 = (1 -  ) 1- {1 -  [(1 - )(1 -  ) +  ]} 1- AR    K  = (A )1- K  ,                                                (A.8)
                                               
                                 A


where the parameter , and profit shocks A are defined by:

                       (1 -  )
          =                             ,
               1 -  [(1 - )(1 -  ) +  ]
                                                                                          1-             
                       1                                             1   (1 - )(1 -  )     1-           1-
        A = (1 -  )   1-   {1 -  [(1 - )(1 -  ) +  ]}               1-                                       A.
                                                                              w                   pM

A.3     Value Function and Normalization
This section details the derivation of the value function.

A.3.1    Original Value Function

The per-period profit is (K, A ), where K is pre-determined capital and A is a profit shock
realized at the beginning of the period. Firms pay the input VAT at rate  on purchases of new
investment, which is not allowed to be deducted from the output VAT. Firms also pay the CIT at
rate  on profits. Capital depreciates at rate  . Besides the economic depreciation rate, we also
consider a straight-line accounting depreciation rate (^) that determines the deductibility of capital
usage from the CIT.
                                                                              I 2
   Firms face adjustment frictions including a convex cost ( 2                K
                                                                                    K ), a random fixed cost (K  ),
and partial irreversibility from the non-deductible VAT on new equipment purchases.
   Let D be the depreciation allowances accumulating over time. Since the accounting depreciation
rate ^ differs from the economic depreciation rate  , firms track the depreciation allowance D besides
capital stock K . The firm's state variables are (K, D, A ,  ). We assume that the fixed cost is i.i.d
drawn from the distribution G( ) and we define the ex ante value function:
                                                            ¯
                                                            
                                 0             
                              V (K, D, A ) =                    V (K, D, A ,  )dG( ).                             (A.9)
                                                        0




                                                            61
The firm's problem in recursive formulation is:

            V (K, D, A ,  ) = max{V b (K, D, A ,  ), V s (K, D, A ,  ), V i (K, D, A ,  )},

where

                                      ^
V b (K, D, A ,  ) = (1 -  )(K, A ) +  D
                                                                 2
                  + max -[1 +  -  ^(1 +  )]I -             I
                                                                     K - K  +  E[V 0 (K , D , A )|A ]
                    I>0                        2           K
                                      ^
V s (K, D, A ,  ) = (1 -  )(K, A ) +  D
                                                                     2
                  + max -[1 +        - ^(1 +  )]I -        I
                                                             K           - K  +  E[V 0 (K , D , A )|A ]
                      I<0                           2      K
                                      ^ +  E[V 0 (K (1 -  ), D(1 - 
V i (K, D, A ,  ) = (1 -  )(K, A ) +  D                            ^), A )|A ]


The capital stock K and depreciation allowance D evolve according to the following laws of motion:

                                    K = (1 -  )K + I
                                    D = (1 - ^)[D + (1 +  )I ].


A.3.2   Simplification

Winberry (2020) shows that the impact of the depreciation schedule ^ on the deductibility of a unit
of new capital can be summarized by the sufficient statistic pv , which is defined recursively as

                                       pv = ^ + (1 - ^) E[p ].                                    (A.10)
                                                           v


Furthermore, the function V (K, D, A ,  ) has the same solution as the following value function

                  ~ (K, A ,  ) = max{V
                  V                  ~ b (K, A ,  ), V
                                                     ~ s (K, A ,  ), V
                                                                     ~ i (K, A ,  )},




                                                  62
where
                              ¯
                              
          ~ 0 (K, A ) =
          V                       ~ (K, A ,  )dG( )
                                  V
                          0
                                                                                                 2
         ~ b (K, A ,  ) = max (1 -  )(K, A ) - [1 +  -  pv (1 +  )]I + 
         V
                                                                                             I
                                                                                                     K + K 
                          I>0                                          2                     K
                          ~ 0 (K , A )|A ]
                     +  E[V
                                                                                                 2
         ~ s (K, A ,  ) = max (1 -  )(K, A ) - [1                                            I
         V                                                         -  pv (1 +  )]I +                 K + K 
                          I<0                                                            2   K
                          ~ 0 (K , A )|A ]
                     +  E[V
         ~ i (K, A ,  ) = (1 -  )(K, A ) +  E[V
         V                                    ~ 0 (K (1 -  ), A )|A ]


   We sketch the brief proof here. Rewrite the value function as

                                  ^ + max - [1 +  -  
V (K, D, A,  ) = (1 -  )(K, A) +  D                  ^(1 +  )]1I>0 + [1 -  ^(1 +  )]1I 0 I
                                                  I
                                                                         2
                                                                   I
                                                            -                K - K  1I =0 +  E[V (K , D , A ,  )|A]
                                                              2    K
                                                                                                              (A.11)

Consider the set of functions of the form f (K, A, D,  ) = g (K, A,  ) +  pv D, where pv = ^ + (1 -
^)E[p ], and the operator T defined by the right hand side of Bellman Equation (A.11).
     v



Claim: The operator T maps a function of the form f (K, A, D,  ) = g (K, A,  ) +  pv D to itself.
Proof: Applying the operator T to f (K, A, D,  ), we get that

                                    ^ + max - [1 +  -  
T f (K, A, D,  ) = (1 -  )(K, A) +  D                  ^(1 +  )]1I>0 + [1 -  ^(1 +  )]1I 0 I
                                                      I
                                                                   2
                                                               I
                                                      -                K - K  1I =0 +  E[g (K , A ,  ) +  pv D |A]
                                                        2      K




                                                          63
     By the law of motion for the depreciation allowance D = (1 - ^)[D + (1 +  )I ], we have that

                                    ^ + max - [1 +  -  
T f (K, A, D,  ) = (1 -  )(K, A) +  D                  ^(1 +  )]1I>0 + [1 -  ^(1 +  )]1I 0 I
                                                    I
                            2
                        I                                                  ^) E[p ]D +  (1 - ^) E[p ](1 +  )I
               -                K - K  1I =0 +  E[g (K , A ,  )|A] +  (1 -       v                 v
                    2   K
               = (1 -  )(K, A) +  [^ + (1 - ^) E[p ]]D+
                                                  v

               max - [1 +  -  (1 +  )(^ + (1 - ^) E[p ])]1I>0 + [1 -  (1 +  )(^ + (1 - ^) E[p ])]1I 0 I
                                                     v                                       v
                I
                            2
                        I
               -                K - K  1I =0 +  E[g (K , A ,  )|A]
                 2      K
               = (K, A) +  pv D + max - {[1 +  -  (1 +  )pv ]1I>0 + [1 -  (1 +  )pv ]1I 0 } I
                                           I
                            2
                        I
               -                K - K  1I =0 +  E[g (K , A ,  )|A],                                        (A.12)
                    2   K

     where the last equation follows the definition of pv = ^ + (1 - ^)E[p ]. Note that the right-hand
                                                                          v
     side of Equation (A.12) is also a function of the form h(K, A,  ) +  pv D. That is, the operator T
     maps function f (K, A, D,  ) = g (K, A,  ) +  pv D to itself. Since the set of functions f (K, A, D,  )
     is a closed set, there exists a unique fixed point and the fixed point lies in the set. By the definition
     of value function, which is the fixed point, it follows that V (K, A, D,  ) is of the form:

                                                          ~ (K, A,  ) +  pv D.
                                         V (K, A, D,  ) = V                                                (A.13)

     Substituting Equation (A.13) back into the original value function (Equation (A.11)) and canceling-
     out common terms on both sides, we have

         ~ (K, A,  ) = (1 -  )(K, A) + max - {[1 +  -  pv (1 +  )]1I>0 + [1 -  pv (1 +  )]1I 0 } I
         V
                                                I
                                                                      2
                                                               I                            ~ (K , A ,  )|A].
                                                         -                K - K  1I =0 +  E[V
                                                           2   K

     A.3.3    Further Normalization

     Recall that we decompose profit shocks into three components Ait = exp(i + bt + it ), where
     i is firm-specific permanent heterogeneity, bt is the aggregate shock, and it is the idiosyncratic
     transitory shock. The state variables are then (K, , b, ,  ). Note that both the profit function
     and the investment cost function are homogeneous of degree one in the pair (K, A ), and thus in
     (K, exp( )). This implies that the value function V (K, , b, ,  ) is also homogeneous of degree one
     in the pair (K, exp( )).
        We can further normalize the value function to v (k, b, ,  ) by defining k = K/ exp( ), where




                                                          64
the normalized value function is given by:

                              v (k, b, ,  ) = max(v b (k, b, ,  ), v s (k, b, ,  ), v i (k, b, ,  )),

where
                       ¯
                       
  v 0 (k, b, ) =           v (k, b, ,  )dG( )
                   0
                                                                                               2
                                                                                           i
v b (k, b, ,  ) = max (1 -  ) (k, b, ) - [1 +  -  pv (1 +  )]i +                                   k + k  +  E v 0 (k , b ,  ) |b,  ,
                   i>0                                                             2       k
                                                                                       2
                                                                                  i
v s (k, b, ,  ) = max (1 -  ) (k, b, ) - [1 -  pv (1 +  )]i +                              k + k  +  E v 0 (k , b ,  ) |b,  ,
                   i<0                                                       2    k
v i (k, b, ,  ) = (1 -  ) (k, b, ) +  E v 0 (k (1 -  ), b ,  ) |b,  .

The law of motion for capital k is

                                                      k = (1 -  )k + i,

where investment is normalized by i = k - (1 -  )k = I/exp( ).


B       Policy Background
This appendix section documents details of the VAT reform (Section B.1) and the CIT reform
(Section B.2). Table F.1 summarizes the impact of VAT and CIT reforms on the tax components
of the user cost of capital (TUCC).


B.1     VAT Reform
The VAT reform had four stages. Effective on July 1, 2004, stage I started from eight industries
in four provinces and cities in Northeast China (Heilongjiang, Jilin, Liaoning, and Dalian city).
The eight industries include equipment manufacturing, petrochemical, metallurgical, automotive
manufacturing, shipbuilding, agricultural product processing, military manufacturing, and new-
and high-tech industries.
    On July 1, 2007, the reform was extended to twenty-six cities in another six provinces (Henan,
Hubei, Shanxi, Anhui, and Jiangxi) with eight qualified industries including equipment manufac-
turing, petrochemical, metallurgical, automotive manufacturing, agricultural product processing,
electricity, mining and new- and high-tech industries.
    One year later, on July 1, 2008, stage III extended the reform to five cities and leagues in eastern
Inner Mongolia with the same eight industries as those in Northeast China. At the same time, due


                                                                65
to the Wenchuan earthquake, the government allowed firms in the "key earthquake devastated areas
of Wenchuan" to deduct input VAT on equipment. Except for several regulated industries, all other
industries were covered.68
    On January 1, 2009, the reform was unexpectedly extended to all industries across the country.
Together with the national expansion of VAT reform, the deduction method of input VAT on
equipment changed as well. At the early stages of the reform, the government first collected input
VAT and then returned it to firms. To alleviate tax losses, at the beginning of each year the
government usually set a limit on the tax return--the increase in VAT payable from the previous
year. At the end of the year, if revenue permitted, the full amount of the input VAT on fixed assets
would be returned. Since 2009, however, the government switched to the tax credit accounting
method so that firms deduct input VAT on equipment from total output VAT directly.


B.2      CIT Reform
In 2008, the Chinese government implemented a Corporate Income Tax (CIT) reform that harmo-
nized the CIT rate for domestic and foreign firms. This reform reduced the CIT rate for domestic
firms from 33% to 25% and it raised CIT rate for foreign firms from lower rates to 25% (e.g., see
Chen et al. (2019)).
    In spite of the changes to the CIT, the effect on the user cost of capital (TUCC) was limited
since the CIT only distorts the capital price through depreciation deductions. Table F.1 summarizes
the VAT rate, CIT rate, and TUCCs for domestic and foreign firms from 2007 to 2011. We report
two TUCC's--a theoretical one and the sample average. The theoretical TUCC is calculated using
the statutory VAT rate as well as the CIT rate (= (1 + statutory )(1 - statutory pv )/(1 - statutory ));
the sample average TUCC is calculated using statutory VAT rate and the empirical CIT rate
(= (1 + statutory )(1 - empirical pv )/(1 - empirical )).69 While the theoretical TUCC drops by 3.8
percentage points in 2008, we do not see a decrease in the sample average. Notably, the TUCC
then drops by 18.1 percentage points following the VAT reform in 2009. The theoretical and sample
average TUCC for foreign firms barely changed. This confirms that the VAT reform is the major
driving force behind the user cost of capital during this period.


C      Investment Data
In this section, we provide more details of the data we use and how we construct the key variables
in our empirical analysis.


  68
     The regulated industries include coke processing, electrolytic aluminum production, small-scale steel production,
and small thermal power generation.
  69
     The empirical CIT rate is calculated as  = actual CIT payable/net profit. We do not observe the separate
VAT paid for equipment so we use statutory VAT rate for both measures.

                                                         66
Data Detail

The major dataset we use is the National Tax Survey Database (hereafter "tax data") collected
jointly by Ministry of Finance (MoF) and State Administration of Tax (SAT). The two ministries
produce two lists of survey firms every year. The first list consists of key firms that are more likely
to be large firms and are required to account for at least 10% of the total number of general VAT tax
payers. The key firms include those that accounted for over 70% of local VAT revenue in the past
year, firms with preferential tax treatment, exporters, and publicly listed firms. The other list of
firms are randomly selected from the administrative tax database, many of which are smaller firms.
During our analysis period from 2007 to 2011, firms from the key list and random list account for
80% and 20% of total number of observations, respectively. Taken together, firms in the tax data
contribute to over 75% of national VAT revenue. Since our main specification relies on a balanced
set of firms, our results are mostly informed by firms in the first list.
    The survey is distributed between March and April, covers activities for the previous year, and
is usually gathered by the end of June. For instance, the 2009 survey was conducted in 2010 and
reflected investment in 2009.

Measuring Investment in Equipment

One of the appealing features of tax data is that, instead of constructing investment from capital
stocks, we observe investment directly in the data. Specifically, we observe total investment in fixed
assets for production purpose (hereafter "total investment") and investment in structures. Following
standard classification in the investment literature, we define equipment investment as the difference
between total investment and investment in structures. We cross-validate this measure using data
in 2007 that separately records investment in equipment. The directly reported measure matches
our main measure of equipment investment very well for 2007.
    For our empirical analyses, we construct three outcomes for equipment investment. First, we
define a dummy variable set to 1 if a firm has positive investment in equipment. Note that, as in
other studies that rely on tax data, we do not observe equipment sales. Second, we construct the
investment rate as the ratio of investment in equipment to the net value of total fixed assets. Both
investment and fixed assets measures are deflated using corresponding price indexes from the China
Statistical Yearbook. We winsorize investment rate for the top 1% of the sample. Finally, we define
an investment spike with a dummy variable set to 1 if a firm's investment rate is larger than 20%
of capital.


D      Additional Reduced-Form Results
In this section, we present additional reduced-form results.



                                                   67
D.1        Inverse Probability Weighting (IPW)
This appendix section documents details of the inverse probability weighting (IPW) method that
we use in robustness checks. One concern of our empirical strategy is that domestic and foreign
firms might not have similar observable characteristics. To address this concern, we reweight our
data to match the distribution of firm characteristics between domestic and foreign firms.
   We first generate propensity scores for being treated by estimating a probit model. The model
takes the following form:

                                       Gi = 1{ + Xi  + Yi  + ui > 0},                                             (D.1)

where Gi is the treatment variable, Xi is a vector of firm-specific variables including whether a firm
had VAT preferential treatment (and for export), whether it is an exporter, its sales and number
of workers. Yi includes investment growth measured by whether a firm invests or not, investment
rate and IHS investment.70 The error term ui is independently and identically drawn from normal
distribution. We use information in the pre-reform years to conduct the analysis. That is, we use
data in 2007 for all firm-specific terms and use data in 2007 and 2008 for investment growth terms.
Table F.2 reports the estimates of the probit model.
   We use the specification in column (6) to generate propensity scores for reweighting. Figure F.1
plots the distribution of propensity scores for domestic and foreign firms, respectively. This figure
shows that the distributions of propensity scores overlap. Panel (B) of Figure F.2 shows that
after reweighting, domestic and foreign firms are balanced in observable characteristics including
investment, sales, fixed assets, and the number of workers.


D.2        Event Study Estimates
Table F.3 reports coefficients used in Figure 6 from 2007 to 2011. Particularly, we run the following
regression:

                                               Yijt = Gi t + µi + ijt ,                                           (D.2)

where Gi is an indicator that equals one for domestic firms, and µi is firm fixed effects. The
dependent variable Yijt is the investment measure for firm i in industry j at time t: Columns (1)
to (3) report the results at the extensive margin--i.e., the fraction of firms investing; Columns (4)
to (6) report the results at the intensive margin--i.e., investment rate. In columns (1) and (3) we
control for industry-year fixed effects to account for industry-specific trends; in columns (2) and
(5) we control for province-year fixed effects; in columns (3) and (6) we add both industry- and
province-year fixed effects.

  70
       Growth in log investment is not included because of collinearity with the indicator of firm's investing.

                                                           68
   These results confirm that domestic and foreign firms had parallel trends before 2008 since the
coefficients on 2007 are economically small and statistically insignificant at both the extensive and
intensive margin. At the extensive margin, column (1) shows that the reform increased the fraction
of domestic firms that invest in equipment by 6.9 percentage points in 2009, which equals to 14.1%
of the pre-reform average fraction of domestic firms investing. Despite of slight decrease, the effects
are stable in the following years. The estimates are robust when we add province-year fixed effects.
Similar results hold for the investment rate.
   Table F.4 conducts the same robustness checks performed in our difference-in-differences analysis
and shows that the event study coefficients are robust across specifications. Particularly, in columns
(2) and (5) we adjust the regressions with inverse probability weighting (IPW); in columns (3) and
(6) we use unbalanced samples at the variable level. Despite slight variation in magnitudes, our
baseline estimates are robust.


D.3     User-Cost-of-Capital Investment Elasticities
As a complement to the difference-in-differences analysis, in this appendix we quantify how changes
in the tax component of user-cost-of-capital (TUCC) driven by the reform affected investment
outcomes. In particular, we estimate the following regression

                           Yijt =  log(TUCCijt ) + µi + jt + Xit  + ijt ,                        (D.3)

where TUCC is the tax component of user cost of capital from Equation 5. As in Equation 7, we
control for firm fixed effects, industry-by-year fixed effects, and we show robustness of our results
to controlling for industry-by-year fixed effects and firm-level characteristics.
   Two challenges prevent OLS from delivering unbiased estimates of  in Equation D.3. First,
both investment and the CIT rate, and thus the TUCC, might be correlated with unobserved firm
characteristics. For instance, if politically connected firms have lower productivity and enjoy a lower
corporate tax rate, an OLS estimation of  would bias  toward zero. Second, measurement error
in investment and the TUCC would also bias the estimate toward zero.
   To solve these problems, we use a synthetic TUCC as an instrument for the actual TUCC. In the
synthetic TUCC, we allow for  to change with the reform but we hold all other aspects of the TUCC
constant. Table F.5 shows that this instrument is a powerful predictor of the actual TUCC since,
as we discuss in Section 2, the VAT reform had a large effect on the cost of capital. The exclusion
restriction that the synthetic tax change identifies changes in the TUCC and is not correlated with
differential shocks between foreign and domestic firms is consistent with the difference-in-differences
results in the previous section.
   Table F.9 reports estimates of semi-elasticities of investment with respect to the TUCC. The
coefficients on TUCC are all negative, indicating investment increases as the TUCC declines. While
OLS estimates are biased toward zero, we find that IV estimates are much larger in magnitude.

                                                  69
Columns (2)­(8) in the first panel show that cutting the TUCC by 10% leads to an increase in the
fraction of firms investing by 2.4-3.1 percentage points. Similarly, cutting the TUCC by 10% would
increase the investment rate by about 2%. Relative to the average investment rate of 10%, the
second row of results implies an investment elasticity of -2 with respect to the user cost of capital.
Indeed, the third column shows TUCC elasticities between -2.4 and -2.1 for the sample of firms with
positive investment. Finally, the last row of Table F.9 shows larger estimates for the IHS, which
arise from the larger weight the IHS places on extensive-margin responses.
    Table F.9 shows that regardless of how we measure outcomes, the estimates of  are very
stable across specifications that control for different levels of fixed effects or for firm-level controls.
In particular, the last column controls for corporate income tax rates, which ensures that our
identifying variation only comes from changes driven by the VAT reform.


D.4       Heterogeneous Effects by External Finance Dependence
An important finding in recent estimates of the effects of tax policy on investment is that the effects
of tax policy can interact with financing constraints. For instance, in their study of the effects of
bonus depreciation, Zwick and Mahon (2017) find that firms with tighter financial constraints see
larger effects on investment. However, this effect may be more important in the case of bonus
depreciation, since that policy increases immediate cash flow to these firms. In contrast, while the
VAT reform reduces the price of investment and the degree of partial irreversibility, it does not
otherwise interact with firms' financial constraints.
    To investigate interactions between the VAT reform and financing constraints, we expand our
difference-in-differences analysis by including an interaction with an industry-level measure of ex-
ternal finance dependence from Hsu, Tian and Xu (2014). As we show in Table F.8, we do not find
that firms in industries with higher external finance dependence have larger responses to the VAT
reform. If anything, we find smaller effects along the intensive margin.


E     Additional Structural Estimation Results
This appendix provides additional details on the structural estimation.


E.1       Productivity Estimation via System GMM
We now document details related to estimating the curvature parameter of profit function () and
the persistence of idiosyncratic shocks ( ) using the system GMM estimator of Blundell and Bond
(2000).




                                                    70
   Following Appendix A.2, we start by taking logarithms of Equation A.8:

                                        rit = (1 - )aR
                                                     it + kit .                                    (E.1)

Since we observe sales rit and capital kit , we can thus back out log revenue shocks aR      R
                                                                                      it by ait =
 1
   (r
1- it
        - kit ), which differ from a                                                        R
                                    it by a constant. Without loss of generality, we write ait =
bt + i + it , where bt , i , it are aggregate shock, firm permanent component and firm transitory
shock, respectively. Let mit denote classical measure error or any other unexpected optimization
errors. Then, combined with Equation (E.1), we have

                         rit = kit + (1 - )bt + (1 - )i + (1 - )it + mit .

Recall that the firm transitory shock it follows an AR(1) process i.e., it =  i,t-1 + eit , where
eit is an innovation term independently and identically distributed across firms and over time. We
exploit the AR(1) property of it to difference out the persistent component in it . We can then get
the following revenue equation:

               rit =  ri,t-1 + kit -  ki,t-1 + b    
                                                t + i + mi,t -  mi,t-1 + (1 -  )eit ,              (E.2)

where b                                                      
       t = (1 -  )bt -  (1 -  )bt-1 is year fixed effect and i = (1 -  )(1 -  )i is the firm fixed
effect. We complement Equation (E.2) with its first-differenced (FD) equation:

        rit =  ri,t-1 + kit -  ki,t-1 + bt + mi,t -  mi,t-1 + (1 -  )eit .                         (E.3)

   We construct a GMM estimator using two sets of moments based on both the level Equation (E.2)
and FD Equation (E.3). The first set of moments is

                              D
                           E[zi,t -s (mi,t -  mi,t-1 + (1 -  )eit )] = 0,


       D
where zi,t -s = [ri,t-s , ki,t-s ], s  3. Intuitively, we use lagged revenue and capital in levels (r and
k ) to instrument for the FD equation. The second set of moments is

                       L
                    E[zi,t -s ((1 -  )(1 -  )i + mi,t -  mi,t-1 + (1 -  )eit )] = 0,


       L
where zi,t -s = [ri,t-s , ki,t-s ], s  2. Here, we use the first difference of lagged revenue and capital




                                                   71
(r and k ), to instrument for the level equation.71 In our data, we have the moment condition

                                                 E[Zi Ui ] = 0, i,

where
                                                                                                             
                       ri,07 ki,07                  0                      0                    0
          ZiD
                                                                                                             
                 0          0       r i, 07 k  i, 07 ri, 08   ki, 08       0                    0            
  Zi =                =                                                                                      
           0    ZiL    
                            0                       0                ri,08 ki,08                0            
                                                                                                             
                            0                       0                      0         ri,08 ki,08 ri,09 ki,09
                                                                                        
                                mi,10 -  mi,09 + (1 - )ei,10
                UiD
                                                                                        
                                   mi, 11  -         m  i, 10 +   (1 -   ) e i, 11      
         Ui =         =                                                                 
                UiL    (1 - )(1 -  ) + m -  m + (1 - )e 
                                             i        i,10          i,09           i,10 

                        (1 - )(1 -  )i + mi,11 -  mi,10 + (1 - )ei,11

We then estimate  and  using the GMM estimator.


E.2      Markup
An alternative way to obtain the revenue equation in Appendix A.2 is to assume that the firm has
a CRTS production function and faces a CES demand function with elasticity 1/. This simple
monopolistic competitive model yields a constant markup, which maps to our estimate of . In this
case, we can write the curvature of profit function () as a function of other primitive parameters

                                                   (1 -  )(1 -  )
                                     =                                    ,                                     (E.4)
                                           1 - (1 -  )[(1 - )(1 -  ) +  ]

where  is the share of capital out of value added and  is the share of materials. The gross
markup equals to 1/(1 -  ). To be consistent with the empirical markup calculated from data, we
consider the markup excluding capital cost, which equals 1/{(1 -  )[(1 - )(1 -  ) +  ]}. Using
Equation (E.4) we obtain:

                                                       1     (1 -  )
                                markuptheoretical =                      + 1.
                                                        (1 - )(1 -  ) + 

Given an estimate of  and values of  and  we can calculate the markup. Setting  = 1/2 (Bai
et al., 2006) and  = 0.7 (Jones, 2011), the theoretical markup is 1.224.



  71
    The identification of the first-differenced equation relies on the sequential exogeneity, as well as classical mea-
surement error assumption; the identification of the level equation is that the changes in revenue and capital are
uncorrelated to firm-specific permanent component and the measurement error.

                                                          72
   In data, we calculate the markup by

                                                          total sales
                               markupempirical =                           .
                                                      major business costs

The average empirical markup is around 1.223. It is reassuring that the theoretical markup calcu-
lated from our estimate of  is comparable to the empirical markup from data.


E.3     Productivity Decomposition
In this appendix we document details of the productivity decomposition we use to obtain the
standard deviation of firm idiosyncratic and permanent shocks ( ,  ), and the persistence and
standard deviation of aggregate shocks (b , b ).
   We first construct revenue shocks using the estimate ^


                                               ^R           ^
                                               a it = rit - kit .


Here we use "purified" revenue--projecting revenue on higher-order polynomials of capital and
labor--to get rid of disturbances such as measurement errors. With a
                                                                   ^it in hand, we exploit the
AR(1) property of it to write:

                            ^it - 
                            a     ^ ait-1 = bt - ^ bt-1 + (1 - ^ )i + eit ,                        (E.5)

where eit is an innovation term of it independently and identically distributed across firms and
                                  ^it - 
over time. We run a regression of a     ^ a
                                          ^it-1 on time dummies and obtain the residual: uit =
(1 - ^ )i + eit .
   We then calculate the variance of i and it from var(uit ) and cov (uit , uit-1 ) solving the following
equations:
                    2     cov (uit , uit-1 )          2      var(uit ) - cov (uit , uit-1 )
                      =                        and      =                                   .
                            (1 -     ^ )2                             (1 - ^ 2 )
   Lastly, we recover (b , b ) using the coefficients on time dummies from the regression above.
Denote the coefficients by t . Then b and b jointly solve the following equations:

                               var(t ) = (-2^ b + 1 + ^ 2 )b
                                                           2


                               cov (t ) = [-^ 2
                                              b + (1 + ^ 2 )b -    2
                                                                ^ ]b .

   We bootstrap this procedure 100 times to obtain standard errors for these parameters.




                                                      73
E.4     Adjustment Cost Estimation
In this appendix we report additional results for estimation using method of simulated moments
(MSM). The criterion function is:

                                          ^ - m()] W [m
                                  g () = [m           ^ - m()].

    We use grid-search to find the parameter values that minimize the criterion function g (). Using
the grid-search results as initial values, we further refine our estimates by pattern-search. To confirm
our estimates minimizes the criterion function, we plot the loss function against each parameter in
Figure F.3, holding the other two parameters at their estimated values. For example, Panel (A)
plots log loss function log(g ) against convex adjustment cost  , with ¯ held at its estimate ^
                                                                                              ¯ = 0.119
and  held at ^ = 0.071. The loss function is convex and rises steeply around our estimated value,
confirming that our estimates minimize the criterion function.


E.5     Sensitivity Analysis
Lastly, we construct the sensitivity measures proposed by Andrews et al. (2017):

                                     = -(G W G)-1 G W × g (m),

where G is the Jacobian matrix, W is the weighting matrix (identity matrix here), and g (m) is
a vector of moments with misspecification. Here, we consider the misspecification to be a 10%
deviation from the moment value. Table F.10 reports the complete sensitivity matrix.
    For the parameter  , changes in the share of investment rate below 10% and 30% have the largest
effect. An increase in the share below 10%--which implies greater inaction--results in larger fixed
costs. For the parameter  , we find that moments that skew the distribution toward zero also lower
the value of this parameter. For the parameter  , an increase in serial correlation results in a lower
estimate of convex costs. These results are consistent with our discussion of identification in Section
5.2.


F      Additional Simulation Results
This appendix discusses additional simulation results. First, we show that our baseline simulation
results are robust to the following extensions: 1) allowing for an upward-sloping capital supply;
2) allowing for an interest rate response to the TUCC; 3) allowing the net-of-tax resale price to
be less than one; 4) aggregate productivity shocks; and 5) allowing for adjustment costs to be
tax deductible; and 6) allowing changes in the CIT to impact the weighted average cost of capital
(WACC) which is affected by CIT cut. Lastly, we show VAT and CIT cuts with the same TUCC


                                                  74
reduction may have different effectiveness in stimulating investment.


F.1       Robustness of Policy Simulations
We first show that our baseline simulation results are robust to the following extensions.

Upward-sloping Capital Supply

In our baseline model we assume that capital price--net of taxes--is constant. One concern is that
the capital price is endogenous and increases as the demand goes up (e.g., Goolsbee, 1998). We
relax the assumption of constant capital price by incorporating an upward-sloping capital supply.
We assume a functional form of capital supply, which allows us to solve for the price change from
the quantity change, i.e., investment response. The capital supply has constant elasticity:

                                                             s
                                                  pK = I 1/ ,

where s is the elasticity of capital supply with respect to pre-tax capital price. Following estimates
from House and Shapiro (2008), we set s to be 10.72 Using our difference-in-difference estimate for
investment rate--36% increase--it follows that the capital price increases by 3.6%.
   As a robustness check to our main simulation, we feed in a 3.6% increase in capital price to the
model--both the purchase and resale price of capital--in response to the reform. In particular, the
VAT reform reduces the purchase price of capital from (1 -  pv )(1 + 17%) to (1 + 3.6%) × (1 -  pv ),
and increases the resale price of capital from 1 -  pv (1 + 17%) to (1 + 3.6%) × (1 -  pv ). Column
(2) of Table F.12 reports the simulation results. Even after accounting for this price response, the
reform results in a substantial increase in investment. While the drop-in capital price is smaller,
the decrease in partial irreversibility continues to stimulate investment.

Interest Rate Effects of TUCC

As an alternative general equilibrium response, we consider the possibility that interest rates increase
following tax incentives for investment. To allow for this possibility, we assume that the interest
                                                                   r
rate has a negative elasticity with respect to the TUCC,           T U CC .   In Table F.13, we conduct several
                                 r
robustness checks allowing       T U CC   to vary between -0.25 and -0.05. While stronger interest rate
responses lead to smaller effects on aggregate investment, even in the most responsive scenario,
we find that the overall increase in investment is close to 80% of the baseline case that assumes a
fixed interest rate. Therefore, the result that policies that target extensive margins of investment
are more effective at stimulating investment is robust to allowing for interest rate responses to tax
policy.

  72
     House and Shapiro (2008) estimate the elasticity of supply to be between 6 and 14 using Bonus Depreciation in
the US.

                                                       75
Resale Price

Our baseline model assumes that the net-of-tax resale price is the same as the net-of-tax purchase
price of capital. One concern is that the capital market for used capital is imperfect and that
the resale price is smaller than the purchase price even without taxes. To explore this possibility,
we reduce the resale price from one (as in the baseline model) to 0.80 (e.g., Ramey and Shapiro,
2001; Cooper and Haltiwanger, 2006). As we show in column (3) of table F.12, the results do not
change. Both the pre-reform static moments and simulated investment responses--i.e., the average
investment rate and the fraction of firms investing--to various tax reforms are almost identical to
our baseline results. This is because, even without the imperfect resale price of capital, the VAT
and fixed cost generate considerable inaction. Hence, lowering the resale price has little impact on
overall investment patterns.

Aggregate Productivity Shocks

Since the VAT reform took place in 2009 as one of the measures to deal with the financial crisis,
the response to the reform may reflect a concomitant drop in aggregate productivity. To explore
this possibility, we feed in a one standard-deviation drop in (permanent) aggregate productivity at
the same time of the tax reform. Column (4) of Table F.12 reports the results of this simulation.
Our results are robust to allowing for a concomitant productivity drop.

Deductible Adjustment Costs

Our baseline model assumes that adjustment costs, i.e., convex and fixed adjustment costs, are
non-deductible from CIT. Put differently, the adjustment costs are paid by after-tax profits. It
is possible that those costs are tax-deductible and thus paid by pre-tax profits. For instance, the
fixed costs might represent costs of hiring workers to install equipment, where labor costs are tax-
deductible. If this were the case, a change in the CIT rate would impact the adjustment costs
as well. To explore this possibility, we simulate the effects of a CIT cut assuming that firms pay
                                                                   ^
convex costs (1 -  ) D and fixed costs (1 -  ) D , where  D =   (1-0.154)
                                                                            is the tax-deductible convex
cost, and similarly for  D . In column (3) of Table F.14, we simulate the effects of CIT cuts under
this alternative assumption. Since the adjustment costs are paid by pre-tax profits, a reduction in
the CIT rate decreases the tax benefit and increases the effective adjustment costs. As a result, the
investment response is smaller than in our baseline simulation of a CIT cut.

Weighted Average Cost of Capital

Our model assumes that changes in CIT do not affect the cost of capital. Note that this assumption
has no effect on our estimation. However, the effects of changes in CIT may be different if the CIT
affects the costs of capital.


                                                 76
     Here, we extend the constant interest rate r by allowing the CIT to impact the weighted average
cost of capital (WACC). WACC considers two ways through which a firm raises capital--equity
and debt. Because the cost of interest payments for debt financing, but not for equity financing,
are deductible from the tax base of corporate income tax (CIT), changing the CIT rate affects the
cost of debt financing, and thus how firms discount future profit. The WACC is defined as follows:

                           WACC = Sharedebt (1 -  )r + (1 - Sharedebt )rk ,

where Sharedebt is the share of capital financed through debt and, accordingly, (1 - Sharedebt ) is
the share of capital financed through equity. r is the real interest rate and rk is the capital return.
In the simulation, we calibrate the share of debt financing to be 0.65 to match the average debt to
capital ratio. To focus on how the policy--CIT rate here--we keep r and rk constant and match
baseline discount rate at 95%.
     Column (4) in Table F.14 reports the simulation results allowing for interactions between the
                                                                      1
CIT and the WACC. In particular, the discount rate  =              1+WACC
                                                                          .   The CIT rate affects the cost of
capital through two channels. First, as in our baseline simulation with constant WACC, it reduces
                                 (1+ )(1- pv )
the after-tax price of capital       1-
                                               .   Additionally, it increases the expected return on capital,
1

    - (1 -  ), by reducing the discount rate  . Due to the second channel--increasing expected return
of capital--which offsets the decreasing capital price, the response of investment rate is smaller.
The tax revenue loss is larger since the investment increase is smaller with the same reduced tax
rate. Similarly, the increase in firm value is smaller as well. As a result, the ratios of investment
and firm value to tax revenue are also smaller.


F.2      TUCC Elasticities are Not Sufficient Statistics
To show that the TUCC is not a sufficient statistic, Table F.15 displays the investment responses
at the intensive margin (i.e., average investment rate) and the extensive margin (i.e., the fraction of
firms investing) to different reforms with the same TUCC reduction. We use the estimated frictions,
i.e.,  = 1.43, ¯ = 0.12, to simulate tax cuts. Table F.15 shows the results with initial VAT rate at
17% and CIT rate at 15.4%. We compare two reforms with the same reduction in TUCC: 1) VAT
reform cuts VAT from 17% to 14.2% (i.e., 2.8% rate reduction), and 2) CIT reform cuts CIT rate
from 15.4% to 5.4% (i.e., 10% rate reduction). Both reforms reduce TUCC by 2.4%. Column (3)
also allows the CIT cut to affect the WACC, as in the last section. Because these different reforms
have the same effect on the TUCC, the fact that the effects on investment differ implies that TUCC
elasticities are not sufficient statistics for the effects of different policies on investment.
     Note that, while a 10% CIT cut has a stronger effect on investment than a 2.8% VAT cut, the
CIT cut is far less effective than the VAT cut since the former also leads to large decreases in tax
revenue. Furthermore, once we consider the effect on the WACC, the CIT cut is even less effective
at stimulating investment.

                                                         77
                          Figure F.1: Distribution of Propensity Score




                                5
                                4  3
                            Density
                                2
                                1
                                0




                                       0   .2          .4            .6             .8     1
                                                       Propensity Score

                                                Foreign Firms             Domestic Firms




Notes: This figure plots the distributions of estimated propensity scores for domestic firms (solid line)
and foreign firms (dash line), respectively. The propensity score is estimated using a probit model (see
Equation (D.1)). The estimation results are reported in column (6) in Table F.2. The dependent variable
is an indicator = 1 if a firm is in the treatment group, i.e., domestic firms. The regressors include: whether
a firm had VAT preferential treatment, whether a firm had export VAT preferential treatment, whether it
is an exporter, sales, logarithm of the number of workers, growth in the fraction of firms investing, growth
in the investment rate, growth in the log investment, and growth in the IHS measure of investment. The
regression is performed using pre-reform data form 2007 and 2008. All regressions include region and
industry fixed effects, and firm fixed effects.




                                                           78
             Figure F.2: Mean Difference between Treatment and Control Groups

                          A. Unweighted                                                   B. Inverse Probability Weighting

    Investment Rate                                                                   Investment Rate



    Log Investment                                                                     Log Investment



         Log Sales                                                                          Log Sales



   Log Fixed Assets                                                                   Log Fixed Assets



     Log # Workers                                                                     Log \# Workers


                      -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -.5 0        .5   1 1.5 2 2.5       3                           -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -.5 0        .5   1 1.5 2 2.5       3
                           Difference between Treatment and Control Groups                                    Difference between Treatment and Control Groups




Notes: This graph shows the difference in major variables between the treatment group (i.e., domestic firms)
and control group (i.e., foreign firms). The left panel shows the differences before weighting; The right
panel shows the differences using inverse probability weighting (IPW). The propensity score is estimated
using probit model (see Equation (D.1)). The estimation results are reported in column (6) in Table F.2.




                                                                                 79
                   Figure F.3: Loss Function from Structural Estimation

                    A.                                                      B. ¯




                                                  C. 




Notes: This graph displays the loss function against each parameter, holding the other two parameters at
optimal values. The loss function is calculated by:
                                             ^ - m()] W
                                     g () = [m          ^ [m
                                                           ^ - m()],
where the moments m() include six pre-reform static moments, as well as two investment responses from
reduced-form analysis (see Section 5.2). We use the identity matrix as the weighting matrix. Panel A plots
log loss function against values of  , holding ¯ and  at their optimal values. The vertical line indicates
the estimated  = 1.432. Panel B and C plot the log loss function against    ¯ and  , respectively.




                                                   80
 Figure F.4: Correlation between Serial Correlation and Convex Adjustment Cost 




Notes: This graph plots simulated serial correlations against convex cost  , holding the other two param-
eters at their estimated values, i.e., fixed cost ¯ = 0.119 and depreciation rate  = 0.710.




                                                   81
                      Figure F.5: Simulating Alternative Tax Reforms:
                          Elasticity of Firm Value to Tax Revenue

                                    C. VAT Cuts vs. CIT Cuts




                                       D. VAT Cuts vs. ITC




Notes: These figures plot the simulated percentage change in the average firm value to the percentage
loss in tax revenue at different rates of VAT cut, CIT cut and investment tax credit (ITC) policies. For
each tax rate, we solve the model; simulate investment, tax revenue and firm value; and calculate the
corresponding changes in each outcome. Panel A plots the percentage change in the average firm value
against the percentage change in tax revenue. The red solid curve corresponds to VAT cuts from 17%
to different rates. The blue dotted line corresponds to CIT cuts from 15.4% to different rates. Similarly,
Panel B compares the percentage change in tax revenue from VAT cuts with that from an ITC.



                                                   82
   Table F.1: Changes in Tax Rate, Theoretical and Effective User Cost of Capital

                                                           User Cost of Capital
                   Year   CIT(%)      VAT (%)
                                                  Theoretical     Sample Avg.     #Obs
                             (1)         (2)         (3)             (4)           (5)
                   A. Domestic Firms
                   2007      33          17           1.284           1.222       30,789
                   2008      25          17           1.247           1.233       44,893
                   2009      25          0            1.066           1.042       53,580
                   2010      25          0            1.066           1.037       56,579
                   2011      25          0            1.066           1.040       56,955

                   B. Foreign Firms
                   2007      20           0           1.049           1.023       15,984
                   2008      25           0           1.066           1.038       16,842
                   2009      25           0           1.066           1.035       20,394
                   2010      25           0           1.066           1.038       20,596
                   2011      25           0           1.066           1.044       20,555

Notes : This table displays summary statistics of user cost of capital (TUCC) of domestic and foreign firms,
respectively. TUCC is calculated by TUCC = (1 +  )(1 -  pv )/(1 -  ), where  is VAT rate,  is CIT
rate, pv = 0.803 is discounted present value of capital depreciation schedule. Column (1) and (2) report
the statutory rates of CIT and VAT for domestic and foreign firms, respectively. Theoretical TUCC is
calculated using statutory VAT and CIT rates. Sample average refers to the average TUCC in tax data,
which is calculated using statutory VAT rate but empirical CIT rate. The sample average statistics are
calculated using full balanced panel, i.e., firms existing for five years in the sample. Empirical CIT rate is
calculated by  = actual CIT payable/net profit, which is closer to the "effective" CIT rate.




                                                     83
                 Table F.2: Estimates of Probit Model of Propensity Score

                                      (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)
   Had VAT PT                      0.112        0.106      0.116        0.131      0.119       0.107
                                   (0.020)      (0.044)    (0.038)      (0.067)    (0.037)     (0.046)

   Had Export VAT PT               -0.797      -0.896      -0.902      -0.770      -0.925      -0.866
                                    (0.042)     (0.094)     (0.085)     (0.130)     (0.083)     (0.097)

   Exporter                        -1.004      -0.287      -0.309      -0.373      -0.280      -0.328
                                    (0.250)    (0.112)      (0.100)    (0.157)      (0.098)     (0.115)

   Sales                           -0.001      -0.001      -0.001      -0.001      -0.001      -0.001
                                    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)

   Log Workers                     -0.375      -0.545      -0.653      -0.356      -0.547      -0.651
                                    (0.024)     (0.045)     (0.050)     (0.101)     (0.045)     (0.050)

   % Firms Investing Growth                      -0.267                                         2.953
                                                (0.346)                                        (1.872)

   Investment Rate Growth                                    -0.272                            -1.049
                                                            (0.358)                            (0.496)

   Log Investment Growth                                                 -0.020
                                                                        (0.099)

   IHS Investment Growth                                                            0.022      0.102
                                                                                   (0.019)     (0.058)
   #Obs                             77,939      21,433      20,172      5,836      21,422      20,170
   Industry FE                        Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y
   Region FE                          Y           Y           Y           Y           Y           Y
Notes: This table displays probit regression results for the propensity score estimation in Equation (D.1).
The dependent variable is an indicator = 1 if a firm is in the treatment group. The variables on the
right hand side include: whether a firm had VAT preferential treatment, whether a firm had export VAT
preferential treatment, whether it is an exporter, sales, logarithm of the number of workers, growth in the
fraction of firms investing, growth in the investment rate, growth in the log investment, and growth in the
IHS measure of investment. The regression is performed using pre-reform data form 2007 and 2008. All
regressions include region and industry fixed effects, and firm fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered
at the firm level.




                                                    84
                               Table F.3: Estimates of Event Study

                                        Extensive Margin                      Investment Rate
                                     (1)         (2)          (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)
         2007                       0.006      0.004         0.011     -0.000      -0.007    -0.005
                                   (0.013)    (0.014)       (0.014)   (0.006)     (0.006)   (0.006)

         2008                       0.000      0.000         0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000
                                     (.)        (.)           (.)       (.)         (.)       (.)

         2009                      0.069      0.045         0.055     0.044      0.043      0.043
                                   (0.013)    (0.013)       (0.013)   (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)

         2010                      0.051      0.047         0.050     0.034      0.032      0.035
                                   (0.014)    (0.015)       (0.015)   (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.006)

         2011                      0.064      0.044         0.049     0.029      0.027      0.028
                                   (0.014)    (0.015)       (0.015)   (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)
         N                          86870      86870         86870     81270      81270      81270
         Nfirms                     17374      17374         17374     16254      16254      16254
         Industry × Year FE           Y                        Y         Y                     Y
         Province × Year FE                      Y             Y                    Y          Y

Notes: This table uses tax data to estimate event study regressions of the form:
                                     Yit = Gi × t + µi + jt + st + it ,
where Gi is the treatment indicator set to 1 for domestic firms and 0 for foreign firms, µi is firm fixed
effect, jt and st are industry-year and province-year fixed effects, respectively. Dependent variable Yit is
the investment measure for firm i at time t: Column (1) to (3) report the estimated t (t = 2007, · · · , 2011)
at the extensive margin--i.e., the fraction of firms investing; Column (4) to (6) report the results at the
intensive margin--i.e., investment rate. In column (1) and (3) we control for industry-year fixed effects; in
column (2) and (5) we control for province-year fixed effects; in column (3) and (6) we add both industry-
and province-year fixed effects. All regressions include firm fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at
the firm level.




                                                       85
                          Table F.4: Event Study: Robustness Checks

                                            Extensive Margin                        Investment Rate
                              Baseline     IPW       Unbalanced      Baseline     IPW       Unbalanced
                                (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)        (5)           (6)
    2007                       0.006       0.044        -0.001        -0.000      0.012        -0.003
                              (0.013)     (0.028)      (0.011)       (0.006)     (0.011)      (0.005)

    2008                        0.000      0.000           0.000       0.000      0.000         0.000
                                 (.)        (.)             (.)         (.)        (.)           (.)

    2009                      0.069       0.108        0.058         0.044       0.045         0.046
                              (0.013)     (0.026)      (0.010)       (0.005)     (0.009)       (0.004)

    2010                      0.051       0.092        0.058         0.034       0.032         0.039
                              (0.014)     (0.032)      (0.010)       (0.005)     (0.011)       (0.004)

    2011                      0.064       0.091        0.059         0.029       0.030         0.032
                              (0.014)     (0.045)      (0.010)       (0.006)     (0.013)       (0.004)
    N                          86870       82785        221069        81270       79195        215813
    Nfirms                     17374       16557        60870         16254       15839         60513
    Industry × Year FE           Y           Y            Y             Y           Y            Y

Notes: This table uses tax data to conduct robustness checks for the event study regressions of the form:
                                     Yit = Gi × t + µi + jt + st + it ,
where Gi is the treatment indicator set to 1 for domestic firms and 0 for foreign firms, µi is firm fixed
effect, jt and st are industry-year and province-year fixed effects, respectively. Dependent variable Yit is
the investment measure for firm i at time t: Column (1) to (3) report the estimated t (t = 2007, · · · , 2011)
at the extensive margin--i.e., the fraction of firms investing; Column (4) to (6) report the results at the
intensive margin--i.e., investment rate. We report the baseline results (column (1) and (4)) In column (2)
and (5) we adjust the regressions by inverse probability weighting (IPW, see Section D.1). In column (3)
and (6) we use the unbalanced sample for the analysis (i.e., unbalanced at the variable level but balanced
at the firm level). All regressions include industry-year fixed effects and firm fixed effects. Standard errors
are clustered at the firm level.




                                                      86
          Table F.5: Estimates of Difference-in-Difference Regressions: TUCC

                                             TUCC                               Log TUCC
                                   (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
       Domestic × Post          -0.193      -0.194        -0.194     -0.171     -0.171     -0.171
                                 (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
       N                          77677       77677         77677      77677      77677      77677
       Nfirm                      17371       17371         17371      17371      17371      17371
       Industry × Year FE           Y                         Y          Y                     Y
       Province × Year FE                      Y              Y                    Y          Y

Notes: This table estimates difference-in-difference regressions of the form:
                                 Yit = Gi × P ostt + µi + jt + st + ijt ,
where Yit is the user cost of capital (TUCC), Gi is the treatment indicator set to 1 for domestic firms
and 0 for foreign firms, and P ostt is the post-reform indicator set to 1 for years since 2009. µi is firm
fixed effect, jt and st are industry-year and province-year fixed effects, respectively. Particularly, the
dependent variable for column (1) to (3) is T U CC = (1 +  )(1 -  pv )/(1 -  ) where  is the statutory VAT
rate,  is the empirical CIT rate, and pv is the discounted present value of capital depreciation schedule.
The dependent variable for column (4) to (6) is the logarithm of TUCC. Column (1) and (4) control for
industry-year fixed effects. Column (2) and (5) control for province-year fixed effects. Column (3) and (6)
include both fixed effects. All regressions include firm fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the
firm level.




                                                     87
               Table F.6: Robustness Check: Investment Including Leasing

                                        Extensive Margin                  Investment Rate
                                     (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)
         Domestic × Post          0.059      0.044       0.046     0.035      0.037       0.038
                                  (0.010)    (0.010)     (0.010)   (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.004)
         N                         86870      86870      86870      81270       81270      81270
         Nfirm                     17374      17374      17374      16254       16254      16254
         Industry × Year FE          Y                     Y          Y                      Y
         Province × Year FE                     Y          Y                      Y         Y

Notes: This table uses tax data to estimate difference-in-difference regressions of the form:
                                Yit = Gi × P ostt + µi + jt + +st + it ,
where Yit is a measure of investment including leasing, Gi is an indicator set to 1 for domestic firms
and 0 for foreign firms, and P ostt is the post-reform indicator set to 1 for years since 2009. µi is firm
fixed effect, jt and st are industry-year and province-year fixed effects, respectively. We construct an
alternative investment measure to include leased equipment. The dependent variable for column (1) to (3)
is a dummy variable set to 1 if the leasing-included investment rate is positive. The dependent variable for
column (4) to (6) is leasing-included investment rate. Column (1) and (4) control for industry-year fixed
effects. Column (2) and (5) control for province-year fixed effects. Column (3) and (6) include both fixed
effects. All regressions include firm fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.




                                                    88
           Table F.7: Extensive Margin Responses of Investment in Structures

                                                   % Firms Investing with Investment Rate
                                                     1%        2%          3%        20%
                                                     (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)
             Domestic × Post                       0.028     0.020        0.017      0.001
                                                   (0.011)   (0.011)     (0.010)    (0.007)

             Domestic × Equipment × Post           0.036 0.056          0.077       0.065
                                                   (0.015) (0.015)      (0.015)     (0.011)
             N                                     162540 162540        162540      162540
             Nfirm                                  16254   16254        16254       16254
             Industry × Year FE                       Y       Y            Y           Y
             Province × Year FE                       Y       Y            Y           Y

Notes: This table uses tax data to estimate triple-differences regressions of the form:
      Ykit = 1 Gi × P ostt + 2 Ak × P ostt + 3 Gi × Ak × P ostt + 4 Gi × Ak + µi + jt + st + ijt ,

where k denotes the type of investment, i.e. equipment and structures. Ak is an indicator set to 1 for
investment in equipment and 0 for investment in structures. Yit is a dummy variable that is set to 1 if
the investment rate is larger than a certain threshold specified in the column header. For instance, the
dependent variable for column (2) is a dummy variable set to 1 if the investment rate is larger than 0.5%,
i.e. Dik = 1{IKit  0.005}, where IKit is the investment rate of firm i at time t. Gi is an indicator set to
1 for domestic firms and 0 for foreign firms, and P ostt is the post-reform indicator set to 1 for years since
2009. All regressions include firm fixed effects, industry-year and province-year fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level.




                                                     89
     Table F.8: Estimates of Difference-in-Difference Regressions: External
                             Finance Dependence

                               Extensive Margin      Investment Spikes       Intensive Margin
                                  (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)       (6)
 Domestic × Post               0.041      0.042      0.071      0.070       0.037      0.037
                               (0.010)     (0.010)    (0.009)    (0.010)    (0.004)     (0.004)

 Domestic × Post × EFD                      0.005                -0.002                -0.004
                                           (0.003)               (0.003)                (0.002)
 N                              81270      81270      81270       81270      81270      81270
 Industry × Year FE
 Province × Year FE               Y           Y          Y          Y           Y          Y
Notes: This table shows the heterogeneous responses by industry's external finance dependence,
by using tax data to estimate regressions of the form:

                   Yit = 1 Gi × P ostt + 2 Gi × P ostt × EF Dj + µi + st it ,

where Yit is equipment investment, Gi is an indicator set to 1 for domestic firms and 0 to foreign
firms, respectively, and P ostt is the post-reform indicator set to 1 for years since 2009. EF Dj
is the external finance dependence index of industry j from Hsu et al. (2014) that measures
the industry-level dependence on external finance. µi is firm fixed effect, and st is province-
year fixed effect. For comparison, Column (1), (3) and (5) report the baseline estimates from
difference-in-difference regressions. The dependent variable for column (1) and (2) is a dummy
variable set to 1 if a firm makes positive investment. The dependent variable for column (3) and
(4) is a dummy variable set to 1 if the investment rate is larger than 0.2. The dependent vari-
able for column (5) and (6) is firm's investment rate. All regressions include firm fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.




                                               90
                                               Table F.9: TUCC Semi-Elasticity Regressions Results

                                             OLS                                                IV
                                                                     Industry-   Province-      Both          Cash     Firm          CIT
                                          Year FE      Year FE
                                                                      Year FE    Year FE         FE           Flow    Controls       Rate
                                             (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)      (7)          (8)
                            Panel A. Dependent Variable: Dummy Variable if Firms Investing
                            log TUCC       -0.055      -0.317        -0.318       -0.263      -0.266      -0.238      -0.260       -0.277
                                           (0.031)      (0.058)       (0.060)      (0.062)     (0.064)     (0.064)     (0.064)      (0.074)
                            N               77677       77661         77661        77661       77661          74959     77265       77661
                            Panel B. Dependent Variable: Investment Rate
                            log TUCC      -0.056       -0.198        -0.208       -0.215      -0.220      -0.217      -0.201       -0.217
                                           (0.013)      (0.023)       (0.023)      (0.024)     (0.025)     (0.025)     (0.025)      (0.030)
                            N               73115       73102         73102        73102       73102          71731     72743       73102
                            Panel C. Dependent Variable: Log Investment




91
                            log TUCC      -0.945       -2.406        -2.401       -2.209      -2.235      -2.244      -2.136       -2.122
                                           (0.193)      (0.291)       (0.301)      (0.314)     (0.322)     (0.328)     (0.319)      (0.403)
                            N               19607       19607         19606        19604       19603          19164     19594       19603
                            Panel D. Dependent Variable: IHS Investment
                            log TUCC      -0.896       -4.211        -4.236       -3.967      -3.986      -3.785      -3.816       -3.540
                                           (0.231)      (0.501)       (0.515)      (0.526)     (0.535)     (0.542)     (0.533)      (0.616)
                            N               77677       77661         77661        77661       77661          74959     77265       77661

     Notes: This table uses tax data to estimate (semi-)elasticity regression of the form:
                                                                Yit =  log(TUCCit ) + µi + jt + Xit  + it ,
     where TUCCit is the user cost of capital of firm i at time t. The dependent variables are an indicator of positive investment, investment rate, log investment
     and IHS measure of investment that are reported in Panel A to D, respectively. Column (1) uses OLS estimator. Column (2) to (8) uses theoretical TUCC
     as instrument, where theoretical TUCC is calculated by statutory tax rates. Column (1) and (2) controls for year fixed effects. Column (2) controls for
     industry-year fixed effects. Column (4) controls for province-year fixed effects. Column (5) to (8) add both industry- and province-year fixed effects. Column
     (6) controls for firm's cash flow (scaled by fixed assets). Column (7) controls for fourth-order polynomials of sales, profit margin (=profit/revenue) and age.
     Column (8) controls for statutory CIT rate. All regressions include firm fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.
                  Table F.10: Sensitivity Analysis of Structural Moments

                                                        10% Change
                        Moments
                                                             ¯          
                        Pre-Reform Static Moments
                        Avg. Investment Rate -0.0058 0.0007 0.0006
                        Share<0.1             -0.5705 0.0218 -0.0065
                        Share<0.2             -0.1568 -0.0011 -0.0098
                        Share<0.3             0.5000 -0.0322 -0.0108
                        Serial Correlation    -0.0562 -0.0052 0.0002
                        SD. Investment Rate   -0.0739 0.0047 0.0013
                        Reduced-Form Investment Responses
                        Extensive DID         -0.0163 -0.0002        -0.0001
                        Intensive DID         -0.0118 0.0002          0.0000

Notes: This table displays sensitivity matrix:
                                       = -(G W G)-1 G W × g (m),
where G is the Jacobian matrix, W is the weighting matrix (identity matrix here), and g (m) is a vector
of moments with misspecification. Here, we consider the misspecification to be a 10% deviation from the
moment value.




                                                  92
Table F.11: Structural Estimation and Reduced-Form Moments of Investment Spikes

                                Extensive Margin                     Intensive Margin
                          % Firms Investing with IK > 0.2         Spike Investment Rate
                 Data                  0.073                               0.035
                 Model                 0.064                               0.036

Notes: This table displays additional reduced-form moments regarding investment spike, complementing
Table 10. The first row reports difference-in-difference estimates of investment spike responses (column (3)
and (6) in Table 6). The extensive margin refers to the fraction of firms whose investment rate is larger
than 0.2, i.e., 1{IKit  0.2} where IKit is the investment rate of firm i at time t. The intensive margin
                                             spike
refers to the spike investment rate, i.e., IKit    = IKit × 1{IKit  0.2}. The second row reports model
simulated responses of investment spikes. We use the estimated frictions, i.e.,  = 1.43,    ¯ = 0.12, for the
simulation.




                                                     93
                    Table F.12: Robustness of Simulating 17% VAT Cut

                                                          Upward-Sloping   Resale Price   Aggregate Pro-
 Percentage Change in                      Baseline       Capital Supply    ps = 0.80     ductivity Drop
                                             (1)               (2)             (3)             (4)
 Aggregate Investment                       0.434             0.343           0.431            0.439
 Fraction of Firms Investing                0.098             0.087           0.097            0.102
 Tax Revenue                                -0.279            -0.277          -0.279          -0.277
 Firm Value                                  0.114             0.090           0.114           0.114
 Ratio of Investment to Tax Revenue         1.557             1.235           1.544           1.586
 Ratio of Firm Value to Tax Revenue         0.410             0.325           0.408           0.413

Notes: This table displays simulation results for the baseline policy reform--17% VAT cut--with the
following extensions. Column (1) is the baseline simulation results. Column (2) assumes the capital supply
                                                         s
is upward sloping with the functional form of pK = I 1/ . The elasticity of capital supply with respect to
pre-tax capital price s is set to 10. Column (3) assumes the net-of-tax resale price to be 0.8. In column
(4), we feed in a one standard deviation permanent drop of aggregate productivity.




                                                     94
      Table F.13: Robustness of Simulating 17% VAT Cut: Varying Interest Rate

                                                       Elasticity of interest rate w.r.t TUCC
                                                   0 (Baseline)     -0.05     -0.1     -0.2    -0.25
        Percentage Change in                           (1)           (2)       (3)     (4)      (5)

        TUCC                                          -0.145       -0.145   -0.145    -0.145   -0.145

        Aggregate Investment                           0.434       0.416     0.399    0.365    0.348
        Fraction of Firms Investing                    0.098       0.092     0.088    0.077    0.072

        Tax Revenue                                   -0.279       -0.280   -0.282    -0.284   -0.286
        Firm Value                                     0.114        0.104    0.094     0.074    0.065

        Ratio of Investment to Tax Revenue             1.557       1.485     1.418    1.284    1.219
        Ratio of Firm Value to Tax Revenue             0.410       0.371     0.334    0.262    0.227

Notes: This table displays simulation results for the baseline policy reform--17% VAT cut--with elasticity
of interest rate with respect to TUCC at -0.05, -0.1, -0.2 and -0.25, respectively. For instance, column (1)
assumes the elasticity of interest rate with respect to TUCC at -0.05, leading to a 0.73% increase in interest
rate. In our baseline model, we fix the discount factor at 0.95 and thus the interest rate at 0.0526 = 1/ - 1.




                                                     95
 Table F.14: Simulating CIT Cuts with Deductible Adjustment Costs and Weighted
                         Average Cost of Capital (WACC)

                                                                          CIT Cut 15.4% to 10%
                                            17% VAT Cut
                                                               Baseline    Ded. Costs    Varying WACC
 Percentage Change in                              (1)           (2)          (3)              (4)
 Aggregate Investment                            0.434          0.147         0.038            0.061
 Fraction of Firms Investing                     0.098          0.062         0.012            0.025
 Tax Revenue                                     -0.279         -0.191        -0.172           -0.227
 Firm Value                                       0.114          0.103         0.065            0.049
 Ratio of Investment to Tax Revenue              1.557          0.767         0.218            0.270
 Ratio of Firm Value to Tax Revenue              0.410          0.540         0.379            0.214

Notes: This table displays simulation results for CIT cut from 15.4% to 10%. Column (2) reports the
baseline results. Column (3) shows the simulated results when adjustment costs (i.e., convex and fixed
adjustment costs) are tax deductible. Column (4) shows the simulated results when CIT cut changes
                                                                       1
weighted average cost of capital (WACC), and thus discount rate  = 1+WACC  . WACC is calculated as

                             WACC = Sharedebt (1 -  )r + (1 - Sharedebt )rk ,

where Sharedebt is the share of capital financed through debt and, accordingly, (1 - Sharedebt ) is the share
of capital financed through equity. We calibrate the share of debt financing to be 0.65 to match the average
debt to capital ratio. We keep real interest rate r and capital return rk constant to match baseline discount
rate.




                                                     96
                     Table F.15: Tax Cuts with Same TUCC Reduction

                                                                        CIT Cut
 Percentage Change in                       VAT Cut
                                                           Constant WACC      Varying WACC
                                               (1)               (2)                (3)
 Tax Rate (pp.)                               -2.8              -10.0               -10.0
 TUCC                                        -0.024            -0.024              -0.024
 Aggregate Investment                        0.067             0.274               0.108
 Fraction of Firms Investing                  0.023             0.111              0.042
 Tax Revenue                                 -0.029            -0.359              -0.421
 Ratio of Investment to Tax Revenue           2.346            0.765               0.257

Notes: The table shows the results with initial VAT rate at 17% and CIT rate at 15.4%. We compare two
reforms with the same reduction in TUCC: 1) VAT reform cuts VAT from 17% to 14.2% (i.e., 2.8% rate
reduction), and 2) CIT reform cuts CIT rate from 15.4% to 5.4% (i.e., 10% rate reduction). Those two
reforms have the same impacts on TUCC, reducing TUCC by 2.4%. We use the estimated frictions, i.e.,
 = 1.43,  ¯ = 0.12, to simulate tax cuts. In column (2) we simulate CIT cut with fixed interest rate. In
column (3) we use weighted-average cost of capital (WACC) for simulation. WACC is calculated as

                             WACC = Sharedebt (1 -  )r + (1 - Sharedebt )rk ,

where Sharedebt is the share of capital financed through debt and, accordingly, (1 - Sharedebt ) is the share
of capital financed through equity. We calibrate the share of debt financing to be 0.65 to match the average
debt to capital ratio. We keep real interest rate r and capital return rk constant to match baseline discount
rate. Ratio of investment rate to tax revenue is calculated by dividing the percentage change in average
investment rate by the percentage change in tax revenue.




                                                      97
