                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     ON LATIN AMERICAN POPULISM, AND ITS ECHOES AROUND THE WORLD

                                       Sebastian Edwards

                                      Working Paper 26333
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26333


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




I thank Al Harberger, Doug Irwin, Ed Leamer, Alejandra Cox, José De Gregorio, Leonidas
Montes, and Fernando Losada for helpful discussions and comments. Luis Cabezas provided able
assistance. I am grateful to three editors for extremely useful comments. This paper is dedicated
to the memory of Rudi Dornbusch. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Sebastian Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
On Latin American Populism, And Its Echoes Around the World
Sebastian Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 26333
October 2019
JEL No. D71,D72,D74,D78,E52,E62,N16

                                         ABSTRACT

In this paper I discuss the ways in which populist experiments have evolved historically.
Populists are charismatic leaders that use a fiery rhetoric to pitch the interests of "the people"
against those of banks, large firms, multinational companies, the IMF, and immigrants. Populists
implement redistributive policies that violate the basic laws of economics, and in particular
budget constraints. Most populist experiments go through five distinct phases that span from
euphoria to collapse. Historically, the vast majority of populist episodes end up with declines in
national income. When everything is over, incomes of the poor and middle class tend to be lower
than when the experiment was launched. I argue that many of the characteristics of traditional
Latin American populism are present in more recent manifestations from around the globe.


Sebastian Edwards
UCLA Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
sebastian.edwards@anderson.ucla.edu
         Most definitions of populism refer to political movements led by individuals with strong
and charismatic personalities, whose rhetoric revolves around the causes and consequences of
inequality. Populist leaders are nationalistic, and confront the interest of "the people" with those
of the elites, large corporations and banks, multinationals, immigrants, and other foreign
institutions, including the International Monetary Fund. Populist politicians appeal directly to the
masses. They tend to skip the channels of traditional political parties, and often lead their own
"movements" ­ Hugo Chávez's Movimiento Bolivariano in Venezuela is a premier example.
Populist leaders regularly show ambivalence, if not open contempt, towards representative
democracy, and instead exhibit a streak of authoritarianism.

         For a long time, populist policies were considered to be a Latin American phenomenon,
pursued in places such as Argentina and Venezuela. In the last few years, however, populism has
expanded beyond Latin America to countries as diverse as Italy, Russia, Hungary, Poland,
Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the United States. I argue that many of the characteristics of
traditional Latin American populism are also present in most recent manifestations from around
the globe.

         Experts across the social sciences define populism differently and, often, imprecisely. For
example, sociologist Peter Worsley (1969, p. 245) wrote that "populism is better regarded as an
emphasis, a dimension of political culture in general, not simply as a particular kind of overall
ideological system or type of organization." Historian Edwin Williamson (1992, p. 347) defined
populism as "the phenomenon where a politician tries to win power... with sweeping promises
of benefits and concessions to... the lower classes..." Political scientist Paul Drake (1982, p.
218) argued that populists "respond to the problems of underdevelopment... through
ameliorative redistributive measures." More recently, political scientists Mudde and Rovira
(2017, p. 19) have posited that populism is a "thin-centered ideology...which has come to the
fore... in many different shapes..."

         To make attempts at definitions even more complicated, populism is a pejorative term. It
is usually tossed around by politicians to discredit rivals. Political theorist Ernesto Laclau (2005,
p. 19) famously said that populism has been generally "denigrated." Almost no politician is
willing to call himself or herself a populist, or to label his/her political and economic platform as
populist.

         Economists have tried to provide more structure to their discussion of populist policies,
and have offered definitions centered around the use of unsustainable policies (macro and micro)
to attain redistribution. Many economists have argued that these policies end up hurting the
lower classes, the group that the policies were supposed to help. In the early 1990s Rudi

                                                  2
Dornbusch and myself defined populism as a set of economic policies aimed at redistributing
income by implementing policies that violate "good economics," including budget constraints,
and efficiency principles. (Dornbusch and Edwards 1990, 1991). According to Rodrik (2018 p.
196) populism refers to a set of "irresponsible, unsustainable policies that often end in disaster
and hurt most the ordinary people they purportedly aim to help." The problem is that often cases
are not "black or with," but rather have shades of grey.

         I begin in the next section by making a distinction between "classical" and "new"
populism. I provide basic information on fifteen episodes in Latin America before 1990, and
seven cases in the post-1990 period. I argue that all of these experiences have important
similarities that can be conceptualized in a five-phases model first suggested by Dornbusch and
Edwards. I then analyze in greater detail the experiences of Chile (1970-73), Peru (1985-1990),
Argentina (2003-2015), Venezuela (1998-now), and Ecuador (2007-2017). I argue that while the
existence of "fiscal dominance" has been a key feature of classical populism, it is not necessarily
at the center of new populist experiences. I end by comparing experiences from other parts of the
world with those of Latin America.

"Classical" and "New" Populism in Latin America

         In analyzing populist experiences in Latin America, it is useful to distinguish between
"classical populism" and "new populism." Both types of regime are led by charismatic leaders
with strong personalities, who rely on heterodox economic policies to redistribute income. Most
(but not all) cases of "classical populism" took place before 1990, and ended up with major
currency crises, runaway inflation, and a collapse in real wages. In many of these classical
episodes, the populist leader rose to power using non-democratic means, and was frequently
deposed through a coup d'état. Two examples are Argentina's Juan Domingo Perón (1946-1955)
and Peru's Alan Garcia (1985-1990). Although the Venezuelan experiment was initiated in 1998,
it followed the path of classical populism.

        "New populism," in contrast, refers (mostly) to post-1990 experiences that have taken
place under democratic rule. These new experiments are, generally, cases of "microeconomic
populism," with a focus on blanket regulations, deep protectionist policies, large expansions of
the public sector, and mandated minimum wage increases to redistribute income. New populism
in Latin America does not rely exclusively on money creation, and has often been accompanied
by new constitutions that give the government legal tools to achieve its goals. Two examples of
new populism are Ecuador under Rafael Correa (2005-2015), and Bolivia under Evo Morales
(2006-now). Argentina during the presidents Kirchner (2003-2015) is a mixed case that
combines elements from classic and new populism.

                                                 3
The phases of classical populism in Latin America

        In 1990, Rudi Dornbusch and I developed a model to analyze the dynamic of populism in
Latin America in a five-phase cycle. The analysis recognized that a range of policies ­
protectionism, agrarian reforms, controls and regulations, and the nationalization of large
companies ­ were put in place by populist regimes, but the emphasis was on fiscal largesse
financed by money creation as the main redistributive mechanism. In the last few years a number
of authors have used and expanded this framework to investigate the surge of populism around
the world. (Acemoglu et al 2013; Rodrik 2018; Eichengreen 2018; Ocampo 2019).

        A summary of the Dornbusch-Edwards five phases model is as follows: During Phase 1,
before the populist leader gains power, the population is deeply dissatisfied with the economy's
performance. Often, the country has experienced economic stagnation or outright depression as a
result of previous attempts (usually implemented under an IMF program) at reducing inflation or
recovering from a severe currency crisis. People are experiencing lower standards of living,
higher prices of public services, and a high degree of inequality. Citizen frustration increases
rapidly, and people are willing to try heterodox policies. In many cases frustration is channeled
through the armed forces, which stage a coup d'état and put the populist leader (often an Army
general) in power. Once in government, populists explicitly ignore constraints on public sector
expenditure and monetary expansion. The risks of deficit finance are portrayed as exaggerated.
Populists argue that monetary expansions are not inflationary because there is unutilized
capacity, and it is always possible to squeeze profit margins by price controls. In that regard,
their policies have interesting similarities to those of Modern Monetary Theory. (See Edwards
2019 for a comparison).

         During Phase 2, populist policymakers may seem fully vindicated in their diagnosis and
prescription. The economy reacts strongly to the aggregate demand shock: growth, real wages,
and employment are high, and the populist policies appear highly successful. Price controls
assure that inflation is not a problem, and shortages are alleviated through an increase in imports.
The run-down of inventories and the availability of imports ­ financed with dwindling
international reserves -- accommodate demand expansion with little impact on prices.

       The fiscal dimension of classical populism is marvelously captured in a letter sent in
1952 by Argentina's Juan Domingo Perón to retired Chilean General Carlos Ibañez del Campo,
who had recently been elected to the presidency (Hirschman 1979, p. 65):

               My dear friend: Give the people, especially to the workers, all that is possible.
               When it seems to you that already you are giving them too much, give them more.

                                                 4
               You will see the results. Everybody will try to frighten you with the specter of an
               economic collapse. But all of this is a lie. There is nothing more elastic than the
               economy which everyone fears so much because no one understands it ...


       Another clear statement of classical populist economic strategies is provided by
economist Daniel Carboneto, who during the mid-1980s advised Peruvian president Alan García
(Carbonetto 1987, p. 82):

               It is necessary to spend, even at the cost of a fiscal deficit, because, if this deficit
               transfers public resources to increased consumption of the poorest, they demand
               more goods and this will bring about a reduction in unit costs; thus the deficit is
               not inflationary, on the contrary!


        During Phase 3, the economy runs into bottlenecks, as a result of expansionary demand,
lack of foreign exchange and capital flight. Black markets for foreign currency and necessities
develop. Inflation increases significantly, often above an annual rate of 100 percent. Wages keep
up (with a lag) thanks to government mandated indexation. As inflation rises, the periodicity of
wage adjustments increases, first to quarterly and then to monthly adjustments. The budget
deficit worsens further as a result of pervasive subsidies to food, public services, and
transportation.

       Phase 4 is the beginning of the end, and is characterized by pervasive shortages,
increased capital flight, and an extreme acceleration of inflation. Price controls are intensified,
and shop-owners are often accused of speculating and are sent to jail. The government may seek
to stabilize the economy by cutting subsidies and by devaluing the currency, but the policies are
usually timid and end up in further frustration. There is talk of defaulting on the foreign debt. In
spite of indexation, inflation-adjusted wages fall. The disparity between inflation (very high) and
exchange rates (pegged or depreciating slowly) intensifies the extent of real exchange rate
overvaluation. Often, multiple exchange rates are put in place. Foreign currency becomes a
common medium of exchange, as people ditch the domestic currency. Generalized indexation
worsens the fiscal accounts, as the government wage bill increases rapidly according to the
indexation formula, while tax revenues lag behind.

        Phase 5 is the cleanup following the crisis. Usually an orthodox stabilization happens
under a new government. More often than not, an IMF program will be enacted, and when
everything is said and done, the incomes ­ and in particular the incomes of the poor -- will have
declined to a level significantly lower than when the episode began (Edwards 2010).
                                                   5
        In Table 1, I present information on 15 selected episodes of classical populism in Latin
America prior to 1990: four from before 1960, and eleven for the 1961-1990 period. I provide
information on the political leaning of the government, inflation at the beginning and at the end
of the episode, and whether there was an IMF program in force in the years prior to the accession
of the populist leader to power. 1 It is important to emphasize that the sample in Table 1 does not
pretend to be exhaustive or definitive; others may produce a different list. In the real world it is
not always easy to pronounce whether a government is populist or not. Episodes often have
shades of grey.

         Several interesting conclusions emerge from this table. First, the vast majority of the
experiences correspond to leftist governments. The exceptions are in Brazil: the generals who
governed between 1969 and 1973, and the center-right government of Jose Sarney from 1985­
1990. (Castro and Ronci, 1991). Second, in every case inflation at the end of the experiment was
significantly higher than at the beginning. In six of the eleven post-1960 episodes, inflation at the
end of the experiment was at the three-digit level, and in Peru and Nicaragua it reached
hyperinflation levels. Thirteen of these cases occur after the IMF becomes operational, and in
eleven out of these thirteen cases, IMF programs preceded the arrival of the populist leader. All
eleven of these IMF programs imposed austerity and rapid fiscal retrenchment, policies that
amplified the frustration of citizens and increased the appeal of the populist leader. In all eleven
episodes the IMF program was suspended after populists attained power.

"New populism" in Latin America after 1990

         In the mid-1990s a different type of populism began to emerge. This "new" populism still
conformed broadly to the phases of the Dornbusch-Edwards model, but the exact nature of these
phases was different; these new episodes added additional texture and granularity to populist
experiences. In the post-1990 episodes, the crises that triggered the populist event were not
necessarily as abrupt and "spectacular" as in the past. They often were slow simmering crises, in
which unhappiness grew gradually and slowly until it passed some threshold. Massive corruption
scandals also added to the degree of frustration and helped populists get to power. Ocampo
(2019) has argued for considering a "frustration gap" index when analyzing the emergence of
populist regimes. This gap can grow quickly and explode, as in the case of major devaluation
crises and "classical populism," or can build up slowly. Another difference with classical cases is
that in the "new populism" episodes the final situation is not runaway inflation, but rather an


1In Ta ble 1, i nflation at the beginning of the period is defined as the ra te of growth of the consumer price index in the full year
before the populist government begun. Inflation a fter the episode i s defined as the rate of i nflation either during the last year
of the experiment or one year a fter (whichever is higher). The period used to define whether there was an IMF program in
force corresponds to two years prior to the a rrival of the populist leader, or i s the year of arrival.

                                                                  6
unsustainable accumulation of debt. However, not all post-1990 episodes conform with the
"new" populism pattern: for example, Venezuela is a clear case of classical populism that has
continued well into the 21st century.

        In Table 2, I present summary information on seven selected populist episodes in Latin
America since 1990. Again, this does not pretend to be an exhaustive list of populist
governments. For example, I have not included Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva
(2003-2011). Lula was concerned about income distribution, poverty alleviation and social
conditions. But his policies were carefully designed not to generate inflation or major macro
disequilibria. Rather than a populist, Lula was a representative of a group of modern left-of-
center politicians in Latin America that included Ricardo Lagos and Michelle Bachelet from
Chile, and José Mujica and Tabaré Vásquez from Uruguay. (Edwards 2010). However, Lula's
involvement in the Lava-Jato scandal has marred his legacy.

         Table 2 helps to clarify some features of this more recent crop of populists. First, six out
of the seven are left leaning; Jair Bolsonaro from Brazil is the only exception. Second, except for
Venezuela, there are no major outbursts of inflation during these experiences of new populism.
In fact, in Bolivia, Ecuador, and Nicaragua, inflation at the end of the period is at the low one-
digit level. (Of course, it is too early to evaluate fully the cases of Mexico and Brazil). Argentina,
as noted, is a mixed case. Inflation was high at the end of President Cristina Fernandez de
Kirchner's mandate, but not much higher than when the regime (headed by her husband Nestor
Kirchner) was inaugurated, or as high as end-of-period inflation in the episodes of classical
populism in Table 1. Once again, the IMF is conspicuous in the years prior to these episodes;
there were IMF programs in five of the seven cases.

        An important difference between new and classical populists is their attitude towards
globalization. Traditional populist leaders, from Juan Domingo Perón to Alan García, were
staunchly nationalistic; they opposed foreign investors and, in many cases, nationalized
multinationals firms. However, the criticisms of new populists go beyond specific foreign
companies or banks. New populists, both from the left and from the right, decry globalization in
broad terms. They often champion national identity and denounce the loss of cultural heritage.
New populists frequently criticize multilateral organizations. In Brazil, Bolsonaro's rejection of
foreign assistance in the Amazon fires of 2019 capture vividly the confrontational attitude
towards internationalism and multilateralism.

         Instead of relying on money creation by the central bank to redistribute income, many of
the new populists have emphasized intrusive government controls and restrictions as a way of
redirecting income to particular groups. For example, exchange controls were imposed in

                                                  7
Argentina in an attempt to reduce the cost of food; foreign companies were nationalized in
Bolivia, Ecuador, and Venezuela in an effort to capture profits and raise workers' salaries;
contracts with foreign investors were violated in Argentina and Ecuador as a way of maintaining
low prices for electricity and gas; prices were controlled at artificial levels in Argentina, Bolivia,
Ecuador and Venezuela; import tariffs were raised in Argentina and Ecuador to protect local
industries; export taxes were hiked time and again in Argentina in an effort to finance social
programs; and an archaic monetary systems that border on barter was promoted in Venezuela. In
all of these countries protectionism was particularly harmful, in ways that went beyond
traditional welfare costs measured by small triangles. It increased uncertainty and sent mixed
signals that negatively affected investment, and increased risk premia.

       The new populists have also relied on rapid and massive increasers in minimum wages
and salaries of state employees to further their goals. According to the UN Economic
Commission for Latin America (ECLA), the real minimum wage was raised in Bolivia by 133%
between 2005 and 2017; in Ecuador, it was raised by 67% during the Correa administration; and
in Nicaragua, it was raised 75% between 2006 and 2017 in Nicaragua. In all of these countries,
changes in public sector wages provide guidelines for private sector negotiations.

        The new populists have used the legal system, including new constitutions, to further
their redistributive goals. During the last two decades, new constitutions were approved in
Venezuela, Ecuador and Bolivia, and a major constitutional reform was passed in Nicaragua. All
three new constitutions grant vast social rights to the people broadly, to indigenous populations,
and to regions. In contrast, new constitutions have not been approved in other Latin American
nations since the early 1990s

        Constitutions can play an important role in determining economic outcomes, including
economic performance and income distribution (Persson and Tabellini 2005). Under the "new
Latin American constitutionalism," political constitutions are expected to be changing
documents, easy to amend and reform. During their expected life of around ten years, these new
constitutions are supposed to help attain certain political goals. In Venezuela, the goal of the
"Chavez Constitution" is to construct a political system based on the principles of "Socialism of
the XXI Century." These new Latin American constitutions also add "citizens' power" and the
"electoral power" to the conventional threesome of executive, legislative and judiciary powers.
In this way, this new doctrine has elevated one of the fundamental characteristics of populism ­
the direct appeal to the masses through plebiscites and referenda ­ to the constitutional level.
(Pastor and Dalmau 2008; Salamanca, Pastor and Asensi 2004).



                                                  8
Populism, Old and New: Five Episodes

         In this section I analyze five of Latin America's best known populist episodes: Chile
during President Salvador Allende's socialist experiment (1970-1973); Peru during the first Alan
Garcia administration (1985-1990); the administrations of Presidents Nestor Kirchner and
Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner (2003-2015) in Argentina; Venezuela during the administrations
of Presidents Hugo Chavez and Nicolas Maduro (1998-now); and Ecuador during Rafael
Correa's presidency (2007-2017). Although each case is unique, the five of them share the
populist pattern presented above. Also, the five ended with a crisis; three of them with major
income collapses and runaway inflation (Chile, Peru and Venezuela), one with serious economic
dislocations (Argentina), and one on a clearly unsustainable path (Ecuador).

Classical Populism in the Andes: Chile and Peru

        In Tables 3 and 4, I present data for Chile and Peru for real GDP growth, fiscal balance as
percentage of GDP, the rate of growth of money, inflation, and current account balance over
GDP. The years of each populist episode are indicated by an asterisks. The similarities are
remarkable. In both cases, the initial conditions are characterized by very low (Chile) or negative
growth (Peru). To deal with this situation and to reduce inequality, the populist leader proposed a
nationalistic, anti-globalization and anti-elite redistributive program. In both cases, there were
IMF programs when the experiment was initiated, and in both cases the IMF programs ended as
soon as the new government was in place.

       The "growth to bust" cycle of populism is easily detected. In Chile the economy grew at
an impressive 9% during the first year of Salvador Allende's Unidad Popular government, and
Peru experienced a surge in GDP growth to 12% in 1986, Alan García's first full year in office.
However, good times did not last. Chile experienced negative growth in 1972 and 1973, the
second and third years of the Allende administration. In Peru, growth became negative from
1988 until the end of García's presidency.

         Both episodes involved enormous fiscal expansions. In 1973, the last year of the Allende
administration, the central government deficit in Chile reached almost 25 percent of GDP.
Including state-owned enterprises in the "consolidated public sector," the deficit surpasses 30%
of GDP. In Peru, the deficit exceeded 10 percent of GDP in 1987, 1988 and 1989, before falling
slightly to 8 percent of GDP in 1990.

       The high deficits were financed by the central bank through rapid expansion of the
money supply. Norberto García (1972, p. 104) one of the economists behind President Salvador
Allende's economic program, explicitly wrote about the "need" to finance major fiscal

                                                9
expansions through money creation: "Monetary and credit policy provided the financing for
fiscal expansion and the deficit..." The Allende government in Chile also nationalized the
banking sector, as a way to facilitate the flow of credit to major public infrastructure projects and
newly nationalized companies. In Peru, Alan García also planned to nationalize the banking and
financial sectors. However, after weeks of protests led by novelist and future Nobel Prize winner
Mario Vargas Llosa, the government gave up on the attempt. Eventually, and not surprisingly,
inflation was extremely high. In Chile it surpassed 500 percent in 1973; in Peru, inflation
exceeded 7,000 percent in 1990. (Larrain and Meller 1991; Lago 1991; Edwards and Edwards,
1991).

       The tables also show growing external imbalances. In Chile the current account deficit
surpassed 9 percent of GDP in 1973. In Peru, one of the first measures undertaken by García was
to limit payments on foreign debt to 10 percent of exports; he eventually stopped all payments to
all creditors, including to the IMF. Peru's current account deficit still exceeded 5 percent of GDP
in 1986 and 1988.

         When these two populist regimes were replaced ­ in Chile through a violent coup, and in
Peru through an election --, the economic conditions of the poor were worse than when the
experiments began. Real wages declined in Chile by 39%; in Peru the decline was 40%. Behind
this brief analysis, there are, of course, complex stories and intricate political relations and
disputes. In particular, in the period before 1990 the Soviet and Cuban models still seemed
attractive to large segments of Latin America's society. Both Allende in Chile and Garcia in Peru
shared the ideological goal of putting in place some version of socialism.

Post-1990 Experiences: Argentina, Venezuela

         Venezuela, during the Hugo Chavez and Nicolas Maduro administrations, and Argentina
under the president Kirchners, are the two best known recent populist experiences in Latin
America. Although both cases share a number of characteristics, they ended very differently. The
Venezuelan populist experience, which is still going on, evolved into hyperinflation and total
economic and political breakdown, a situation that has fueled one of the most massive peacetime
outmigration of modern times. In contrast, Argentina experienced (very) high but not runaway
inflation, and ended with a peaceful democratic transition in 2015 to a government led by
Mauricio Macri. I discuss these two cases, and compare them to Ecuador during Rafael Correa's
administration, which is possibly the cleanest case of "new populism" in Latin America.

        In Tables 5 and 6, I present data for Argentina and Venezuela. For Argentina I present
two series on inflation: official numbers that underestimate true inflation, and an alternative
series computed by independent think tanks. For Venezuela, the inflation data are incomplete,

                                                 10
since the government stopped publishing economic statistics when inflation got completely out
of hand.

         In Argentina, President Nestor Kirchner came to power in May 2003, after the major
currency and banking crisis of 2001-02, which marked the end of the currency board regime,
which had fixed the value of the US dollar and the Argentinian peso at 1:1. During the latter part
of the currency board experiment, a series of IMF programs had imposed successive rounds of
austerity. After the devaluation in early 2002, foreign debt was unilaterally restructured,
imposing a 75 percent haircut on investors; unemployment skyrocketed above 20 percent;
deposits were frozen; and the peso lost almost 80 percent of its value in three years. Eventually
the Argentine peso lost 90 percent of its value, greatly affecting the middle classes.

        In Venezuela, the populist policies of Hugo Chávez were put in place after a sequence of
economic and political crises, and the failure of a succession of IMF programs. The events that
gave initial impetus to the populist movement were a series of demonstrations in Caracas. On
February 27 1989, riots erupted after a rally to protest a 30 percent increase in public
transportation fares. The police were called in to control the protestors, but things go out of hand,
and more than 300 demonstrators were dead. (Edwards 2010).

        In both countries, economic growth shot up during the early years of the populist regime
(although 2008-09, the year of the global financial crisis, is an exception). In both countries, and
thanks to very positive terms of trade (agricultural commodities in Argentina, oil in Venezuela),
the bonanza lasted for longer than in most historical populist episodes. But eventually, the
combination of inflation, distortions, controls, protectionism, violations of property rights and
the rule of law, and corruption scandals, affected the real economy, and growth collapsed. In
Venezuela, growth became negative in 2006, and has stayed negative ever since. In Argentina,
growth was negative in 2012 and 2014.

         In Argentina, the fiscal deficit exceeded 3 percent of GDP in 2013, when transfer
programs were expanded and export tax revenues fell significantly due to declines in commodity
prices. The deficit then kept rising, reaching 6.4 percent of GDP in 2016. Because Argentina was
cut off from international financial markets, the central bank became a major source of
government financing. Argentina's money growth exceeded 30 percent every year since 2010,
reflecting strong "fiscal dominance."

         The picture for Venezuela, in Table 6, shows that with the exceptions of 1998 and 2001,
the early years of the "Bolivarian Revolution" were characterized by (relatively) balanced public
sector finances. A very high international price of oil helped. However, once oil prices declined,


                                                 11
the deficit shot up. It surpassed 3 percent of GDP in 2008, and increased every year since,
reaching a remarkable 31 percent of GDP in 2017. Throughout, it was mostly financed by money
creation. 2 Although in 2013, both the central bank and the international financial organizations
(IMF, World Bank) stopped publishing official figures, it is estimated that by 2018 the rate of
expansion of base money exceeded 5,000 percent. Not surprisingly, as inflation raged, the
demand for domestic money (Bolivares) collapsed.

        The inflationary outcome was clearly different in these two experiments. While inflation
in Argentina settled at around 35 percent per annum, in Venezuela it turned into one of the most
ferocious hyperinflations of modern times. According to official figures, prices increased by
130,000 percent in 2018!

        The evolution of real wages was also different in the two countries. According to
incomplete and suspiciously optimistic figures, real wages in Venezuela declined by 21 percent
between 1999 and 2013. More recent reliable data are not available, but given the hyperinflation
and generalized black markets for almost every item, including food and medicines, further
precipitous declines seem likely. In Argentina, in contrast, average real wages increased by 13
percent between 2002 and 2016. This was the result of a combination of three factors: deeply
depressed salaries at the end of the currency board period (2002), the very significant
improvement in export prices during most of the episode, and the fact that although inflation was
very high (it peaked at 39 percent), hyperinflation was avoided. 3

Populism in the absence of fiscal dominance: Ecuador, 2007-2017

        In the four case studies discussed so far--Chile, Peru, Argentina and Venezuela--an
underlying reality is that the country can undertake an independent and discretionary monetary
policy. In this scenario, the central bank can finance massive increases in public expenditures
through a variety of channels, including purchases of debt issued by the national government,
loans to subnational entities, and loans to state-owned enterprises. But what happens if monetary
policy is constrained in a way that fiscal dominance is not possible? I first consider the
constraints imposed by an independent central bank, which has not worked that well in a Latin
American context. I then consider the stronger constraints on monetary policy imposed by
"dollarization" ­ and I analyze the case of Ecuador, a country that gave up its own currency in



2 America Economía, "The Central bank of Venezuela can finance the government." March 25, 2010.
https://www.americaeconomia.com/politica-sociedad/politica/banco-central-de-venezuela-podria-financiar-al-
gobierno
3 Wage data are from the UN Economic Commission on Latin America.


                                                     12
2000, and yet pursued populist policies during the ten years that Rafael Correa was in office
(2007-2017).

        In theory, independent central banks constitute a first line of defense against the full
populist onslaught. During the late 1980s and early 1990s, most Latin American countries
implemented reforms that granted a significant degree of independence to their central banks.
Carriere-Swallow et al. (2016) constructed an index of the degree of central bank independence
that goes from zero to one, with higher numbers denoting a more independent bank. In
Argentina, the index shot up from 0.31 to 0.83 in 1992; its central bank became a solid example
of independence and professionalism. In Venezuela, the indicator climbed from 0.40 to 0.69 that
same year. For comparison, the highest value of the index, corresponding to the central bank of
Chile, is 0.85.

        However, during the 2000s, three of the 14 Latin American countries in this study
reversed the reforms, and significantly weakened the degree of central bank independence. These
countries are Argentina, Bolivia and Venezuela, all countries that embraced populist policies. Of
these, only Bolivia avoided an inflationary surge. In Argentina, a new central bank charter
required the bank to promote economic development, in part by lending to small- and medium-
size enterprises and to groups that had been excluded from the credit market (Banco Central de la
República Argentina 2014, p. 2). In Venezuela, the relapse towards a "submissive" central bank
took place in 2001, three years after Hugo Chávez was elected to the presidency. After that, the
central bank was required to work jointly with the government in order to "achieve the highest
objectives of the State and the Nation." (Carriere-Swallow et al. 2016, p. 6).

        These cases indicate that in Latin America having an independent central bank has not
been a guarantee against populist policies. Independence can be taken away as easily as it is
granted. 4 One of the first steps taken by most populist politicians when they get to power is to
weaken (or eliminate) central bank independence as part of the move towards a "fiscal
dominance" regime.

        A more drastic "commitment device" is giving up domestic currency, either by
"dollarizing" or by becoming a member of a monetary union led by credible central bankers. Of
course, a country could decide to reintroduce its domestic money, but this "exit option" would at
a minimum involve a difficult transition. Inflation in dollarized countries is significantly lower

4Fiscal stabilization laws that impose limits on imbalances have been equally ineffective as restraining devices. In
most case these laws require the government not to surpass certain limits for the public sector's "structural
balance." However, as the history of Latin America has shown repeatedly, these types of laws can be easily altered
by politicians that control the majority of the legislative power (Edwards 2010).

                                                        13
and more stable than in countries with a currency of their own. (Edwards and Magendzo 2006).
This is not surprising, given that dollarized nations rule out, by definition, having a discretionary
monetary policy. So with inflation under control, what happens in dollarized nations when a
politician with populist inclinations takes power?

         The vast majority of dollarized nations (as listed, for example, in Dornbusch 2001) have
not been subject to populist regimes. Ecuador, however, is an exception that provides an
interesting case study of populism in the absence of fiscal dominance.

         In early 2000, in the aftermath of a macroeconomic crisis that resulted in 100 percent
inflation, debt default, and a jump in unemployment, Ecuador decided to eliminate its domestic
currency, the Sucre, and to adopt the US dollar as its currency. Once President Rafael Correa
took office in 2007, he argued that dollarization was a "straightjacket" that prevented his
administration from using central bank financing to pursue the redistributive policies that the
people demanded. According to him, "very few countries in the world have committed a
monetary suicide like Ecuador." Noting that Ecuador could not devalue, he compared the
situation with that of neighboring countries: "Colombia devalued, Peru devalued, but we could
not respond [by devaluing]..." (as quoted in Telesur 2016).

        The crisis that catapulted Rafael Correa's to power had a very important political
component. In 2006, when he decided to run for president, the economy was doing relatively
well. After dollarization, inflation had moved towards international levels, growth had picked up,
and unemployment had declined. In contrast, Ecuador's political system was in disarray. In
February 1996, after less than six months in power, President Abdala Bucaram was deposed by
Congress. In 1997, Ecuador had three heads of government. In 1998, Jamil Mahuad was elected
president, only to be overthrown by the military in January 2000, barely two weeks after he
signed the law that dollarized Ecuador's financial and monetary systems. In 2002, new elections
were held and Lucio Gutierrez, was inaugurated as president. Three years later he was
impeached by Congress, and replaced by an interim head of government. This instability was in
part a reflection of a deep historical rivalry between two regions and cities: Quito, the capital, in
the highlands, and Guayaquil, the largest city and main port.

         During 2006, Rafael Correa, who had been minister of economics for three months in
2005, founded a new political movement ­ Alianza Pais-- in order to run for president. He was
young, charismatic and articulate. He was perceived as an honest, nationalistic, technocrat ­ he
has a PhD in economics from the University of Illinois ­, who could put an end to political
instability and improve social conditions. Correa promised to convey a Constitutional Assembly,
and to implement policies that would distribute income in a notoriously unequal country. He also

                                                  14
vowed to nationalize multinationals, confront the United States, lower interest rates, restructure
foreign debt, raise the minimum wage, deal with the negative effects of globalization by hiking
import tariffs, and implement a program to empower the country's large indigenous population.
On January 15, 2007, after obtaining 57 percent of the votes in the second round of elections, he
was inaugurated as president.

         In Table 7, I present the evolution of the key macroeconomic indicators for Ecuador
during 2005-2018. Again, the years of the populist episode are identified with an asterisk. Three
patterns stand out. First, the cycle that goes from boom to (severe) slowdown is present, although
not as pronounced as in the previous four cases. In 2008, a year into Correa's rule, Ecuador's
growth jumped to 6.4 percent, and it averaged 5.7 percent during 2010-2012. However, during
the last three years of the Correa administration (2015-2017) growth plunged to barely 0.4. This
severe slowdown was partially the result of a drop in the international price of oil (Ecuador's
main export), and partially the result of the accumulation of distortions and the perception that
the country was pursuing an aggressive anti-markets strategy (World Bank 2016).

        Second, and in contrast with the other four cases discussed above, there is no rise or
explosion of inflation towards the end of the episode. Inflation was always at the one-digit level,
as one would expect from a dollarized country. During the Correa administration, inflation
averaged only 3.8 percent.

         Third, in spite of the absence of "fiscal dominance," fiscal policy was very loose. During
2013-2017 the public sector deficit averaged 6 percent of GDP. Initially the expansive fiscal
policy was financed by a large increase in the price of oil. When the international oil prices
declined in late 2008, Ecuador found additional fiscal space by restructuring its sovereign debt.
During the years that followed, fiscal largesse was financed with loans from China and debt
issued by the oil state-owned company Petroecuador. In addition, an amendment to the
dollarization law allowed the central bank to use its reserves to buy some government bonds
linked to specific public-sector projects (see details below). As a result, between 2010 and 2017
the country's debt-to-GDP ratio more than doubled from 17.6 to 43.6 percent, a large number for
Latin American nations.

        Immediately after inauguration, Correa decreed a large increase in the minimum wage
and in public sector salaries, a common policy in every populist episode in the region. By late
2015, Ecuador had, by far, the highest minimum wage in Latin America; it was 50 percent higher
than the average of Brazil, Chile and Colombia. Relative to income per capita, it was more than
twice the average for those three countries, and 60 percent higher than in Peru, the Latin
American country with the second-highest minimum wage relative to GDP (IMF 2015).

                                                 15
        In the years that followed, a series of controls and regulations were put in place,
including higher import tariffs and duties. There were stringent controls on foreign oil
companies, and foreign investors were demonized. In 2007, contracts with foreign oil companies
were change retroactively, de facto increasing the tax on oil operations, and in 2011 some oil
fields were nationalized. A new constitution that enshrined a large number of rights was adopted.
Between 2007 and 2017 Ecuador dropped rapidly in international rankings that measure the
"quality" of economic policies, including in the Fraser Institute Index of Economic Freedom and
the World Bank's Doing Business Index. The decline was particularly noteworthy in categories
related to "business regulations" and "international trade."

        In 2015, eight years after Correa was inaugurated, it looked as if Ecuador's experiment
was running out of steam, and that the country was entering the crisis phases of populism. Public
sector debt had more than doubled relative to 2010, and growth had declined drastically to -1.2
percent. In mid-2015, credit rating agencies downgraded Ecuador's sovereign debt, and the IMF
issued a report arguing that the nation needed urgent fiscal rectification. Also, in 2015 it was
found by perceptive analysts that the administration had used the central bank reserves, which
were supposed to back the dollarized financial system, to buy government bonds. Between
September 2014 and March 2015, central bank holdings of government paper went from $64
million to $1.1 billion. A second credit rating downgrade was issued in June 2017, generating a
large increase in the country risk premium

       As the 2017 elections approached, many investors believed that without major policy
changes the country would face a serious crisis. An article published in late 2015, in the
Investment Business Daily was titled, "The end of dollarization in Ecuador, the crisis has begun."
Dollarization seemed to be at risk, and investors warned that a return to the national money, the
Sucre, would result in chaos. In 2017, Lenin Moreno, Rafael Correa's vice president, was
narrowly elected as president. To general surprise, once in office he decided to change paths and
to implement a tighter fiscal policy aimed at stabilizing (and then reducing) the debt-to-GDP
ratio. Also, many of the regulations of the Correa years were relaxed or eliminated. The new
government was aware that price stability and dollarization were cherished by the population
and, in particular, by the poor; an end to dollarization could result in an inflationary spike and in
political turmoil. In addition, the Moreno administration believed that in order to revive growth it
was indispensable to attract foreign investment, and that foreign companies would only come if
the policies of regulation and control were replaced by market-friendly initiatives. In August
2019 an new program, with IMF was signed. 5


5   This IMF agreement immediately resulted in demonstrations by farmers.

                                                       16
        Rafael Correa was successful in reducing inequality. Ecuador's Gini coefficient fell from
53.4 in 2006 to 44.7 in 2017 (based on World Bank data), a significant achievement, not matched
by any Latin American countries in modern times. For comparison, during the same period the
Gini coefficient in Chile, a country generally considered as the poster child of successful market-
oriented reforms, declined from 51.5 to 46.6. In Chile, reducing inequality is considered, both by
the right and the left, as an antidote to populism.

        Ecuador's experience shows that total collapse, wage decline, and runaway inflation are
not the unavoidable results of populist policies. Although the data clearly suggest that Ecuador
was on an unsustainable path, it is only possible to speculate on what would have happened if
President Moreno had not changed course in 2017. One likely outcome would have been a
serious fiscal crisis, possibly similar to the one experienced in Greece after 2010. Without a
currency of its own, Ecuador might then have had to engineer a large "internal devaluation,"
including a large public sector adjustment. As Argentina's experience with the currency board
shows, that is a politically difficult exercise to implement. The main alternative would have been
to accept the high transition costs of exiting from the US dollar, reintroducing the Sucre, and
then adopting the policies of classical populism.

Connections to Populism around the World: Some Historical and Recent Episodes

       Of course, the term populism was not invented in Latin America, or for the Latin
American countries. It was first used by the New York Times in 1891, to refer to supporters of the
People's Party in the United States. (New York Times, 12 January, 1891, p. 11). 6 It was used
again a few years later in relation to Russia's Narodniks, and the Social Credit movement in
Canada.

        Throughout the years a number of U.S. politicians have been called populists, often in a
disapproving way. Two examples from the late 19th and early 20th century are William Jennings
Bryan and Huey Long. During Bryan's three runs for the presidency (1896, 1900, and 1908), he
campaigned against the gold standard and advocated the remonetization of silver. This would
have created a major increase in liquidity, and a sharp decline in interest rates, helping farmers
and residents in the agricultural states. Huey Long was Governor of Louisiana and then a U.S.
Senator until his assassination in 1934. He campaigned incessantly for the poor, supported rural




6 According to Oxford English Dictionary, "the policies of the Populists included public control of railways,
limitation of private ownership of land, extension of the currency by free coinage of silver and increased issue of
paper money, a graduated income tax, etc."

                                                         17
workers, and unveiled a populist platform ("Share our Wealth"), based on capping fortunes at
$50 million, and distributing any amount in excess of the cap to the poor.

         Recently, some scholars have argued that there are good and bad populists, and that
President Franklin Delano Roosevelt is a premier representative of the good type. Rodrik (2018),
for instance, has pointed out that FDR's profound economic reforms were needed to address
inequalities that had lingered for decades in the United States. According to Rodrik, FDR was a
benevolent "economic populist," not a "dangerous," authoritarian one.

        Analyzing FDRs policies to determine whether they had populist elements is well beyond
the scope of this paper. However, Rodrik (and others) may be onto something: FDR's rhetoric
was at times incendiary and feisty, not very different from that of Latin American populists. He
often criticized banks, trusts, and the urban elites. Throughout the campaign and his first year in
office (1933) he declared time and again that his main objective was to help farmers and the
poor. His June 1933 decision to unilaterally restructure U.S. debts had a distinctive Latin
American flavor. In June 1933, all debt contracts ­ public and private -- in the U.S., which for
decades had been written in terms of gold, were voided and rewritten in paper dollars. Once the
dollar was devalued with respect to gold in January 1934, creditors suffered large losses (over
40%). Similarly, in Argentina, in 2002, contracts in USDs were unilaterally rewritten in
depreciated pesos, imposing huge losses on investors and international firms that had
participated in the Argentine privatization process of the 1990s. (See Edwards 2018 for details).

        The similarities between Latin America and other parts of the world are not confined to
the past or to historical figures such as FDR. In the aftermath of the global financial crisis of
2018-2010, populist movements gathered force in a number of advanced countries, including in
the United States. Although every case is unique, many of these episodes share some
characteristics with traditional Latin American populism. The cycle begins with an accumulation
of grievances and frustration, and is fed by inequality. As in Latin America, once the populist
gets to power, he/she implements heterodox policies that, at first, appear to work and to deliver
growth and social progress. The population is happy and the populist leader is vindicated. After
some time, however, the costs of heterodoxy become apparent. Protectionism hurts consumers,
excessive regulations slow investment and growth, anti-migrant policies upset the labor market,
excessive debt accumulation increases risk premia, and unreasonably easy money tends to feed
bubbles and often results in an acceleration of inflation. In high income countries it is improbable
that these policies will result in three digits (or even two digits) inflationary outbursts. A more
likely outcome is that they would end up slowing growth and requiring a significant fiscal
correction and policy rectification.

                                                 18
         In the United States, in the aftermath of the subprime crisis, many felt that they had been
wronged by the elites, by large companies and banks, by traditional politicians, and by
foreigners, including migrants. Many citizens abhorred the bailout of banks and financial
institutions after 2008. Of course, Donald Trump's rallies were not the same as Hugo Chávez's
huge marches, but to many observers there were some striking similarities, including the fierce
attacks and mocking of political rivals, the anti-globalization rhetoric, and the criticism of the
elites and the establishment. As in Latin America, the Trump administration implemented
protectionist policies. Also, as in Latin America, there have been severe denunciations of
traditional institutions. Chávez criticized the Supreme Court, and then packed it; Correa was
critical of Ecuador's monetary system. Trump disparaged the Federal Reserve ­ he called its
policy "crazy" and "loco"--in a way that echoes Chávez attacks to the independence of
Venezualea's central banks. Turkey's Erdogan also attacked his nation's central bank for not
helping his government achieve its redistributive goals. Similarly, Italy's former Deputy Prime
Minister Matteo Salvini's attacks on the European Union budget process resembled events in
Latin America.

        But the recent wave of populism in high income countries also has some important
differences with Latin American classical populism. First, while the vast majority of populists in
Latin America have been leftist, many recent advanced countries populist are right wing. Second,
and more important, modern populism in the advanced nations ­ in the United States, the United
Kingdom (Brexit), Italy, and Hungary ­ has been characterized by a high degree of nativism.
Immigrants are blamed for crime, unemployment and the stagnation of wages. In Latin America,
in contrast, populist politicians (both classical and new) have never targeted immigrants. To be
sure, they have opposed multinationals, foreign banks, the IMF, and globalization more
generally--but not foreign workers.

         A third important difference is that in many of the advanced episodes the country in
question (Italy, Greece) don't have a currency of their own and, thus, cannot use the central bank
to finance public sector expansion. In that regard, their experiences are closer to Ecuador's than
to Argentina's.

        As the case of Greece after the 2010 crisis showed, in the absence of a flexible exchange
rate macroeconomic adjustment will require an "internal devaluation," and can be difficult and
costly. Of course, there is an alternative that no member of the Eurozone has taken so far: to
reintroduce a domestic currency. This option has been discussed from time to time in Greece and
Italy. However, the task would be significantly more complex than the U.S. abrogation of the
gold clauses in 1933. In that episode, only debt contracts were affected by the change in the
monetary regime, while currently every contract in the eurozone is written in euros. A key
                                                 19
question is what would happen once a country has (hypothetically) left the euro and reintroduced
a domestic currency. It is possible that with a domestic money, some of the European countries
with populist proclivities could fall into the trap of classical populism, and use money creation to
finance massive fiscal expansion and social programs. This is, indeed, what Modern Monetary
Theory (MMT) espouses (Edwards 2019). As the cases of "classical" Latin American populism
discussed in this paper show, that path can lead to sharp declines in national incomes.




                                                 20
                                      BIBLIOGRAPHY


Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin. 2017. "A political theory of
      populism." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128.2 (2013): 771-805.

America Economía, "The Central bank of Venezuela can finance the government." March 25,
       2010.

Banco Central de la República Argentina. 2014. Objetivos y planes respecto del desarrollo de la
      política monetaria, financiera, crediticia y cambiaria para el año 2015, 2014.

Carbonetto, Daniel. 1987. "Marco teórico de un modelo de consistencia macroeconómica de
      corto plazo." In Un modelo económico heterodoxo: El caso peruano, ed. Daniel
      Carbonetto. Lima: Instiuto Nacional de Planificacion.

Carriere-Swallow, Yan, Luis Jacome, Nicolas E. Magud, and Alejandro M. Werner. 2016.
        Central banking in Latin America: The way forward. International Monetary Fund, 2016.

Castro, P. R., and Ronci, M. (1991). Sixty years of populism in Brazil. In The macroeconomics
        of populism in Latin America (pp. 151-173). University of Chicago Press.

Dornbusch, Rudiger. 2001. "Fewer monies, better monies." American Economic Review 91.2
      (2001): 238-242.

Dornbusch, Rudiger and Sebastian Edwards. 1990. "The macroeconomics of populism in Latin
      America." 32.2 Journal of Development Economics: 247-277.

Dornbusch, Rudiger and Sebastian Edwards. 1991. The macroeconomics of populism in Latin
      America. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Drake, Paul W. 1982. "Conclusion: Requiem for Populism?" in Michael L. Conniff, Latin
       American populism in comparative perspective. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico
       Press.

Edwards, Sebastian. 2010. Left Behind: Latin America and the False Promise of Populism,
      University of Chicago Press.

Edwards, Sebastian. 2018. American Default: The Untold Story of FDR, the Supreme Court, and
      the Battle over Gold. Princeton University Press, 2018.

Edwards, Sebastian. 2019. "Modern Monetary Theory: Cautionary Tales from Latin America."
      Hoover Institution, Working Paper 19106.

Edwards, S., and Edwards, A. C. (1991) Monetarism and Liberalization: The Chilean
      Experiment . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


                                              21
Edwards, Sebastian, and I. Igal Magendzo. 2006. "Strict Dollarization and Economic
      Performance: An Empirical Investigation." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
      (2006): 269-282.

Eichengreen, Barry. 2018. The Populist Temptation: Economic Grievance and Political Reaction
       in the Modern Era. Oxford University Press, 2018.

Fraser Institute. 2018. Economic Freedom, https://www.fraserinstitute.org/economic-
        freedom/map?geozone=world&page=map&year=2016

Friedman, M. (1992). Franklin D. Roosevelt, Silver, and China. Journal of Political Economy,
       100(1), 62-83.

García, N. (1972) "La coyuntura económica en 1971." In La economía chilena en 1971.
        Santiago: Instituto de Economía, Universidad de Chile.

Hirschman, A. O. (1979). The turn to authoritarianism in latin america and the search for its
       economic. The new authoritarianism in Latin America, 61.

International Monetary Fund. 2015. 2015 Article IV Consultation, Ecuador. Washington D.C.
         2015.

Investment Business Daily was titled, "The end of dollarization in Ecuador, the crisis has begun."

Laclau, E. (2005). On populist reason. Verso.

Lago, R. (1991) "The Illusion of Pursuing Redistribution Through Macropolicy: Peru's
       Heterodox Experience, 1985­1990." In R. Dornbusch and S. Edwards (eds.) The
       Macroeconomics of Populism in Latin America, 263­330. Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press for the NBER.

Larraín, F., and Meller, P. (1991) "The Socialist-Populist Chilean Experience, 1970­1973." In R.
        Dornbusch and S. Edwards (eds.) The Macroeconomics of Populism in Latin
        America175­221. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the NBER.

Martinelli, Cesar and Marcos Vega. 2018. "Monetary and Fiscal History of Peru 1960-2010:
       Radical Policy Experiments, Inflation, and Stabilization, Working Paper, Becker
       Friedman Institute, University of Chicago.

Mudde, C., and Rovira, C. R. (2017). Populism: A very short introduction. Oxford University
      Press.

Ocampo, E. (2019). The Economic Analysis of Populism. A Selective Review of the Literature
     (No. 694). Universidad del CEMA.



                                                22
Pastor, R. V., and Dalmau, R. M. (2008). Necesidad y oportunidad en el proyecto venezolano de
        reforma constitucional (2007). Revista Venezolana de Economía y Ciencias Sociales,
        14(2), 101-130.

Persson, T., and Tabellini, G. E. (2005). The economic effects of constitutions. MIT press.

Rodrik, D. (2018). Is Populism Necessarily Bad Economics?. In AEA Papers and proceedings
       (Vol. 108, pp. 196-99).

Salamanca, L., Pastor, R. V., & Asensi, J. (2004). Sistema político en la Constitución
       Bolivariana de Venezuela. Vadell Hermanos Editores.

Telesur, 2016. "Ecuador Committed 'Monetary Suicide' by Switching to the Dollar." August 8,
        https://www.telesurtv.net/english/news/Ecuador-Committed-Monetary-Suicide-by-
        Switching-to-the-Dollar-20160808-0025.html.

Williamson, Edwin. 1992. The penguin History of Latin America, Penguin, Middlesex

World Bank (2016), Doing Business 2016: Measuring Regulatory Quality and Efficiency,
      Washington, D.C.

Worsley, P. (1969). The concept of populism. In, Ionescu, G., & Gellner, E. (Eds.). Populism: Its
       Meaning and National Characteristics, 244. Macmillan.




                                                23
Table 1: "Classical" Populism and Inflation in Latin America: Selected Episodes, 1945-
                                         1990
Country             Leader                Political          Beginning      Final       IMF
                                         persuasion           inflation   inflation   Program
                                                                                       before
                                                                                       arrival
Argentina   Juan Domingo Perón        Left, nationalist,       3.9%        16.7%      Pre-IMF
(1946-                                   capitalism
1955)                                     of state

Brazil      Getulio Vargas             Left, nationalist      -12.4%       14.6%      Pre-IMF
(1931-
1945)

Brazil      Getulio Vargas             Left, nationalist       9.2%        22.6%       1949,
(1951-                                                                                 1950,
1954)                                                                                  1951

Chile       Carlos Ibañez del            Center left,          23.5%       39.0%       1948
(1952-      Campo                        protectionist
1958)

Argentina   Héctor Cámpora/J.D.        Left, nationalist,      58.4%      176.1%       1971,
(1973-      Perón/Isabel Perón          protectionist                                  1972
1976)

Brazil      Joao Goulart               Left, nationalist       30.0%       91.4%       1960,
(1961-                                                                                 1961
1963)

Brazil      Arturo Costa e Silva/     Right, nationalist,      22.0%       27.6%       1968
(1969-      Ernesto Geisel              protectionist,
1973)                                  anticommunist

Brazil      Jose Sarney              Center, protectionist    192.0%      432.0%       1983,
(1985-                                                                                 1984
1990)

Chile       Salvador Allende         Left, Marxist, pro-       30.6%      505.0%       1968,
(1970-                               Soviet, pro-Cuban                                 1969
1973)

Peru        Juan Velasco Alvarado/     Left, nationalist,      9.8%        75.4%       1967,
(1968-      Francisco Morales         protectionist, pro                               1968
1980)       Bermúdez                     indigenous




                                               24
 Peru         Alan Garcia                    Left, nationalist,       110.0%       7,481.7%       1983,
 (1985-                                       protectionist                                       1984
 1990)

 Mexico       Luis Echeverría               Left, protectionist        3.4%         29.1%          No
 (1970-                                                                                         programs
 1976)

 Mexico       José López Portillo           Left, anti-banking        14.9%         111.5%        1976
 (1976-                                    sector, protectionist
 1982)

 Nicaragua    Daniel Ortega                Left, Marxist, pro-         4.6%        13,490%        1978,
 (1979-                                    Cuban, pro-Soviet                                      1979
 1990)

 Venezuela    Carlos Andres Perez         Center left, nationalist     4.1%         12.4%          No
 (1974-                                                                                         programs
 1978)


Sources: Dornbusch and Edwards (1991), IMF, World Bank. The Velasco Alvarado and Morales
Bermudez governments in Peru followed different policies, with the former being more aggressive in
implementing redistributive policies. However, for the purpose of this analysis it seems appropriate to
consider them together as one populist episode.




                                                     25
                Table 2: Populism in Latin America: Selected Episodes, 1990-2019
  Country           Leader         Political                 Beginning    Final (or      IMF
                                   persuasion                 inflation   current)     Program
                                                                          inflation     before
                                                                                        arrival

 Argentina      Nestor Kirchner/   Peronist left;
 (2003-         Cristina           progressive anti-           25.9%       36.3%          2003
 2015)          Fernandez de       neoliberal
                Kirchner


 Bolivia        Evo Morales        Movement for                5.4%        2.3%        2003, 2004,
 (2006-                            Socialism; anti-                                       2005
 present)                          neoliberal


 Brazil         Jair Bolsonaro     Right wing; social          3.6%        3.2%          None
 (2019-     )                      conservative;
                                   nationalistic


 Ecuador        Rafael Correa      Left nationalist;
 (2005-                            anti-neoliberal             2.7%        -0.2%          2003
 2015)


 Mexico         Andre Manuel       Leftist; nationalistic;     4.8%        3.2%          None
 (2018- )       López Obrador      anti-neoliberal;
                                   protectionist


 Nicaragua      Daniel Ortega      Left; Frente
 (2007-                            Sandinista de               9.1%        4.9%       2006, 2007
 present)                          Liberación Nacional


 Venezuela      Hugo Chavez/       Socialism of the            35.8%      130,000%        1996
 (1998-         Nicolas Maduro     XXI Century (Filo
 present)                          Marxist)

Sources: IMF, World Bank.




                                                       26
                                          Table 3
                                     Chile, 1968-1976
                                  Macroeconomic Indicators

                          Real         Public    Rate of     Inflation   Current
                          GDP          Sector    growth          %       account
                         Growth       Balance       of          Per      balance
                          % per        as %      money        Annum       as %
                          year         GDP       Supply      (Average)    GDP
                                                     (%)
               1968         3.6        -2.4          36.8      27.9        -2.2
               1969         3.7        -1.5          43.6      29.3        -0.1
              1970*         1.9        -2.9          66.2      34.9        -1.3
              1971*         9.0        -11.2         135.9     22.1        -2.4
              1972*        -1.2        -13.5         178.3    163.4        -4.3
              1973*        -5.6        -24.6         365.0    508.1        -9.1
               1974         1.0        -10.5         319.6    375.9        -3.7
               1975       -12.9        -2.6          293.7    340.7        0.0
               1976         3.5        -2.3          271.6    174.3        0.0
Source: Edwards and Edwards (1991); Banco Central de Chile; Larrain and Meller (1991). The asterisk
refers to the populist regime years. The Allende government was inaugurated on November 4 1970.




                                                27
                                           TABLE 4
                                    Peru, 1983-1992
                                Macroeconomic Indicators

                           Real        Public         Rate of   Inflation   Current
                           GDP         Sector         growth        %       account
                          Growth       Deficit           of        Per      balance
                           % per        as %          Money      Annum        as %
                           year         GDP            % per    (Average      GDP
                                                       year         )
               1983         -9.3        -11.6          115.1      111.1      -6.8
               1984          3.8         -7.9          142.5      110.2      -1.4
              1985*          2.1         -3.7          214.9      163.4       0.3
              1986*        12.1          -7.8          39.4       77.9       -5.4
              1987*          7.7        -10.1          110.5      85.8       -4.3
              1988*         -9.4        -11.5          568.2       667       -5.4
              1989*        -13.4        -11.3         1,436.6    3398.3      -0.5
              1990*         -5.1         -8.9         7,782.5    7481.7      -5.1
               1991          2.2         -2.9          162.2      409.5      -4.5
               1992         -0.5         -4.0          95.8       73.5       -5.4
Source: International Monetary Fund, except for fiscal deficit which comes from Martinelli and Vega
(2018). The asterisk refers to the populist regime years.




                                                 28
                                  TABLE 5

                         Argentina, 1999-2016
                        Macroeconomic Indicators

          Real        Public      Rate of      Inflation     Inflation     Current
          GDP         Sector     growth of     (official)   (adjusted)     account
         Growth      Balance     Money %           %             %         balance
          % per     as % GDP      per year        Per           Per          as %
          year                                  Annum         Annum          GDP
                                              (Average)     (Average)
 1999      -3.4        -3.8          4.1          -1.2          -1.2         -3.9
 2000      -0.8        -3.3          1.5          -0.9          -0.9          -3
 2001      -4.4        -5.4         -19.4         -1.1          -1.1         -1.4
 2002     -10.9        -2.1          19.7        25.9          25.9           7.9
2003*       8.8        1.2           29.6        13.4          13.4           5.8
2004*        9         3.5           21.4         4.4            4.4          1.8
2005*       8.9        3.2           21.5         9.6            9.6          2.5
2006*        8         1.3           20.3        10.9          10.9           2.8
2007*        9         -0.1          24.5         8.8          25.7           2.1
2008*       4.1        0.2           8.1          8.6          23.0           1.5
2009*      -5.9        -2.6          17.0         6.3          14.8           2.2
2010*     10.1         -1.4          33.1        10.5          25.7          -0.4
2011*        6         -2.7          26.0         9.8          22.5           -1
2012*       -1          -3           34.8        10.2          25.2          -0.4
2013*       2.4        -3.3          27.1        10.6          27.9          -2.1
2014*      -2.5        -4.3          29.8        22.1          38.5          -1.6
2015*       2.7        -5.8          39.6        24.2          27.8          -2.7
 2016      -1.8        -6.4          41.5        36.3          40.7          -2.7
  Source: International Monetary Fund, except "adjusted inflation," from Bolsa de Comercio de
  Santa Fé. The asterisk refers to the populist regime years.




                                       29
                                 TABLE 6

                         Venezuela, 1998-2018
                        Macroeconomic Indicators


                Real        Public       Rate of      Inflation    Current
                GDP         Sector      growth of         %        account
               Growth      Balance      Money %          Per       balance
                % per     as % GDP       per year      Annum         as %
                year                                 (Average)       GDP

    1998*         0.3         -4.5         7.4          35.8         -4.8
    1999*         -6          0.7          21.7         23.6          2.2
    2000*         3.7         4.4          33.7         16.2         10.1
    2001*         3.4         -4.6         10.7         12.5          1.6
    2002*        -8.9         -1.5         14.6         22.4           8
    2003*        -7.8         0.2          62.4         31.1         14.1
    2004*       18.3          2.5          50.0         21.7         13.8
    2005*       10.3          4.1          47.4          16          17.8
    2006*         9.9         -1.6         72.7         13.7         14.9
    2007*         8.8         -2.8         33.9         18.7          6.1
    2008*         5.3         -3.5         28.8         31.4         10.8
    2009*        -3.2         -8.7         23.3          26           0.2
    2010*        -1.5         -9.2         23.5         28.2          1.9
    2011*         4.2        -10.6         49.2         26.1          4.9
    2012*         5.6        -14.6         53.3         21.1          0.8
    2013*         1.3        -14.1         58.8         43.5           2
    2014*        -3.9        -16.5          --          57.3          2.3
    2015*        -6.2        -17.6          --         111.8         -6.6
    2016*       -16.5        -17.8          --         254.4         -1.6
    2017 *       -14         -31.8          --         1087.5          2
    2018*          --          --           --        130,000          --
Source: International Monetary Fund. The asterisk refers to the populist regime years.




                                      30
                                 TABLE 7

                          Ecuador, 2005-2018
                        Macroeconomic Indicators


              Real GDP       Public      Rate of      Inflation Current
               Growth        Sector     growth of         %     account
                % per       Balance     Money %          Per    balance
                year       as % GDP      per year      Annum      as %
                                                     (Average)    GDP

    2005         5.3          0.4           --           2.2             1.1
    2006         4.4          2.7           --           3.3             3.7
   2007*         2.2          3.1           --           2.3             3.7
   2008*         6.4          -3.7          --           8.4             2.9
   2009*         0.6          -2.4          --           5.2             0.5
   2010*         3.5          -1.1          --           3.6            -2.3
   2011*         7.9          -0.6          --           4.5            -0.5
   2012*         5.6          -1.7          --           5.1            -0.2
   2013*         4.9          -5.8          --           2.7            -1.0
   2014*         3.8          -6.4          --           3.6            -0.7
   2015*         0.1          -6.7          --           4.0            -2.2
   2016*         -1.2         -6.8          --           1.7             1.3
   2017*         2.4          -4.0          --           0.4            -0.5
    2018         1.1          -1.7          --           -0.2           -1.3
Source: International Monetary Fund; World Bank. The asterisk refers to the populist regime
years.




                                      31
