                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      A CROSS-COHORT ANALYSIS OF HUMAN CAPITAL SPECIALIZATION AND
                     THE COLLEGE GENDER WAGE GAP

                                             Carolyn Sloane
                                               Erik Hurst
                                               Dan Black

                                         Working Paper 26348
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w26348


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                             October 2019, Revised February 2020




We thank seminar participants at the University of Chicago for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Carolyn Sloane, Erik Hurst, and Dan Black. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Cross-Cohort Analysis of Human Capital Specialization and the College Gender Wage
Gap
Carolyn Sloane, Erik Hurst, and Dan Black
NBER Working Paper No. 26348
October 2019, Revised February 2020
JEL No. J16,J24

                                         ABSTRACT

In this paper, we exploit new data to assess gender differences in pre-labor market specialization
among the college educated and highlight how those differences have evolved over time. We
highlight new results pertaining to gender differences in the mapping between undergraduate
major and subsequent occupational sorting. To perform our analysis, we introduce new indices in
potential wage space that measure gender differences in major choice and separately the
subsequent occupational sorting conditional on major choice. We highlight that women both
choose majors with lower potential earnings (based on male wages associated with those majors)
and that they then subsequently sort into occupations with lower potential earnings given their
major choice. We highlight that these differences have narrowed over time but recent cohorts of
women still choose majors and occupations with lower potential earnings. Differences in
undergraduate major choice explains a substantive portion of gender wage gaps for the college
educated above and beyond simply controlling for occupation. Collectively, our results highlight
the importance of understanding gender differences in pre-labor market human capital
specialization and the mapping between college major and occupational sorting when studying
the evolution of gender differences in labor market outcomes over time.

Carolyn Sloane                                  Dan Black
Department of Economics                         1155 E. 60th Street
University of California, Riverside             Harris School
Riverside, CA 92521                             University of Chicago
c.m.sloane@gmail.com                            Chicago, IL 606037
                                                danblack@uchicago.edu
Erik Hurst
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
Harper Center
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
erik.hurst@chicagobooth.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26348
1       Introduction
In the last several decades, the gender composition of the college-educated workforce in
the U.S. has shifted dramatically due to the dual forces of accelerated female labor force
participation and growth in the relative supply of college-educated women.1 At the same
time, the specialized skills of college-educated men and women have been evolving. Post-
schooling labor market specialization (e.g. occupational choice) has been identified as an
important determinant of gender gaps in wages and employment.2
    Before entering the labor market, US workers with at least a bachelors degree are faced
with a menu of potential undergraduate college majors that is nearly as varied as the op-
portunities to specialize once in the labor market. Until recently, large, multi-cohort data
linking detailed college major choice to subsequent labor market outcomes was not available.
Due to this empirical constraint, the impact of pre-market specialization (e.g. major choice)
has not received as much attention. Further, very little is known about gender differences
in the linkages between major and occupation.
    In this paper, we use new data to assess gender differences in pre-market human capital
specialization and examine the extent to which such gender differences in specialization have
converged over time. Furthermore, we fill an important gap in the literature by examining
gender gaps in the mapping of college major to subsequent occupational specialization. To
go beyond simply documenting gender differences in pre-labor market specialization (college
major choice) and occupational sorting conditional on pre-labor market specialization, we
introduce new indices that measures specialization in potential wage space. In doing so, we
highlight that women both choose majors with lower potential earnings and that they then
subsequently sort into occupations with lower potential earnings given their major choice.
We then show that gender differences in major choice explains a substantive portion of the
gender wage gap among college graduates above and beyond what is explained by gender
differences in occupational sorting. Finally, we show evidence that some of the gender
differences in occupational sorting conditional on college major can be explained by women
choosing occupations with lower potential hours worked. Collectively, our results highlight
the importance of understanding gender differences in pre-labor market specialization and
    1
     See Altonji and Blank (1999), Bertrand and Hallock (2001), Black and Juhn (2000), Blau and Kahn
(1997), Blau and Kahn (2000), Goldin (1992), and Jacobsen et al. (1999). For a recent, detailed review of
this literature, see Blau and Kahn (2017) For literature on overtaking see Becker et al. (2010), Charles and
Luoh (2003), DiPrete and Buchmann (2006), Goldin et al. (2006), and Jacob (2002).
   2
     The literature documenting both changes in occupational sorting by gender over time and the contri-
bution of occupational choice to gender labor market disparities includes Bayard et al. (2003), Blau et al.
(1998), Blau et al. (2014), Cortes and Pan (2018), Goldin (1992), Groshen et al. (1987), Hsieh et al. (2019),
Macpherson and Hirsch (1995), and Pan (2015).



                                                     1
the mapping between college major and occupational sorting when studying the evolution
gender differences in labor market outcomes over time.
    The paper exploits newly released data from the American Community Survey (ACS)
which added questions starting in 2009 on pre-labor market specialization, namely major
choice, for millions of college-educated individuals.3 These questions are asked regardless
of age. Given that major choice is constant for an individual over their life-cycle, this data
allows us to explore how pre-market human capital specialization decisions have changed
across cohorts. The data also measures an individual's current labor market status allowing
us to link undergraduate major to employment status, occupation, and wages for different
cohorts of both men and women.
    Similar to others in the literature, we document that men and women systematically
choose different college majors and those differences have evolved over time. Women have
made substantial progress in traditionally male-dominated majors such as Business and the
Physical and Life Sciences. Younger birth cohorts of women are even more likely to be
Biology majors than men. In contrast, although relative growth of women in Engineering is
large, Engineering remains a male-dominated field of study. The fraction of women majoring
in Education, a historically female-dominated field of study, declined substantially. However,
the decline among males was even larger making the education field even more heavily female-
concentrated among recent birth cohorts.
    One innovation of the paper is to measure gender differences in major choice in potential
wage space. We define a major's potential wage based on the median log hourly wage of
native, white men aged 43-57 who matriculated with that major. With this measure, we
compare the major choice of women relative to the major choice of men for each birth cohort
where the units of the index are in potential log wage differentials. We find that across
all birth cohorts women systematically choose majors with lower potential wages relative
to men. College-educated women born in the 1950s matriculated with majors that had
potential wages that were 12% lower than men from their cohort. That gap fell to about
9% for the 1990 birth cohort.4 While there has been convergence in major choice between
men and women during the last 40 years, the youngest birth cohorts of women still choose
majors with lower potential wages than men. We also highlight that the trend in the gender
similarity of major choice is non-monotonic with much of the convergence occurring between
   3
     The ACS covers cohorts from the periods pre-dating and including a nation-wide expansion in the
supply of college graduates. The ACS has been used by Altonji et al. (2014) to measure the evolution
of wage inequality within college majors and Altonji et al. (2016) to estimate major-specific labor market
returns.
   4
     Using a similar methodology to rank undergraduate majors in the ACS, (Bertrand, 2017) notes gender
convergence at the 90th percentile, 80th percentile, and mean of log earnings across birth cohorts.



                                                    2
the 1950 and 1975 birth cohorts with a modest divergence for recent cohorts.
    Convergence in major choice is of a similar order of magnitude as the convergence in oc-
cupational choice. However, conditional on matriculating with a given major, occupational
sorting varies dramatically by gender. For example, among the 1968-1977 birth cohort, 63
percent of female and just 46 percent of male Nursing/Pharmacy majors reported worked in
the nursing occupation in the 2014-2017 ACS. In this same birth cohort, men who majored in
Nursing/Pharmacy were much more likely than women to sort into Executive/Manager occu-
pations and Sales occupations. Women who majored in Nursing/Pharmacy became nurses.
Conversely, men who majored in Engineering were much more likely than women to sort into
engineering occupations. For each undergraduate major, we compute Herfindahl-Hirschman
Indices (HHI) of occupational choice separately for men and women. We document that for
high potential wage majors, men's occupational sorting is systematically more concentrated
than women's.
    To quantify whether women are systematically sorting into low-wage occupations condi-
tional on their undergraduate major we introduce another new index. Specifically, the index
measures gender differences in potential wages based on occupational choice conditional on
matriculating with a degree in a given major. Again, we measure an occupation's potential
wages based on the wages of older men. We find that on average women born between 1968
and 1977, work in occupations with roughly 10 percent lower potential earnings conditional
on major choice. 5 This gap occurs in both higher wage majors (Engineering) and low-
wage majors (Education) and occurs in majors dominated by women (Nursing) and majors
dominated by men (Business).
    While women systematically work in lower pay occupations conditional on major choice,
this gap has narrowed somewhat over time. For example, for the 1950 birth cohort, women
who majored in Engineering sorted into subsequent occupations with potential wages that
were 14 percent lower than the corresponding men who majored in Engineering. For the 1980
birth cohort, however, women who majored in Engineering ended up working in occupations
with potential wages that were only 4 percent lower. These patterns have nothing to do
with women earning less than men within an occupation as we only measure an occupation's
potential wages based on what men earn in that occupation. These patterns stem from the
fact that the subsequent occupations taken by women who majored in Engineering used
to differ markedly from men but now the occupational choice conditional on major has
converged.
   5
     We primarily focus this exercise on a single cohort in their prime-earnings years. Later, we compare
mapping across cohorts with the caveat that these comparisons will necessarily confound age and cohort
effects to some extent.



                                                   3
     The patterns for Engineering are broadly similar to the patterns for all majors. For the
1950 birth cohort, women work in occupations conditional on major choice with potential
wages that were about 11% lower than comparable men with the gap being larger for higher
potential wage majors (like Biochemical Engineering and Economics). The gender gap in oc-
cupational choice conditional on major narrowed somewhat for recent cohorts. For example,
women from the 1980 birth cohort systematically work in occupations with about 9 percent
lower potential earnings conditional on their undergraduate major choice. Interestingly, we
find this convergence is driven by movements of women at the top of the major-pay distri-
bution into higher-pay occupations. We show that female sorting into lower hours-worked
occupations explains part, but not all, of these patterns.
     In the final part of the paper, we ask how much of the gender gap in wages can be
explained by controlling for both undergraduate major and for current occupational choice
and how these relationships have evolved over time. We do this for all cohorts pooled together
and separately by 10-year birth cohorts. The latter analysis lends itself to a decomposition
exercise to assess how much of the change in gender wage gaps can be explained by changes
in undergraduate major choice and current occupational choice. We find that the gender
gap in wages for all college-educated cohorts in the 2014-2017 ACS was 23 log points after
controlling for simple demographics such as highest degree completed, age, race, and state of
residence. Further controlling for both major choice and current occupation reduced the wage
gap to only 11 log points - a 50% reduction. Most importantly, we find that controlling for
major choice has strong predictive power above and beyond controlling for just occupational
choice. The gender gap in wages controlling for demographics and occupational choice is
14.3 log points. Adding undergraduate major as a control in addition to occupation and
demographics further reduces the gender wage gap by 3 log points. We then compare recent
(1978 to 1987) birth cohorts to older cohorts (1958 to 1967). We document that the role
of college major in these cohorts remains remarkably stable, but there is a sharp reduction
in the importance of occupation. Over all, we find that controlling jointly for major choice
and occupational choice explains roughly 40 percent of the cross-birth cohort decline in the
wage gap.
     Separately, we document that undergraduate major choice does not have any effect on ex-
tensive margin labor market participation for college graduates. While undergraduate major
is informative about gender wage differentials, it is not informative with respect to explaining
extensive margin differences in labor supply. However, we document heterogeneous effects
by gender on intensive margin participation. Specifically, we find that conditional on college
major choice, women sort into occupations with lower annual hours worked than men.
     Our results complement a literature on gender differences in major choice. This litera-


                                               4
ture has followed two separate strands. First, there is a recent literature documenting gender
differences in major choice and how those differences have evolved over time. Dickson (2010)
uses administrative data from three public universities in Texas, and Zafar (2013) uses ad-
ministrative data from Northwestern University to document gender differences in majors for
one cohort of undergraduates at their respective universities. Using data from the National
Center of Education Statistics, England and Li (2006) and Blau et al. (2014) (Chapter 8)
document how gender differences in detailed undergraduate majors have diminished over
time for a nationally representative sample of undergraduates with detailed measures of field
of study. Unfortunately, the data that England and Li (2006) and Blau et al. (2014) use has
no information on subsequent labor market outcomes.6
    Second, there is a separate literature examining how gender differences in major choice
affect gender differences in earnings. In a classic reference, Brown and Corcoran (1997) use
data from the 1984 Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) and the National
Longitudinal Study of High School Class of 1972 (NLS72) to document how course work
differences between men and women affect gender wages gaps. For the older cohorts (those
born prior to 1960 and, thus, prior to the female overtaking in college completion), they
find that the gender wage gap for college graduates falls once controlling for 20 broad major
categories. Loury (1997) uses data from the NLS72 and the High School and Beyond Senior
Cohort (Class of 1980) to also document that controlling for GPA and four broad major
choice categories reduces the gender wage gap.7 Within a broader analysis of factors con-
tributing to the gender wage gap such as psychological attributes and demands for flexibility,
Bertrand (2017) uses data from the 2012 to 2015 ACS to briefly document cross-cohort con-
vergence in potential wages based on degree attainment and major. The goal of our paper
is to link and expand on these two strands of the literature. Additionally, we add to this
literature by providing novel results on gender differences in the mapping between major
choice and occupational sorting and how those differences have evolved over time.
   6
     The literature documenting the under-representation of women in STEM fields includes see, for example,
Leslie et al. (1998) and the cites within. Ceci et al. (2014) use data from the National Center for Science
and Engineering Statistics to highlight the gender convergence in STEM majors. Turner and Bowen (1999)
uses data from the College and Beyond database to assess gender differences in major choice within twelve
academically selective colleges and universities finding even conditional on SAT scores, gender differences in
major choice remain.
   7
     Black et al. (2008) use data from the 1993 National Survey of College Graduates to examine the extent to
which pre-labor market factors (including undergraduate major) explains differences in wages across various
race-gender groups of college graduates. Ironically, their data end in 1990, about the time women's field of
studying started diverging from men.




                                                      5
2       Data
Our primary data source is the 2014-2017 American Community Survey (ACS).8 Starting in
2009, the ACS asked all respondents with a bachelor's degree to report their undergraduate
major. Given the possible impact of the Great Recession on undergraduate majors, we re-
strict our analysis to only include ACS respondents from the 2014-2017 surveys. Specifically,
our base sample includes roughly 1.7 million observations of individuals aged 23 to 67 with
a bachelors' degree who reported their undergraduate major.9
    Respondents are asked to report their undergraduate field of study. For those respondents
with a post-bachelor's degree, no additional information is provided for the field of study of
their advanced degree(s). If individuals have more than one bachelor's degree or more than
one major, they are prompted to list multiple majors. The ACS separately records up to
two separate majors for each respondent. Only 11% of our sample reports having a second
major. For the sample years 2014-2017, the ACS combines major responses into 176 distinct
"detailed" majors. The ACS also aggregates these detailed majors into 29 "broad" major
categories. Examples of the detailed majors include Journalism, Economics, Chemical Engi-
neering, Molecular Biology, Music, and Finance while examples of the corresponding broad
major fields include Communications, Social Sciences, Engineering, Biology/Life Sciences,
Fine Arts, and Business. We assign one undergraduate major to each individual with at
least a bachelor's degree. For those with only one major, it is the major reported. For those
with two majors, we choose the reported major that is associated with the highest median
male labor market wage.10
    Our analysis explores the independent contributions of educational and occupational
specialization decisions to the college gender wage gap and explores gender differences in
the mapping between undergraduate majors and occupational choice. For the 2014-2017
data, we use the reported occupation for all individuals in our sample with a valid, civilian
occupation code who have worked within the previous 5 years.11 Lastly, we use the data
    8
     The ACS is conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau. The ACS samples roughly 1 percent of the U.S.
population each year asking detailed questions on demographics, labor market variables and family structure.
We downloaded the ACS samples from IPUMS USA database. For additional details, see Ruggles et al.
(2019).
   9
     Of those with a bachelor's degree, 91.5% of ACS respondents between the ages of 23 and 67 reported
at least one undergraduate major. For those with missing majors, the ACS imputes the majors for these
individuals by assigning them a major probabilistically based on the reports of other respondents of similar
sex, race and occupation. The fraction with missing major was relatively constant between the ages of 23
and 67 but did increase sharply for respondents over 75. We exclude those with imputed majors. We use
inverse probability weighting to correct for non-response. See more details in the Online Appendix.
  10
     In computing potential wage for each major, we restrict the analysis to a sample of native, white men
between the ages of 43 and 57 with strong attachment to the labor market in the prior year.
  11
     We use a balanced panel of detailed occupation codes based on the 1990 Census detailed occupation



                                                     6
on wages and employment rates from the ACS. We define real wages within the ACS by
dividing self reported annual labor income by self reported annual total hours worked and
then using the CPI to convert into real 2018 dollars. We classify individuals in our sample
as strongly attached to the labor market if the individual reports working at least 30 hours
per week for at least 27 weeks in the previous year. See the Online Appendix for additional
details about the construction of all variables used in the paper.


3     Gender Differences in College Major Choice
In this section, we document the presence and evolution of gender gaps in undergraduate
major choice. For comparison, we also document trends in relative occupational choice for
college-educated men and women. In the subsequent section, we discuss gender differences
in the mapping between majors and occupations.
    For each survey year between 2014 and 2017, we begin by assigning each individual a 5-
year birth cohort based on current age in the survey year.12 In the U.S., most individuals who
ever complete a bachelor's degree do so by their mid-twenties; this implies that undergraduate
major is largely fixed over the life cycle. Figure 1 graphs the ratio of females to males within
a broad major category.
    The majors in Figure 1 highlight the heterogeneity with respect to the gender composition
of broad major fields. For some majors, there has been substantial gender convergence across
birth cohorts. For example, for the 1950 birth cohort, the Engineering major contained
twenty men for every one woman. Today, the Engineering major is still much more male-
dominated, but that gap has narrowed over time. By the 1990 birth cohort, there were five
men for every one woman in the Engineering major. These patterns are shown in the solid line
in Panel A. Similar convergence patterns are seen for the Physical Sciences (e.g., Chemistry,
Physics, Astronomy) and for the Biology/Life Sciences majors (e.g., Biology, Molecular
Biology, Genetics, Ecology). In fact, Biology/Life Sciences switched from being a major
field dominated by men (for the 1950-1970 birth cohorts) to one dominated by women (the
1980-1990 birth cohorts). The Business major displays a different pattern: women converged
toward men between the 1950-1965 birth cohorts, a period when the Business major itself
was expanding. Thereafter, in a period that was marked by a contraction overall in Business
majors, women and men once again diverged. History was male-dominated historically and
experienced little convergence or divergence over subsequent birth cohorts.
codes following (Dorn, 2009). This yields 251 detailed occupation codes in our analysis.
  12
     We center the 5-year birth cohorts around years that are multiples of five. For example, what we refer
to as the 1950 birth cohort includes all individuals born between 1948 and 1952.



                                                    7
                                                  Figure 1: Gender Differences in Selected Majors by Birth Cohort

                                 1.6                                                                                                                                     7.0


                                 1.4
                                                                                                                                                                         6.0

                                 1.2

                                                                                                                                                                         5.0
                                 1.0
       Female Share/Male Share




                                                                                                                                               Female Share/Male Share
                                 0.8                                                                                                                                     4.0


                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                         3.0

                                 0.4

                                                                                                                                                                         2.0
                                 0.2


                                 0.0                                                                                                                                     1.0
                                       1950      1955          1960        1965        1970           1975      1980       1985     1990                                       1950     1955      1960      1965          1970           1975      1980         1985        1990
                                                                             Five Year Birth Cohort                                                                                                             Five Year Birth Cohort

                                       Biology/Life Sciences          Business        History          Physical Sciences     Engineering                                       Nursing/Pharmacy     Education         Psychology            Foreign Languages          Fine Arts




                                   Panel A: Historically Male                                                                                                            Panel B: Historically Female
                                       Dominated Majors                                                                                                                       Dominated Majors

Notes: These figures plot the ratio of females to males within major category. The left panel shows trends
for a set of majors where men outnumber women. The right panel shows trends for a set of majors where
women outnumber men. Data from the 2014-2017 ACS and is restricted to those with at least a bachelor's
degree. See text for additional details.


    Similar heterogeneity in trends are seen in historically female-dominated majors (Panel
B). There was gender convergence over time in the Nursing/Pharmacy major. In the 1950
birth cohort, there were five women for every one man in this major. For the 1990 birth
cohort, there less than four women for every one man in this major.13 Notable gender
convergence was also seen in both the Foreign Language and Fine Arts majors. Like History,
the Education major saw little convergence or divergence between women and men over the
last 50 years. Psychology majors, however, were more likely to be populated by women in
the 1950 cohort and became even more female-intensive by the 1990 cohort.
    As seen in Figure 1, some majors moved closer to gender parity and others moved further
from parity from the 1950 to 1990 birth cohorts. We perform two exercises to summarize the
trend in overall similarity in major choice by gender across cohorts. Define sm
                                                                              g,c as the share
of gender group g born in 5-year birth cohort c who matriculated with undergraduate major
m. First, we compute a re-normalized Duncan-Duncan segregation index of undergraduate
major segregation by gender and cohort (Duncan and Duncan (1955)). Specifically, we
compute:
  13
    The broad major field referred to as "Nursing/Pharmacy" represents a broad category of health-related
majors: Nursing, Pharmacy, Treatment Therapy Professions, Community and Public Health, and Miscella-
neous Health Medical Professions.




                                                                                                                                           8
                                                 M
                                  M       1
                                 Ic   =1-       sm     - sm                                             (1)
                                          2 m=1 male,c    f emale,c


         M
where Ic    is the re-normalized gender segregation index in major choice for cohort c and
where M is the total number of detailed undergraduate majors reported in the ACS. We
re-normalize the segregation index such that perfect major segregation by gender yields an
index of 0 and perfect major integration by gender yields a Duncan-Duncan index of 1. The
                                                M
re-normalization implies that an increase in Ic    indicates increasing convergence in major
                                         O
choice by gender. We similarly define Ic , the re-normalized occupational segregation index
based on observed gender differences in occupational sorting.
    Segregation indices have some notable shortcomings. The first is that these indices are
invariant to rank (such as an earnings ordering) of the major field or occupation. In other
words, the above segregation index tells us to what extent college-educated men and women
have sorted into similar majors (occupations), but would take on the same value if all men
were Chemical Engineering majors and all women were Fine Arts majors as it would if
all men were Chemical Engineering majors and all women were Biomedical Engineering
majors. Second, the units of the segregation index do not lend themselves easily to an
economic interpretation. As an alternative measure, we develop an index of the impact of
gender on potential wages based on pre-market educational specialization.14 In contrast to
the segregation index, the units of this index are in wage space allowing for the influence
of major rank and thus making it easier to interpret the economic magnitude of gender
differences in major choice. Furthermore, the inputs of this index are useful in the ensuing
empirical analysis of the college gender wage gap. A crucial input is Y¯ m , a potential wage
                                                                        male
based on major that is plausibly unaffected by post-educational factors. Specifically, we
define Y¯ m to be the median within-major labor market log wage of a group we assume
         male
faces minimal post-educational frictions in the labor market: native, white men between the
ages of 43 and 57 with strong attachment to the labor market.15 For example, for anyone
(male or female) who majored in Economics, we assign as their potential wage the median
log wage of older native white men who majored in Economics. We formally define the
potential wage index as:
  14
    This is similar to an index developed in (Bertrand, 2017).
  15
    Market effects, such as discrimination, can affect equilibrium wages of groups that do not directly face
discrimination such as white men. In fact, Hsieh et al. (2019) documents that discrimination against women
and blacks in the labor market raises the wages of white men. However, Hsieh et al. (2019) also estimate
that these wage effects on men are small.




                                                     9
                                                M    m         ¯m
                                    P,M         m=1 sf emale,c Ymale
                                   Ic     =      M
                                                                       -1                                (2)
                                                      m      ¯m
                                                 m=1 smale,c Ymale
         P,M
where Ic     measures the differential "potential" log wage of women of cohort c given that
the female distribution of major choice in a given cohort may differ from males in their
                     P,M
cohort. A value of Ic    = 0 means that the major choices of women yield the same potential
                                                   P,M
log wage as their male counterparts. A value of Ic     < 0 implies that women systematically
                                                                                   P,M
choose majors associated with lower relative potential log wages. For example, Ic      = -0.35
implies that women choose majors that reduce their potential wage by 35 percent relative to
males from a similar cohort. As with our re-normalized Duncan-Duncan index, an increase
    P,M
in Ic    implies that major choice is converging between men and women.
                                                                 M
    The solid line in Panel A of Figure 2 shows the trend in Ic    , measuring major similarity
                                                             M
across different birth cohorts. For the 1950 birth cohort, Ic   = 0.55. The index increased to
0.64 for the 1990 birth cohort. Over the last half century, the U.S. saw sharp convergence in
undergraduate major choice by gender measured by the segregation index. The time series
trend in the segregation index however is non-monotonic with the increased convergence
occurring between the 1950 and 1965 birth cohorts. We document a surprising new fact that
there is a reversal in the index for recent cohorts, and this reversal seems to be increasing
among more recent cohorts. As seen in Figure 1, Business and Psychology majors saw
gender divergence for recent cohorts. Nevertheless, the recent divergence is small relative to
the convergence that occurred for older cohorts implying that major choice overall converged
between men and women between the 1950 and 1990 cohorts. During this time period, the
fraction of women with a bachelor's degree has increased relative to men.16
                                                                       P,M
    The solid line in the Panel B of Figure 2 shows the trend in Ic        across cohorts. Like
the re-normalized segregation index, the "potential wage" index also shows a strong gender
convergence in major choice over the last half century. This index allows us to interpret
the economic magnitudes of the gender convergence in college major choice over the last
half century. For the 1950 birth cohort, women chose majors that reduced their potential
wage by 12.5 percent relative to their male counterparts. By 1990, women still chose majors
that were associated with lower wages relative to men, but the gap narrowed to 9.5 percent.
                                                        P,M
Like the time series pattern in the segregation index, Ic    is also non-monotonic with major
choice diverging slightly for recent birth cohorts. Overall, the patterns in Figure 2 illustrate
a convergence in major choice between men and women particularly between the 1950 and
  16
    We have performed a series of robustness exercises on the patterns in Figure 2. The hump-shaped
            M
pattern in Ic across cohorts persists for different levels broad and detailed majors and when we restrict the
sample to include only those with strong attachment to the labor market. For more detail, see the Online
Appendix.


                                                     10
                                                           Figure 2: Gender Similarity in Major Choice and Occupation by Cohort
                                             0.76                                                                                                                             -0.07



                                             0.72                                                                                                                             -0.08



                                             0.68                                                                                                                             -0.09




                                                                                                                                          Potential Income Similarity Index
   Inverse Duncan-Duncan Similarity Index




                                             0.64                                                                                                                             -0.10



                                             0.60                                                                                                                             -0.11



                                             0.56                                                                                                                             -0.12



                                             0.52                                                                                                                             -0.13



                                             0.48                                                                                                                             -0.14



                                             0.44                                                                                                                             -0.15
                                                    1950     1955   1960       1965        1970        1975     1980   1985   1990                                                    1950   1955   1960   1965        1970         1975   1980   1985   1990
                                                                                 Five Year Birth Cohort                                                                                                      Five Year Birth Cohort
                                                                           Major                   Occupation                                                                                               Major         Occupation




                                                            Panel A: Segregation                                                                                                        Panel B: Potential Wage
                                                                   Index                                                                                                                         Index
                                               M                                                            P,M
Notes: Figure plots the segregation index, Ic     (left panel) and potential wage gender similarity index, Ic
(right panel) for different cohorts. The solid line in each panel show the indices for major choice. The dashed
line in each panel show the indices for occupation. Data from the 2014-2017 ACS and is restricted to those
with at least a bachelor's degree. See text for additional details.


1970 birth cohorts with a slight divergence for recent cohorts. Moreover, it should be stressed
that even for the most recent cohort, women are systematically choosing majors associated
with per-hour wages that are 10 percent lower than men. The remaining gender gap in major
choice is larger than the convergence in major choice experienced over the last 40 years.
    As a way of comparison, Figure 2 also displays the occupation segregation index (Panel
A - dashed line) and the potential wage gender segregation index for occupations (Panel
B - dashed lines). To make these indices, we use 251 distinct occupation codes reported
in the 2014 to 2017 ACS. These indices are the same as above except for the fact that we
replace sm          o               ¯m          ¯o      o
          g,c with sg,c and replace Ymale with Ymale . sg,c measures the share of each gender
and cohort that works in a given occupation while Y  ¯ o is the median labor market per-hour
                                                      male
wage of native white men aged 43-57 working full time given that they work in occupation
o (regardless of major).
    Focusing on Panel A, the occupational segregation index is roughly similar in both level
and trend to the major segregation index. Both indices start at a level of around 0.55 for
the 1950 cohort and end at a level of around 0.65 for the 1990 cohort. The occupation
index, however, increases monotonically. While there has a been a modest divergence in
major choice across genders for recent cohorts, occupational choice has continued to con-
verge.17 Panel B also shows that there was strong convergence in occupational segregation
  17
                                            We have replicated the gender convergence in occupational choice using the historical U.S. Censuses.


                                                                                                                                     11
as measured by the potential wage index. College women from the 1950 birth cohort were
in occupations that systematically had incomes that were 14 percent lower than the occu-
pations of their male counterparts. The potential wage gap fell to 10 percent lower for the
1990 cohort.
    Collectively, the results in this section highlight three facts about gender differences in
undergraduate major choice. First, the gender gap in major choice has declined somewhat
over time. Second, even for the most recent set of college graduates, a large gender gap in
major choice still exists. Finally, the convergence in the gender gap in major choice among
those with a bachelor's degree is of the same magnitude as the convergence in the gender gap
in occupation choice for college graduates. These patterns suggest that it is important to
think about gender differences in pre-labor market specialization alongside gender differences
in occupational choice. In the next section, we explore gender differences in the relationship
between undergraduate major and occupational choice.


4     Gender Differences in the Mapping of Majors to Oc-
      cupations
An interesting fact from Panel B of Figure 2 is that potential wage index based on occupation
          P,O
choice (Ic    , dashed line) is consistently lower than potential wage index based on major
         P,M
choice (Ic    , solid line). This implies that conditional on choosing the same major as men,
women systematically work in lower-pay occupations. In this section, we explore gender
differences in the mapping of undergraduate major choice to subsequent occupation and
document how these differences have evolved over time.
    Table 1 shows the broad occupational distribution for men and women born between
1968 and 1977 for selected broad major categories. We summarize the occupational distri-
bution by showing the four most common occupations associated with each major. Unlike
undergraduate major, occupation may vary over an individual's lifetime. Similar to above,
we measure occupations for this birth cohort using data from 2014-2017 ACS. Therefore, this
table measures gender differences in occupational choice when these individuals are between
the ages of 38 and 47.
    The table illustrates that there are sharp differences in occupational sorting between
men and women even conditional on major choice. For illustrative purposes, we start by
considering patterns among Education majors. In the 1968-1977 birth cohort, 68 percent of
all women and just 50 percent of all men who majored in education report their occupation
This allow us to control for both cohort and age. Even conditional on age, the convergence in occupational
choice is nearly identical to what is shown in Figure 2. See the Online Appendix for additional details.

                                                   12
Table 1: Gender Differences in Occupational Choice, Selected Majors, 1968-77 Birth Cohort

                                        Panel A: Education Majors
                                   Executive/                      Admin
                                                                                               m
                   Teachers         Manager         Sales         Support                   HHIg,c

   Men               0.50              0.18               0.06                0.03            0.29
   Women             0.68              0.09               0.03                0.07            0.48

                                       Panel B: Nursing/Pharmacy
                   Nurses/         Executive/                     Health
                                                                                               m
                   Health           Manager         Sales       Technicians                 HHIg,c

   Men               0.46              0.15               0.07                0.06            0.25
   Women             0.63              0.09               0.03                0.05            0.42

                                           Panel C: Social Sciences
                 Executive/                         Lawyers/               Admin
                                                                                               m
                  Manager              Sales          Judge                Support          HHIg,c

   Men               0.26              0.13               0.11                0.06            0.11
   Women             0.20              0.07               0.08                0.13            0.10

                                               Panel D: Business
                 Executive/                        Accountant/             Admin
                                                                                               m
                  Manager              Sales        Underwriter            Support          HHIg,c

   Men               0.31              0.18               0.12                0.07            0.16
   Women             0.24              0.11               0.17                0.18            0.14

                                            Panel E: Engineering
                 Executive/                          Other               Architects/
                                                                                               m
                  Manager            Engineer      Technicians           Civil Engin.       HHIg,c

   Men               0.28              0.23               0.09                0.08            0.16
   Women             0.27              0.18               0.05                0.07            0.13


Note: Table shows the occupational distribution of men and women born between 1968 and 1977 for
different majors. We use both broad major categories and broad occupational categories for this table.
Each panel shows a different undergraduate major. The cells of the panel show the fraction of men
(women) who majored in that occupation who subsequently worked in different broad occupations in the
2014-2017 ACS. For each major, we show the four largest occupational categories based on where men
with that major in that age range worked.



                                                   13
as "teacher" in the 2014-2017 ACS. Such patterns are robust across all birth cohorts. For
example, for those majoring in education, 72 percent of women from the 1978-1987 birth
cohort, 63 percent of women from the 1958-1967 birth cohort and 52 percent of women from
the 1948-1957 birth cohort worked as teachers. The comparable numbers for men from the
various birth cohorts were 58 percent, 43 percent, and 28 percent.
    In this simple exercise, rank effects are stark. For example, men from the 1968-1977
birth cohort who majored in education are twice as likely as women (18 vs. 9 percent) to be
executives or managers ­ including principals and superintendents. Women who majored in
education are more than twice as likely as men (7 vs. 3 percent) to work in administrative
support roles­ including teachers' aides, administrative assistants, and office supervisors.
For all cohorts, men majoring in education were roughly twice as likely as women to be in
executive or managerial occupations and women were twice as likely to be in administrative
support occupations.
    Panels B-E show similar patterns for individuals majoring in Nursing/Pharmacy, Social
Sciences, Business, and Engineering. In all the majors we explored in Table 1, conditional on
undergraduate major women are less likely to be executives and managers and more likely
to work in administrative support occupations. This glass ceiling effect is smallest among
Engineering majors where men and women are almost equally likely (28 v. 27 percent) to
be executives and managers; however, male Engineering majors are much more likely than
female Engineering majors to work as engineers (23 v. 18 percent).
    How systematically different is the occupational sorting of men and women conditional
on undergraduate major? To answer this question, we define two measures to summarize the
gender differences in occupational sorting after matriculating with a given major. First, we
                                                               m
create a cross-occupation Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHIg,c     ) for each gender g and cohort
                      18
c for every major m. This index measures the occupational concentration for individuals
in major m separately by gender. Given we are measuring occupational sorting as shares,
                                             m                                               m
our occupational concentration index (HHIg,c    ) ranges from 0 to 1. Higher levels of HHIg,c
imply that occupational sorting is more concentrated.
                                                             m
    Referring back to Table 1, column (5) shows the HHIg,c      for the five broad major cate-
gories. Some major categories, such as Education and Nursing/Pharmacy, have more highly
concentrated occupational distributions for both men and women. For both majors, women's
occupational choices are more concentrated that men's. In the Engineering majors, men's
                                                                                        m
occupations are more concentrated than women's. Appendix Table A2 reports HHIg,c           sep-
  18                m       O o|m 2            o|m
       Formally, HHIg,c =   o (sg,c )   where sg,c is the share of group g from cohort c working in occupation o
                                                                                                     O    o|m
conditional on having major m. For each gender and cohort who matricate with a given major,          o   sg,c = 1
where O is the total number of potential occupations.


                                                        14
arately for both men and women from the 1968-1977 birth cohort for each broad major
category. For many broad major categories, the degree of occupational dispersion is quite
similar for men and women at the broad major level. Notable differences arise, however, in
some broad majors like Computer and Information Sciences and Policy and Social Work.
                                      m
    The concentration indices (HHIg,c   ) shown in Table 1 use broad major categories. We can
also compute these indices using detailed major categories.19 Panel A of Figure 3 plots the
                                m                                m               m
female-male difference in HHIg,c  for each detailed major (HHIf   emale,c -HHImale,c ) against the
female-male difference in the share matriculating with that major (sm              m
                                                                      f emale,c - smale,c ). Positive
values on the y-axis indicate majors where female occupational sorting is more concentrated
than males. An example of such a major is Early Childhood Education where most females
become teachers while more men disperse into executive/manager roles. Conversely, negative
values on the y-axis indicate majors where male occupational sorting is more concentrated.
An example of this type of major is Computer Science where most men become engineers and
programmers while women are more likely to disperse into other occupations. For this figure,
we again restrict our analysis to the 1968-1977 birth cohort. As seen in Panel A, there is a
strong and significant positive gradient between the extent of relative female occupational
concentration (conditional on major choice) and the extent to which women are relatively
more likely to choose that major. In female-dominated majors, women sort into a narrower
set of occupations than men. In male-dominated majors, men sort into a narrower set of
occupations than women.
                                                                    m
    Panel B of Figure 3 plots the female-male difference in HHIg,c       for each detailed major
                               ¯ m (on the horizontal axis). The vertical axis of Panel B is
(on the vertical axis) against Y male
identical to that of Panel A. Recall, Y¯ m measures the log wages of native white men aged
                                        male
43-58 who graduated with undergraduate major m. Detailed undergraduate majors with
high potential earnings (like Finance) are on the right of the figure while lower pay majors
(like Fine Arts) are on the left of the figure. Panel A suggests a symmetry in the relative
occupational dispersion of men and women across gender-dominance of majors. However,
Panel B suggests a dimension in which not all dispersion is created equal. Specifically, this
figure shows a strong and significant negative gradient between the relative occupational
concentration between men and women conditional on major choice and how lucrative that
major is. Men tend to have a higher occupational concentration in high earning majors.
These patterns suggests that when the potential returns to a major are low, men disperse
into a wider set of occupations than women to avoid the wage penalty of a low-return major.
However, when the potential returns to a major are high, men sort into a narrower set of
  19
    When computing the concentration measures for detailed majors, we still use broad occupation categories
                    m
as an input into HHIg,c .



                                                    15
Figure 3: Cross Major Variation in Within-Major Gender Differences in Occupational Dis-
persion, 1968-1977 Birth Cohort
                .3




                                                                                                          .3
   Female - Male HHI Occupation




                                                                                             Female - Male HHI Occupation
                           .2




                                                                                                                     .2
                  .1




                                                                                                            .1
      0




                                                                                                0
                -.1




                                                                                                          -.1
                                  -1      -.5               0               .5     1                                        3             3.5                     4       4.5
                                                Female - Male Share Major                                                                Potential Wage Based on Major



                                         Panel A: Gender                                                                           Panel B: Potential
                                       Composition of Major                                                                         Income of Major
                                                         m
Notes: These figures show cross-major variation in HHIg,c    as a function of how female dominated is the
major (panel A) and average major potential income (panel B). See text for additional details. Each obser-
vation in both panels is a detailed major. We use broad occupation categories. Data is shown only for the
1968-1977 birth cohort. Both panels include a fitted regression line. The slopes of the regression lines are
-0.19 (standard error = 0.027) and 0.12 (standard error = 0.011), respectively.


occupations than women.
                                                           m
    A shortcoming of the above concentration index (HHIg,c   ) is that, like the Duncan-Duncan
index, it does not allow for any rank ordering of occupations. Consider two scenarios. In the
first scenario, all men from a major sort into the same high-pay occupation and all women
from the major sort into the same low-pay occupation. Contrast that with a second scenario
where both men and women from the major sort into the same high-pay occupation. In
both scenarios, men and women will have the same measure of occupational concentration
        m                                     m
(HHIg,c   ). The concentration measure (HHIg,c  ) does not account for men and women sorting
into occupations of different quality. To overcome this limitation, we create a second index
based on occupational sorting by potential income. Specifically, we define the following
index:

                                                                    M                                                       M
                                                   P,O|m
                                                                      (so            ¯o                                         (so         ¯o
                                                  Ic          =         f emale,c |m)Ymale    -                                   male,c |m)Ymale                        (3)
                                                                   m=1                                                  m=1

where so g,c |m is the share of gender g choosing occupation o conditional on major m from
                              P,O|m
cohort c. In other words, Ic        measures the gender gap in potential occupational earnings
for a given cohort c conditional on major choice m. Any gender difference in this index
                                                                                     P,O|m
reflects gender differences in occupational wage rank conditional on major choice. Ic      <0

                                                                                       16
implies that women with major m from cohort c are systematically in occupations with
lower potential wages compared to men from the same major and cohort. For example, if
  P,O|m
Ic       = -0.1, it implies women in detailed major m choose occupations that are associated
with 10 percent lower earnings, on average. To reiterate, as in Figure 2, average potential
wages of an occupation (Y    ¯ o ) is based on the wages of men aged 43 to 57 with strong
                              male
attachment to the labor market. If women and men are in the same occupations conditional
                                    P,O|m
on their undergraduate major, Ic          will be equal to zero by definition.
                                                                               P,O|m 20
     Figure 4 is the analog of Figure 3 except the vertical axis now being Ic       . Specifically,
                               P,O|m           m            m
Panel A of Figure 4 plots Ic         against sf emale,c - smale,c (on the horizontal axis). Recall,
sm            m
 f emale,c - smale,c measures the extent to which the major is female-dominated. There are
two things of note from Panel A of Figure 4. First, in essentially all detailed majors, women
sort into occupations where potential earnings are lower relative to men. Second, there is
no strong, significant linear relationship between whether a major is female-dominated and
the propensity for women to sort into lower-pay occupations. Women from the 1968-1977
birth cohort earn roughly 9 percent less than their male counterparts, conditional on their
undergraduate major, regardless of their relative propensity to choose that major relative
                                                   P,O|m            ¯ m (on the horizontal axis).
to me. Likewise, panel B of Figure 4 plots Ic              against Y male
Again, there is no strong, significant linear relationship between the potential wage of the
major and the propensity for women to sort into lower-pay occupations conditional on major
choice. These patterns stand in contrast to the pattern shown in Panels A and B of Figure 3
and are consistent with the fact that female-male differences in occupational concentration
conditional on major choice occurs because women are more likely to sort into lower earning
occupations. Appendix Tables A3-A6 rank detailed major categories for the 1968-1977 cohort
      P,O|m
by Ic       .
     The above figures highlighted the cross-major variation in occupational sorting between
men and women for a given cohort - those born between 1968 and 1977. How has occupational
sorting conditional on major choice evolved across cohorts? Figure 5 shows the cross-cohort
evolution of occupational differences conditional on major choice between men and women.
                                                         P,O|m
We again measure occupational differences using Ic             . For consistency, the figure focuses
on the same majors highlighted in Figure 1. Figure 5 highlights that women are consistently
in occupations with lower potential wages conditional on major choice. Interestingly, this is
true for both historically male-dominated majors (left panel) and female-dominated majors
                                                                       P,O|m
(right panel). In both panels, all majors have a measure of Ic               < 0 for essentially all
cohorts. Consider the Engineering major (solid line, Panel A). For the 1950 birth cohort,
  20
    As with Figure 3, Figure 4 uses detailed majors and broad occupations to make the index and restricts
the analysis to the 1968-1977 birth cohort.



                                                   17
Figure 4: Cross Major Variation in Within-Major Gender Differences in Potential Wage by
Occupation, 1968-1977 Birth Cohort
   Female - Male Mean Potential Ln Wage Occupation




                                                                                                             Female - Male Mean Potential Ln Wage Occupation
                                                .1




                                                                                                                                                          .1
                                     0




                                                                                                                                               0
                         -.1




                                                                                                                                   -.1
              -.2




                                                                                                                        -.2
   -.3




                                                                                                             -.3
                                                     -1      -.5               0               .5   1                                                          3        3.5                     4      4.5
                                                                   Female - Male Share Major                                                                           Potential Wage Based on Major



                                                            Panel A: Gender                                                                                        Panel B: Potential
                                                          Composition of Major                                                                                      Income of Major
                                                                                                    P,O |m
Notes: These figures show cross-major variation in Ic      as a function of how female dominated is the major
(panel A) and average major potential income (panel B). See text for additional details. Each observation
in both panels is a detailed major. Data is shown only for the 1968-1977 birth cohort. Both panels include
a fitted regression line. The slopes of the regression lines are -0.013 (standard error = 0.009) and -0.025
(standard error = 0.017), respectively.


many women who graduated with an Engineering major ended up working in lower-paying
occupations than men who also majored in Engineering. Across cohorts, women who majored
in Engineering were more likely to be in occupations that were similar to the men who
                                                          P,O|m
majored in Engineering. For Engineering, our index Ic           increased from -0.14 to -0.02
                                    21
between the 1950 and 1990 cohorts.
    The gender convergence in occupational choice within majors is seen in many but not all
of the occupations shown in Figure 5. Many of the historically female-dominated majors like
Education, Foreign Languages, and Fine Arts saw only modest convergence across cohorts
in the occupations taken by women relative to men (in potential wage space) conditional on
major choice (Panel B). Collectively, the patterns in Figure 5 highlight the heterogeneity in
both gender differences in the mapping of majors to occupation for a given cohort and how
that mapping has changed across cohorts.
                                     P,O|m
    The time series trends provided Ic     in Figure 5 are somewhat limited. The figure only
  21
     As our data is from the ACS, we observe birth cohorts at different points in the life cycle. For majors,
this will be less important as major at graduation is sticky over an individual's life cycle. For occupations,
this issue is non-trivial. For example, we observe some cohorts at the beginning of their working careers
while others are observed at the end. To the extent to which occupation is dynamic over the lifecycle and
increasingly dynamic across generations, this will complicate the interpretation of cross-cohort differences
in occupation-based results. This limitation should be kept in mind when we highlight the evolution of
occupational sorting across cohorts.

                                                                                                        18
Figure 5: Within-Major Gender Differences in Potential Wage by Occupation, by Gender
and Cohort
                                                       0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.04


                                                       0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.00
   Female - Male Mean Potential Ln Wages Occupations




                                                       -0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.04




                                                                                                                                                                     Female - Male Potential Ln Wages Mean
                                                       -0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.08


                                                       -0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.12


                                                       -0.16
                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.16


                                                       -0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.20

                                                       -0.24
                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.24

                                                       -0.28
                                                               1950       1955      1960         1965        1970        1975    1980       1985         1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.28
                                                                                                    Five Year Birth Cohort                                                                                           1950        1955      1960    1965        1970       1975      1980       1985        1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Five Year Birth Cohort
                                                                Engineering      Biology/Life Sciences       Physical Sciences   Business      History
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Education      Psychology    Fine Arts      Nursing/Pharmacy      Foreign Languages



                                                               Panel A: Male Dominated                                                                                                                               Panel B: Female Dominated
                                                                        Majors                                                                                                                                                 Majors
                                                                                                                                            P,O |m
Notes: These figures show the trends in Ic        conditional on having graduated with major m. Panel
A are male-dominated majors. Panel B are female-dominated majors. As with the left panel of Figure 2,
                                 ¯ o , is computed in the 2014-2017 ACS using the log wages of native-born,
occupational potential log wage, Ymale
white men 43-57 with strong attachment to the labor market.


displays results for a few broad majors at a time. Further, it describes majors in a taxonomic
fashion by name and gender endowment (Panel A vs. Panel B), but without an economic
                                               P,O|d,g
ranking. Thus, we create one final index, Ic           to summarize heterogeneous patterns of
gendered sorting into occupations conditional on economic major rank:

                                                                                                                                                            M
                                                                                                                                  P,O|d,g
                                                                                                                                                                 (so      ¯o
                                                                                                                                 Ic                =               g,c |d)Ymale                                                                                                                        (4)
                                                                                                                                                          m=1

where so g,c |d is the share of gender g choosing occupation o within major rank decile d. Using
 P,O|d,g
Ic       we can quantify major-to-occupation mappings as a relationship between occupation
rank and major rank. We previously defined Y         ¯ m to be the median within-major labor
                                                      male
market log wage of a group we assume faces minimal post-educational frictions in the labor
market: native, white men between the ages of 43 and 57 with strong attachment to the
labor market. In order to rank majors for this exercise, we begin by dividing Y     ¯ m by decile.
                                                                                     male
                       ¯ o
Then, we average Yi , the potential log wage of individual i with occupation o, within major
                                                            P,O|d,g
decile separately by gender and cohort. The index, Ic               , is the within-decile mean of
occupational potential log wages separately described by gender and cohort.
    Our key findings are highlighted in Figure 6. The x-axis of Figure 6 segments majors
into deciles based on Y    ¯ m . The top decile includes majors like Economics, Chemical Engi-
                            male


                                                                                                                                                                19
Figure 6: Mapping of Potential Wage by Major to Potential Wage by Occupation, by Gender
and Cohort
                                        4.05                                                                                                                                                               0.00




                                        3.95
                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.03




                                                                                                                                                        Female - Male Mean Ln Potential Wages Occupation
   Mean Potential Ln Wages Occupation




                                        3.85
                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.06


                                        3.75

                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.09

                                        3.65


                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.12
                                        3.55



                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.15
                                        3.45




                                        3.35                                                                                                                                                               -0.18
                                                  1          2         3          4             5      6        7           8     9           10                                                                   1    2   3   4           5          6         7   8   9   10
                                                                             Bin Potential Ln Wages Major                                                                                                                           Bin Potential Ln Wages Major

                                               1955 female       1955 male        1965 female       1965 male       1975 female   1975 male                                                                                         1955 Cohort     1975 Cohort




                                                                  Panel A: Levels                                                                                                                                      Panel B: Differences
                                                                 Selected Cohorts                                                                                                                                       Selected Cohorts

Notes: These figures show the mapping between major and occupation. On the x-axes, we have binned
majors based on Y¯ m , the log wage deciles of native, white men age 43 to 57 in major m. On the y-axis
                  male
                        P,O |d,g
in Panel A, we report Ic         , the mean log potential occupational wages within these deciles described
                                                                                              P,O |d,g
separately by gender and cohort. In Panel B, the y-axis reports female - male differences in Ic        for two
of the cohorts.


neering, Biochemical Sciences, Physics and Pharmacy. The bottom decile includes majors
like Communications, Elementary Education, Theology, Counseling Psychology, and Drama
                                               P,O|d,g
and Theater Arts. Our mapping index, Ic                , is on the y-axis. If men and women sys-
tematically choose different majors, they will be in different bins on the x-axis. Conditional
on major rank, if men and women sort into different occupations, there will be variation in
  P,O|d,g
Ic        within a bin reflected as differences on the y-axis. If women are in lower-paying oc-
cupations conditional on major choice, the mapping of major choice (x-axis) to occupational
choice (y-axis) will be systematically lower for women relative to men.
     The mapping of majors to occupations for working men of different cohorts are shown
in the dashed lines in Panel A of Figure 6. Each dashed line represents a different 5-year
birth cohort of men; we highlight the 1955, 1965, and 1975 birth cohorts. The degree of
monotonicity in the relationship between binned potential wages based on major on the
x-axis and mean potential wages based on occupations on the y-axis reflects match quality
between major and occupation within gender. For men, monotonicity is almost tautological.
The mapping is nearly identical for older men (1955 cohort) as it is for younger men (1975
cohort).22
  22
                                        As potential wages for both majors and occupations are based on the wages of native, white men in their


                                                                                                                                                   20
    For women, monotonocity in Figure 6 can be violated because of gender differences in
occupational choice. In fact, what is compelling about Panel A of Figure 6 is the mapping
of majors to occupations for women of different cohorts (shown in the solid lines). For all
cohorts, working college women are in occupations that have systematically lower wages rel-
ative to their male counterparts conditional on major choice. The gap is large. Occupations
that women are in ­ conditional on major choice ­ have potential wages that are between
10 and 20 log points lower than the occupations taken by comparable men. Again, this has
nothing to do with women earning less than men within an occupation as we only use the
within-occupation wages of native, white men in their peak earning years in this figure.
    Panel B of Figure 6 puts the information in Panel A in difference rather than level space
for the 1955 (triangles) and 1975 (x's) birth cohorts. The vertical distance between the
series for the 1955 cohort and the series for the 1975 cohort reflects gender convergence in
the mapping between majors and occupations. In other words, women from the 1975 birth
cohort systematically work in occupations that are more similar to men ­ conditional on
major choice ­ than women from the 1955 birth cohort. The convergence in the gender gap
in occupational choice conditional on undergraduate major was particularly strong for the
highest-paying majors. Compared to the 1955 cohort, women in the 1975 cohort (1) chose
majors that were more similar to men; and (2) work in occupations that are more similar
to men conditional on major choice. This convergence is non-trivial. For the highest wage
majors (deciles 9 and 10), women from the 1955 birth cohort worked in occupations that
had log wages that were 12 percent lower than comparable men. Women in these majors
from the 1975 cohort now only find themselves in occupations that have log wages that 6
percent lower than men. This change in the mapping of majors to occupations is one of the
key findings of the paper.
    It is well-known that, in the aggregate, highly-educated women sort into occupations with
lower hours worked (e.g., Goldin and Katz (2011) and Cortez and Pan (2016)). How much of
the patterns in Figure 6 can be attributed to women systematically moving to occupations
with lower hour requirements? We explore this issue in-depth in the Online Appendix and
summarize the results here. We rank the potential work requirements of an occupation by
computing the median annual hours worked in that occupation for men aged 43-57. We call
this measure H  ¯ o . We find that conditional on major choice, women systematically are in
                 male
occupations with lower hours-worked requirements. Over all majors and across all cohorts,
conditional on major choice, women are in occupations that have a work requirement that is
about 3 percent less than comparable men. There is little trend in this gap across cohorts.
peak earnings years, deviation from monotonicity within the male series can only arise from race, cohort, or
age effects within men.



                                                    21
For comparison, over all majors and across all occupations, women are in occupations that
have per-hour wages that are about 10 percent less than comparable men (Panel B of Figure
6). Putting the two together, women are in occupations where annual earnings are about 13
percent lower (3% from hours + 10% from per-hour wages) with most of the effect coming
from wage differences as opposed to hour differences.


5      Major Choice, Gender Wage Gaps, and Gender Dif-
       ferences in Participation
Previous sections established that (1) men and women sort differently into undergraduate
major, (2) gendered sorting into college major has declined over time, and (3) conditional
on major choice, women work in occupations with lower potential wages. In this section,
we examine the extent to which these patterns are associated with the college gender wage
and employment gaps both within and across cohorts. To shed light on this, we estimate
regressions of the following form:

                      Li =  + F emalei + m M ajori + o Occi + Xi +                 i                   (5)

where Li is a measure of various labor market outcomes for individual i and where L is
either the individual's log wage or a dummy variable equal to 1 if the individual is employed.
F emalei is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the individual is female. Our estimated variable
of interest is  which measures the gender gap in either log wages or employment rates
(depending on specification). M ajori and Occi are summary measures of the individual's
chosen undergraduate major and observed occupation. For our base specification, we sum-
marize an individual's major and occupation choice with the potential log wage variables
Y¯im and Y ¯ o .23 In all specifications, we include a vector of demographic controls summarized
            i
in the vector Xi . Specifically, we control for 5-year birth cohort, race, state of residence,
educational attainment beyond bachelors, survey year, and marital status. Standard errors
are clustered by state of residence.
    Table 2 shows the estimates of (5). The top panel of the table pools the estimation across
all cohorts and explores two distinct dependent variables. In columns (1) to (4), our measure
of Li is log wages, In columns (5) and (6), our dependent variable is a dummy variable equal
  23
    In Table A7 of the Online Appendix, we report results from an alternate specification where we do not
include demographic controls or time fixed effects. In Table A8 of the Online Appendix, we report results
from two alternate specifications where we aggregate majors and occupations to broader categories including
including dummies for each broad major and occupation category. These exercises yield results that are very
similar to those in Table 2.


                                                    22
Table 2: Major Choice, Occupation Choice and Gender Gaps in Wages and Employment

                (a) Log Wage and Employment Rate Regressions, Pooled Cohorts


                                       Log Wages                           Employment Rate
           Variable        (1)        (2)     (3)          (4)              (5)      (6)

           F emalei       -0.233     -0.158    -0.143     -0.114            -0.088    -0.083
                         (0.006)    (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.003)           (0.003)   (0.003)

           ¯m
           Y                         0.807                0.408                       0.045
            i
                                    (0.015)              (0.012)                     (0.003)

           ¯o
           Y                                   0.757      0.677
            i
                                              (0.011)    (0.009)

           Controls        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes               Yes       Yes
           R2              0.22      0.27      0.36       0.37              0.13      0.13


                        (b) Log Wage Regressions, Separately By Cohort


                           1958-1967 Birth Cohorts               1978-1987 Birth Cohorts
           Variable         (1)      (2)      (3)                 (4)      (5)      (6)

           F emalei        -0.322    -0.198     -0.168            -0.155    -0.093    -0.065
                          (0.008)   (0.005)    (0.004)           (0.005)   (0.004)   (0.004)

           ¯m
           Y                                    0.411                                 0.443
            i
                                               (0.016)                               (0.010)

           ¯o
           Y                         0.909      0.823                       0.599     0.513
            i
                                    (0.015)    (0.012)                     (0.008)   (0.007)

           Controls         Yes       Yes       Yes                Yes       Yes      Yes
           R2               0.13      0.32      0.33               0.13      0.25     0.27

Note: Table shows estimates from regression (5). See text for additional details. Sample size for panel
A columns 1-4 is 2,270,392. Sample size for panel A columns 5-6 is 3,428,990. Sample size for panel B
columns 1-3 is 533,348. Sample size for panel B columns 4-6 is 614,106.




                                                  23
to 1 if the individual is employed. As with the analysis throughout the paper, the sample
in all columns is restricted to only those with at least a bachelor's degree. The sample in
columns 1-4 is restricted further to include those individuals with strong attachment to the
labor market.
    The coefficient on F emalei in Column 1 shows that college-educated women earn 23.1
log points lower wages than their male counterparts after controlling for demographics.24
Column 2 includes a control for the individual's undergraduate major (as measured by Y   ¯im ).
Column 3 includes a control for the individual's current occupation (as measured by Y     ¯io ).
Column 4 includes both the controls for undergraduate major and current occupation. Con-
trolling for major choice (but not occupation choice) reduces the gender gap in wages by
about one-third (to 15.9 log points). Controlling for occupation choice (but not major choice)
reduces the gender gap by 40 percent (to 14.4 log points). The key finding from Table 2
arises by comparing the results between columns 3 and 4. Controlling for undergraduate
major in addition to controlling for current occupation reduces the gender wage gap further
by an additional 2.8 percentage points. There is information in undergraduate major that
helps to explain gender differences in wage above and beyond current occupational choice.25
Collectively, controlling for occupation and undergraduate major reduces the gender wage
gap for college-educated women by half (11.5 log points).
    Columns 5 and 6 of Table 2 evaluates the relationship between major choice and the
gender gap in extensive margin labor market participation. In the 2014-2017 ACS, highly
educated women were 8.6 percentage points less likely to work than men conditional on
demographics (column 5). As seen in column 6, controlling for major choice did not sub-
stantially alter the estimated gender gap in employment rates for women with a bachelor's
degree. 26 While controlling for undergraduate major choice reduces the estimated wage gap
between college-educated men and women, major choice is not important for understanding
gender differences in employment rates for this group. Given the effect of major choice on
the gender gap in wages, the extensive margin employment result is surprising. It points to
the importance of potential effects of specialization on gender gaps in the intensive margin
of employment which we discuss later in the paper.
  24
      The estimated gender wage gap for college graduates using the pooled cohorts from the 2014-2017 ACS
is nearly identical to the estimated gender wage gap for young college graduates using historical U.S. Census
data spanning the same cohorts. See the Online Appendix for additional details.
   25
      These findings are complementary with the results in Brown and Corcoran (1997) which finds that major
choice has predictive power in explaining gender wage gaps independent of occupation choice in cohorts born
in the 1940s and 1950s.
   26
      This specification cannot control for occupational choice given that occupation is often not defined for
those who are not working. Occupation is recorded for those who are not working only if they were employed
at some point in the prior five years.



                                                     24
    The bottom panel of Table 2 displays estimates from (5) when the sample is restricted
to include only those born between 1958-1967 (columns 1-3) and only those born between
1978-1987 (columns 4-6).27 For this panel, we only show results where the dependent variable
is log wages. Columns 1 and 4 show the gender wage gaps conditional on demographics for
the two cohorts. Columns 2 and 5 add controls for occupational choice. Columns 3 and
6 add controls for both occupational choice and major choice. The gender gap in wages
conditional on demographics fell from -32 log points to -16 log points between the 1958
and 1987 birth cohorts of college graduates. For each cohort separately, controlling for
occupation and major reduces the gender wage gap by between 50 and 60 percent. This is
similar to the pooled cohort results in the top panel of the table. Also, within each cohort,
undergraduate major choice has predictive power above and beyond controlling just for
occupational choice. Interestingly, major choice has more predictive power and occupational
choice has less predictive power for more recent cohorts relative to older cohorts.
    The bottom panel of Table 2 also allows us to assess how controlling for occupational
choice and undergraduate major alters the time series patterns in the gender wage gaps. By
comparing columns 1 and 4, the baseline gender wage gap fell by 18 percentage points for
a sample of individuals with a bachelors degree between cohorts born in the 1960s relative
to the 1980s. The gender wage gap after controlling for both occupational choice and major
choice fell by 11 percentage points. Therefore, the changing gender difference in both occu-
pational and major choice explain roughly 39 percent of the declining gender gap between
these two birth cohorts.
    Panel B of Table 2 provides evidence of large convergence in the college gender wage gap
across 10-year birth cohorts. In order to shed light on the power of our explanatory variables
within cohort, we conduct a wage decomposition exercise. We report the formal results in
Appendix Table A10 of the Online Appendix and briefly discuss those results here. Across
all 10-year birth cohorts, occupational specialization explains the largest share of the gender
wage gap for college graduates ranging from explaining 43.9% of the gap in the oldest cohort
(1948-1957) to explaining 36.9% of the gender wage gap in the youngest cohort (1978-1987).
Pre-labor market human capital specialization (major choice) is also important in explaining
the college gender wage gap ranging from explaining 17.6% of the gender wage gap in the
oldest cohort (1948-1957) to 27.9% of the gender wage gap in the youngest cohort (1978-
1987). Notably, human capital attainment above and beyond a bachelors degree (such as
a graduate degree) explains considerably less of the college gender wage gap. Occupational
specialization has become slightly less important over time; it explains about 7 percentage
  27
   To increase power in these regressions, we pool together adjacent 5-year cohorts to make 10-year cohorts.
The Online Appendix shows similar regressions for all the 10-year cohorts in our data.



                                                    25
points less of the gender wage gap in the youngest (1978-1987) compared to the oldest
(1948-1957) birth cohort. In contrast, college major has become increasingly important in
explaining the gender wage gap for college graduates over time; it explains 10.3 percentage
points more of the gap in the youngest (1978-1987) compared to the oldest (1948-1957) birth
cohort. These results suggest that properly accounting for human capital decisions above
and beyond schooling attainment and occupational specialization is centrally important in
understanding the causes of the gender wage gap among the highly-skilled.


6    Discussion and Conclusion
Do changes in the range of specialization decisions made by college graduates­ namely college
major and subsequent occupational choice conditional on college major­ explain changes in
the college gender wage gap over the last half century within the U.S.? In our analysis
of this broad question, we exploited new data that links undergraduate major and labor
market outcomes for many birth cohorts, and documented long-run trends for a nationally
representative sample of college graduates. Over the past 40 years, men and women have
chosen more similar undergraduate majors. Women have historically chosen college majors
associated with lower potential wages than men. Although these gaps have narrowed over
time, this is still true for women in the youngest birth cohorts.
    Our analysis shows that there are gender differences in the mapping of undergraduate
major to occupation. In many broad major categories, we show substantial rank effects in
occupational choice with men being more likely to work in Executive/Managerial occupations
than women. We document that in majors that are female-dominated, women sort into a
narrower set of occupations than men, and in majors that are male-dominated men sort into
a narrower set of occupations. However, we also show that there is an asymmetry in the
relationship between potential earnings of a major and occupational dispersion by gender.
We find that men disperse into a wider range of occupations than women when market
returns to a major are low and disperse into a narrower range of occupations than women
when market returns to a major are high. Using an innovative new metric to account for the
wage-cost of gender differences in major-to-occupation mapping, we document a systematic
sorting of women into lower potential wage and lower potential hours-worked occupations
than men conditional on having made the same major choice. There is a modest convergence
between the 1950 and 1990 birth cohorts in the gendered mapping of major to occupation.
This set of findings on mapping between major and occupation marks a unique contribution
to the literature.
    Throughout the paper, we assessed the extent to which undergraduate major has predic-

                                             26
tive power above and beyond occupational choice, and conclude that college major choice
has strong predictive power independent of occupation choice. In fact, in the analysis in our
pooled sample, we find that collectively controlling for occupation and major reduces the
gender wage gap among the college-educated by half. With respect to independent predic-
tive power, adding major to our model reduces the gender wage gap by an additional 2.8
percentage points (on a base of 0.23 log point gap in wages between college men and women)
beyond a model that only accounts for occupational specialization.
    Finally, unlike others in the literature, we examine the extent to which differences in
undergraduate major can explain gender differences in extensive and intensive margin labor
market participation of college graduates. Although, we do not find any effects of specializa-
tion on the extensive margin of participation, we document interesting findings with respect
to the intensive margin. We contribute to the hours literature by introducing the fact that
college-educated women are choosing undergraduate majors associated with lower annual
hours worked. We also show that the gender similarity of occupations and majors based on
potential hours has been converging over time.
    The above analysis and subsequent findings are set in an era in which both the labor force
participation of women and the fraction of women that have graduated from universities has
increased dramatically, fundamentally changing the composition of the educated workforce.
Attempts to measure detailed differences in pre-market specialization by college workers
have been limited by data availability. Researchers have long suspected that pre-market
specialization (major choice) should in some way pre-determine labor market opportunities
particularly with respect to occupational choice. As specialized knowledge is iterative, a
biochemical engineer would likely be ill-served by choosing studio art as her primary un-
dergraduate major. If men and women sort into field of study in systematically different
patterns, it follows that major choice should have non-trivial implications for the college
gender wage gap. The combined results of this paper support this intuition and underscore
the importance of further evaluating gender differences in pre-labor market specialization
including college major choice.
    As a final thought, this work focuses on one aspect of pre-market specialization­ major
choice. Yet, there are other ways in which men and women make pre-market investments
in human capital that pre-determine labor market opportunities. The results in this paper
suggest that an investigation into other avenues of pre-market specialization are important,
particularly investments that may happen earlier in the human capital chain. Further, un-
derstanding the mechanisms for gendered specialization­ whether it is driven by preferences
or information- is of first-order concern for researchers.



                                             27
References
Altonji, J.G., P. Arcidiacono, and A. Maurel, "Chapter 7 - The Analysis of Field
 Choice in College and Graduate School: Determinants and Wage Effects," in Eric A.
 Hanushek, Stephen Machin, and Ludger Woessmann, eds., Eric A. Hanushek, Stephen
 Machin, and Ludger Woessmann, eds., Vol. 5 of Handbook of the Economics of Education,
 Elsevier, 2016, pp. 305 ­ 396.

Altonji, Joseph G and Rebecca M Blank, "Race and gender in the labor market,"
 Handbook of labor economics, 1999, 3, 3143­3259.

Altonji, Joseph G., Lisa B. Kahn, and Jamin D. Speer, "Trends in Earnings Differen-
 tials across College Majors and the Changing Task Composition of Jobs," The American
 Economic Review, 2014, 104 (5), 387­393.

Bayard, Kimberly, Judith Hellerstein, David Neumark, and Kenneth Troske,
 "New evidence on sex segregation and sex differences in wages from matched employee-
 employer data," Journal of labor Economics, 2003, 21 (4), 887­922.

Becker, Gary S, William HJ Hubbard, and Kevin M Murphy, "Explaining the
 worldwide boom in higher education of women," Journal of Human Capital, 2010, 4 (3),
 203­241.

Bertrand, Marianne, "The glass ceiling," Becker Friedman Institute for Research in Eco-
 nomics Working Paper, 2017, (2018-38).

   and Kevin F Hallock, "The gender gap in top corporate jobs," ILR Review, 2001, 55
  (1), 3­21.

Black, Dan, Amelia Haviland, Seth Sanders, and Lowell Taylor, "Gender Wage
  Disparities Among the Highly Educated," The Journal of Human Resources, 2008, 43 (3),
  630­59.

Black, Sandra E and Chinhui Juhn, "The rise of female professionals: Are women
  responding to skill demand?," American Economic Review, 2000, 90 (2), 450­455.

Blau, Francine D and Lawrence M Kahn, "Swimming upstream: Trends in the gender
  wage differential in the 1980s," Journal of labor Economics, 1997, 15 (1, Part 1), 1­42.

   and     , "Gender differences in pay," Journal of Economic perspectives, 2000, 14 (4),
  75­99.

Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn, "The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends,
  and Explanations," Journal of Economic Literature, September 2017, 55 (3), 789­865.

  , Marianne Ferber, and Anne Winkler, The Economics of Women, Men and Work,
  Pearson, 2014.



                                           28
Blau, Francine D, Patricia Simpson, and Deborah Anderson, "Continuing progress?
  Trends in occupational segregation in the United States over the 1970s and 1980s," Fem-
  inist economics, 1998, 4 (3), 29­71.

Brown, Charles and Mary Corcoran, "Sex-Based Differences in School Content and the
 Male-Female Wage Gap," Journal of Labor Economics, 1997, 15 (3), 431­465.

Ceci, Stephen, Donna Ginther, Shulamit Kahn, and Wendy Williams, "Women in
 Academic Science: A Changing Landscape," Psychological Science in the Public Interest,
 2014, 15 (3), 75­141.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Ming-Ching Luoh, "Gender differences in completed school-
 ing," Review of Economics and statistics, 2003, 85 (3), 559­577.

Cortes, Patricia and Jessica Pan, "Occupation and gender," The Oxford Handbook of
 Women and the Economy, 2018, p. 425.

Cortez, Patricia and Jessica Pan, "Prevalence of Long Hours and Skilled Women's
 Occupational Choice," IZA Discussion Paper 10225, 2016.

Dickson, Lisa, "Race and Gender Differences in College Major Choice," The Annals of the
 American Academy of Political and Social Science, 2010, 627 (1), 108­124.

DiPrete, Thomas A and Claudia Buchmann, "Gender-specific trends in the value of
 education and the emerging gender gap in college completion," Demography, 2006, 43 (1),
 1­24.

Duncan, Otis Dudley and Beverly Duncan, "A Methodological Analysis of Segregation
 Indexes," American Sociological Review, 1955, 20 (2), 210­217.

England, Paula and Su Li, "Desegregation Stalled: The Changing Gender Composition
 of College Majors, 1971-2002," Gender and Society, 2006, 20 (5), 657­676.

Goldin, Claudia, "Understanding the gender gap: An economic history of American
 women," OUP Catalogue, 1992.

   and Lawrence F. Katz, "The Cost of Workplace Flexibility for High-Powered Profes-
  sionals," The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 2011, 638
  (1), 45­67.

  ,   , and Ilyana Kuziemko, "The Homecoming of American College Women: The
  Reversal of the College Gender Gap," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2006, 20 (4),
  133­156.

Groshen, Erica L et al., The structure of the female/male wage differential: Is it who you
 are, what you do, or where you work?, Vol. 44, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, 1987.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, Erik Hurst, Chad Jones, and Pete Klenow, "The Allocation of
 Talent and Economic Growth," Econometrica, 2019, forthcoming.

                                           29
Jacob, Brian A, "Where the boys aren't: Non-cognitive skills, returns to school and the
  gender gap in higher education," Economics of Education review, 2002, 21 (6), 589­598.

Jacobsen, Joyce P, James Wishart Pearce III, and Joshua L Rosenbloom, "The
  Effects of Childbearing on Married Women's Labor Supply and Earnings.," Journal of
  Human Resources, 1999, 34 (3).

Leslie, Larry L., Gregory T. McClure, and Ronald L. Oaxaca, "Women and Mi-
  norities in Science and Engineering: A Life Sequence Analysis," The Journal of Higher
  Education, 1998, 69 (3), 239­76.

Loury, Linda Datcher, "The Gender Earnings Gap among College-Educated Workers,"
  Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 1997, 50 (4), 580­593.

Macpherson, David A and Barry T Hirsch, "Wages and gender composition: why do
 women's jobs pay less?," Journal of labor Economics, 1995, 13 (3), 426­471.

Pan, Jessica, "Gender segregation in occupations: The role of tipping and social interac-
 tions," Journal of Labor Economics, 2015, 33 (2), 365­408.

Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose
 Pacas, and Matthew Sobek, "IPUMS USA: Version 9.0 [dataset]," 2019.

Turner, Sarah E. and William G. Bowen, "Choice of Major: The Changing (Unchang-
 ing) Gender Gap," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 1999, 52 (2), 289­313.

Zafar, Basit, "College Major Choice and the Gender Gap," Journal of Human Resources,
  2013, 48 (3), 545­95.




                                           30
