                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  MATERNAL AND FETAL HEALTH EFFECTS OF WORKING DURING PREGNANCY

                                        Dhaval M. Dave
                                         Muzhe Yang

                                      Working Paper 26343
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26343


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




We thank Wei Fu and Chia-Lun Liu for excellent research assistance. We also thank Sebastian
Tello-Trillo, Thanh Tam Nguyen, participants at the 2018 Annual Conference of the Southern
Economic Association, and participants at the 2019 Annual Conference of the Eastern Economic
Association for their helpful comments and suggestions. All errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Dhaval M. Dave and Muzhe Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Maternal and Fetal Health Effects of Working during Pregnancy
Dhaval M. Dave and Muzhe Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 26343
October 2019
JEL No. I12,J13

                                          ABSTRACT

We provide some of the first empirical evidence of maternal and fetal health effects of working
during pregnancy by using a unique dataset from the New Jersey Department of Health that
includes information not only on pregnancy and birth outcomes but also on maternal
employment. We match the mother's occupation with the Metabolic Equivalent of Task, provided
by the Census Occupational Classification System and used as a measure for the strenuousness of
the work activities performed. We find robust evidence that working in a relatively more
strenuous job during pregnancy raises the likelihood of fetal macrosomia by about 1.5 percentage
points. There are no statistically or economically significant effects on other birth outcomes. Our
study further indicates an under-studied link between gestational diabetes (a known risk factor for
fetal macrosomia) and intensive physical activities at work during pregnancy, potentially
mediated by disrupted sleep due to greater work intensity.


Dhaval M. Dave
Bentley University
Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and IZA
and also NBER
ddave@bentley.edu

Muzhe Yang
621 Taylor Street
Department of Economics
Lehigh University
Bethlehem, PA 18015
muzheyang@lehigh.edu
1. Introduction

        Working during pregnancy has become increasingly common in the United States over

the past four decades, with the share of women working at all while pregnant growing from 44%

in 1968 to almost 70% in 2017. 4 While this increase coincided with the secular rise in women's

overall workforce participation, other factors have also played a role in enabling more women to

stay in the labor force during (and after) pregnancy (Laughlin 2011). Norms with respect to how

families approach work and child rearing have shifted such that women are no longer expected to

drop out of the labor force upon becoming pregnant. The Pregnancy Discrimination Act in 1978

prohibited discriminatory practices in hiring, firing, promotion or wages on the basis of

pregnancy or childbirth. The 1980s witnessed the emergence of flexible work schedules and

employer-based child care benefits, making it easier for women to continue working upon

becoming pregnant and after giving birth. The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 mandated

up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave for qualified medical or family reasons, including pregnancy and

care of a newborn child.

        Not only are more expectant mothers continuing to work, they are also working longer

hours and further into their pregnancy. The share of women employed full-time (35 plus hours

weekly) while pregnant increased from 31% to 50% over 1968­2017. Furthermore, the vast

majority of working pregnant women, which is 82% in 2006­2008, continued to work up to one

month or less prior to childbirth, up from only 35% during the early 1960s (Gao and Livingston

2015; Laughlin 2011). With more women continuing to work longer into their pregnancy and



4
  Authors' calculations were based on data from the March Current Population Surveys (CPS). Pregnant women in
the CPS are identified as women who have children under the age of one at the time of the survey (Dave et al. 2015).
Using data from the U.S. Census Bureau's Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), the U.S. Census
Bureau reports a similar increase in work during pregnancy among first-time mothers, from 44.4% during the early
1960s to 69.2% during 2001­2005, declining somewhat to 65.6% over 2006­2008 as a result of the recession
(Laughlin 2011).

                                                         1
being increasingly more exposed to conditions at work, it is important to understand how job

attributes are affecting pregnancy outcomes. We provide some of the first empirical evidence of

the effects of one important job attribute--the overall strenuousness of the job--on maternal and

fetal health.

        While the link between certain workplace hazards, notably occupational exposures to

chemical compounds, and pregnancy outcomes is well-studied and generally well-established in

the literature, 5 the risk for adverse pregnancy outcomes can also extend to more common

occupational exposures such as the physical demands of the job. The threshold for physical

exertion is lower for pregnant women, and work activities that would normally be considered

moderate for non-pregnant women may prove to be more demanding during pregnancy. 6

Working during pregnancy is generally considered safe for most women with uncomplicated

pregnancies, although special guidelines have been issued by the Centers for Disease Control and

Prevention (CDC) and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists with respect to

jobs that have particular physical demands (e.g., heavy lifting, prolonged standing, or repeated

bending).

        Provision of accommodations at work for pregnant women who hold strenuous jobs is far

from universal in the United States. As of June 2019, only 27 states and D.C. had enacted laws

requiring some employers to provide reasonable accommodations for pregnant women. 7 If

strenuous work activities are found to adversely impact maternal and fetal health, then resulting



5
  See Jackson et al. (2018). Also see: https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/repro/specificexposures.html (accessed in
August 2019) and http://www.who.int/ceh/capacity/occupational.pdf (accessed in August 2019).
6
  The high demand for blood flow to the uterus and placenta can limit cardiac output and reserve capacity for
vigorous activity levels (Bonzini, Coggon, and Palmer 2007).
7
  See: http://www.nationalpartnership.org/our-work/resources/workplace/pregnancy-discrimination/reasonable-
accommodations-for-pregnant-workers-state-laws.pdf (accessed in August 2019). Protections offered by these laws
also vary by state, for instance in some cases applying only to public employers, requiring documentation by a
health care professional, or allowing for exemptions in the case of "undue hardship on the employer."

                                                        2
health benefits need to factor into any cost-benefit calculus surrounding the policy debate of

whether to require employers to provide work accommodations for female workers during

pregnancy. 8

        Our study broadly contributes to and bridges two strands of literature, one relating to how

job conditions impact workers' health (Barnay 2016; Case and Deaton 2005; Gueorguieva et al.

2009; Kelly et al. 2014; Theorell 2000) and the other relating to how prenatal inputs affect

maternal and infant health (Conway and Kutinova 2006; Corman, Dave, and Reichman 2018a &

2018b). Research on specific working conditions, activities, and pregnancy outcomes indicate

some associations between certain physical activities and higher risks of adverse outcomes, such

as preterm birth, although the evidence base is far from conclusive (Mozurkewich et al. 2000).

Reviews of this literature have been understandably measured in their conclusions,

acknowledging the uncertainty in the estimates and study designs as well as the lack of a

sufficiently compelling evidence base to justify any mandatory restrictions on studied activities

such as shift work, lifting, standing and heavy physical workload (Bonzoni, Coggon, and Palmer

2007; Mozurkewich et al. 2000; Palmer et al. 2013). Palmer et al. (2013) note, for instance, that

while "small levels of excess risk may exist [with respect to these work activities]...it is also

possible that much or all of these effects are explained by a combination of chance, bias and

imperfectly controlled cofounding."

        Our study adds to this limited evidence base and addresses several gaps in the existing

literature. We utilize a unique dataset that includes information not only on pregnancy and birth

outcomes but also on maternal employment and occupation during pregnancy. This allows us to


8
  At the federal level, the Pregnant Workers Fairness Act, which among other protections ensures that employers
provide reasonable accommodations to pregnant women who want to continue working, has been opposed every
time it has been introduced (Pisko 2016). Part of the opposition stems from the stance that such requirements would
impose an undue burden on businesses and raise business costs.

                                                         3
match objective external information on the overall physical demand of the job. Virtually all of

the prior work has alternately relied on women's self-reports of their physical activities during

pregnancy, at times conflating work-related and leisure-time activities. As recreational physical

activity outside of work has been found to have stronger health-promoting effects relative to

physical activity from one's own job (Saffer et al. 2013), and more intense job-related physical

activity tends to crowd out recreational exercise and leisure-time activities (Colman and Dave

2013), conflating both work and non-work physical activities is potentially problematic.

         Studies that have considered work activities per se have focused on mothers' reports of

certain tasks in isolation (e.g., standing at work, lifting heavy loads, whether work involves high

or low activity, whether work is mostly sedentary or requires physical effort) rather than the

overall physical demand and strenuousness of the job. In addition to potential recall bias, which

is a limitation highlighted by the reviews of this literature, self-reported work activity measures

are also more likely to be plagued with selection bias. 9 For instance, pregnant women in

physically demanding jobs may engage in compensatory behaviors and request accommodations

for a less intensive workload if they have a preference for such or if they feel overly exerted. 10, 11




9
  Casas et al. (2015) do not specifically look at strenuousness or physical activity, but consider the effects of
working in one of 14 occupational groups on birth outcomes, based on mother-child pairs across 13 European
cohorts. Working in certain occupations was also associated with pregnancy outcomes. Specifically, they find that
working as a nurse was associated with favorable birth outcomes, whereas working in the food industry reduced
gestation and raised preterm births.
10
   This would impart a form of reverse causality from maternal or fetal health to reported work activity during
pregnancy, and also cause the measure of work activity during pregnancy to be correlated with the error term of a
regression model.
11
   Provision of accommodations by employers is not automatic or required in all cases. Under the Pregnancy
Discrimination Act, an employer is required to provide certain accommodation such as altered break and work
schedules, permission to sit or stand, ergonomic office furniture, shift changes, elimination of marginal job
functions, and permission to work from home, if and only if accommodations have also been provided to other
employees who have similar limitations that are not caused by pregnancy. A pregnant woman may also be able to
obtain an accommodation at work, under the American with Disabilities Act (ADA), if and only if they have a
pregnancy-related medical condition (for instance, anemia, sciatica, gestational diabetes, depression, and others) that
meets the ADA definition of "disability." See: https://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/publications/pregnant_workers.cfm
(accessed in November 2018).

                                                          4
       Our study provides some of the first empirical evidence on how the overall strenuousness

of the type of job performed by a pregnant woman, as measured by the occupational Metabolic

Equivalent of Task (MET), affects her health and her newborn's health. While we investigate

standard birth outcomes, including gestational length, birth weight, and low birth weight, we also

move beyond the literature and consider effects on maternal health indicators that may be

particularly sensitive to pregnancy-related activity, including weight gain during pregnancy and

gestational diabetes. We further shift the lens and consider the impact of job strenuousness on

the upper tail of the birth weight distribution, and pinpoint important effects on fetal

macrosomia, which is defined as birth weight exceeding 4,000 grams. We find robust evidence

that, compared with light-intensity activity, moderate-intensity activity at work during pregnancy

raises the likelihood of fetal macrosomia by about 1.5 percentage points, with gestational

diabetes being one important biological channel. This focus on the upper tail of the birth weight

distribution is important because it reveals an inadequacy in using birth weight alone as an

outcome for the investigation of the adverse impact of job strenuousness during pregnancy: we

find that compared with light-intensity activity, moderate-intensity activity at work during

pregnancy, on average, raises the birth weight by nearly 40 grams, which can be driven by an

increased risk of fetal macrosomia, and therefore should not be interpreted as a beneficial effect

of having strenuous physical activities at work during pregnancy.

       The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the conceptual framework,

followed by the descriptions of our data and methodology in Section 3. We discuss the findings

in Section 4 and conclude the paper in Section 5.



2. Conceptual Framework



                                                  5
       The objective of this study is to assess how the physical intensity of jobs affects the

health of pregnant women and their birth outcomes. This question can be described using a

maternal health production framework, following Corman, Joyce, and Grossman (1987) and

summarized in Corman, Dave, and Reichman (2018a). Maternal utility (Um), expressed in

equation (1) below, is a function of consumption goods that can be health-promoting (CHealthy) or

health-depreciating (CUnhealthy), own health (Hm), infant health (Hi), and preferences (m).

                             
        = (               ,            ,  ,  ;  )                                             (1)

Infant health is produced (equation 2) using positive (e.g., exercise or nutrition) and negative

(e.g., smoking or drug use) maternal consumption goods (C), other prenatal inputs such as

medical care (D) and work conditions (J), as well as maternal time inputs (T). Infant health also

depends on the health of the mother (as reflected in Hm), with E representing an efficiency

parameter (typically proxied by maternal education) that modifies the marginal product of the

other inputs (Grossman and Kaestner 1997). An analogous production process is defined for

maternal health in equation (3).

                            
        =  (             ,           ,  ,  ,  ,  ;  )                                         (2)

                             
        = (               ,            ,  ,  ,  ;  )                                          (3)

       Utility maximization occurs subject to the production constraints and the standard income

and time constraints. We estimate reduced-form versions of these production functions, directly

relating the intensity of the job (J) to indicators of maternal and fetal health (Hm and Hi). Job

strenuousness can affect health in this framework, both directly and indirectly.

       Direct effects of job strenuousness on maternal and infant health may operate through

biological pathways. Ergonomic stressors, such as intense work activity, may affect the

sympathetic nervous system and are associated with the release of prostaglandins, natural


                                                  6
chemicals that play a role in the inflammatory process (Mozurekewich et al. 2010). Heavy

physical exertion could increase uterine contractility and raise the risk of preterm birth, and can

also reduce maternal-fetal blood flow (Juhl et al. 2013; Palmer et al. 2013). Physical and mental

stress from fatigue, exertion, and intense activity is further known to increase levels of

catecholamines, which have also been found to decrease uterine blood flow (Katz et al. 1991).

Hormonal imbalance, including for stress hormones, is a risk factor for maternal gestational

diabetes, which in turn can affect fetal health. A large literature has identified maternal stress

during pregnancy as a significant predictor of adverse birth outcomes (Bussières et al. 2015).

         Indirect effects of job strenuousness on maternal and fetal health can reflect behavioral

pathways. For instance, stress and mental strain, which might be induced by intense work

activity, have been found to increase addictive consumption (for instance, smoking and

drinking), caffeine consumption, caloric intake, as well as unhealthy eating, and reduce vitamin

use and exercise both for the overall population and particularly for pregnant women. 12 In the

above framework, job strenuousness (J) can therefore affect H by impacting prenatal

consumption and inputs, C and D.

         More intense activity at work can also affect other time inputs (T), by further reducing the

demand for recreational exercise and lowering physical activity outside of work (Colman and

Dave 2013; Saffer et al. 2013). The net effect on caloric expenditure is unclear as the intensity

of work activities is crowding out non-work activities. However, the overall shift in the

composition of physical activity may be health-deteriorating, since moderate physical exercise



12
   See, for instance, Dave and Kelly (2012), Hanna et al. (1994), Hauge et al. (2012), Lobel et al. (2008), and Saffer
and Dave (2005). The link from stress to unhealthy eating and nutrition is not necessarily unidirectional. There is
some evidence of complex interactions, wherein maternal psychosocial stress, dietary behavior, and nutrition likely
regulate and counter-regulate one another during pregnancy (Lindsay et al. 2017). Much of this literature,
specifically for pregnant women, captures associations and is hard-pressed to draw firmer conclusions regarding
causality.

                                                           7
can have beneficial effects and is routinely recommended for women with uncomplicated

pregnancies (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2015; Palmer et al. 2013).

       More strenuous jobs can also affect time use patterns and disrupt sleep. Åkerstedt et al.

(2002) find that high work demand and physical effort at work are associated with disturbed

sleep. Martins et al. (2016) similarly report a higher prevalence of sleep disturbances and lower

sleep quality among workers whose jobs involved high physical effort. Furthermore, Borodulin

et al. (2010) specifically examine pregnant women and find reduced sleep duration to be

correlated with increased level of occupational physical activity. Such changes could trigger

neuroendocrine changes that affect fetal growth (Palmer et al. 2013). Furthermore, a recent

study found that inadequate sleep among pregnant women may be a contributing factor towards

the development of gestational diabetes, an outcome that we test in our study (Reutrakul et al.

2018). Gestational diabetes, in turn, raises birth weight and the likelihood of having a

macrosomic birth, which is further associated with an increased risk of being overweight at

adolescence (Gillman et al. 2003; Lawlor et al. 2010). Hence, effects on birth outcomes may

also be mediated by maternal health, which is an input in the infant health production function

(equation 2).

       We use the conceptual framework discussed here to highlight plausible biological and

behavioral channels that can influence how job strenuousness affects the mother and her baby

during pregnancy, for which our study adds to the very limited evidence base and provides some

of the first empirical estimates in the literature. Findings to date, albeit based on isolated and

disparate self-assessed activity measures, have been mostly presented as associations due to

potential bias from confounding and selection. We capitalize on a unique dataset containing

detailed information on the mother's occupation, in addition to her various pre-pregnancy



                                                  8
characteristics and residential location, which allows us to indirectly assess the extent to which

our results may be driven by non-random selection into work.



3. Empirical Framework

3.1. Data

       Our birth data come from the New Jersey Department of Health (NJDOH), covering live

births that occurred in New Jersey. These data include information on the newborn such as birth

weight and gestational length, as well as information on the mother, regarding demographic

characteristics and health, such as body weight prior to pregnancy, weight gain during

pregnancy, and gestational diabetes. Our study uses the NJDOH's birth records of years 2014

and 2015 because in those two years and for a randomly selected subset (approximately 36% of

the birth records), the NJDOH collected additional information on the mother's occupation and

whether the mother worked in the year prior to childbirth. Hereafter, we refer to this subset with

the additional information collected as the "NJDOH subset." Because our study focuses on job

strenuousness during pregnancy, we include into our estimation sample only mothers who

worked in the year prior to childbirth, which constitute about 64% of the NJDOH subset's

records. In our estimation sample all mothers live in New Jersey (about 97% of the NJDOH

subset's records), and all births are singleton births (about 96% of the NJDOH subset's records).

We focus on singleton births, to avoid cases where adverse birth outcomes occur specifically

because of carrying multiple fetuses in a single pregnancy.

       To the best of our knowledge, our dataset so far has been the only one that contains

information on both birth outcomes and maternal occupation. However, the entry of the

information on maternal occupation was not standardized and was recorded only in words. We



                                                 9
examined all of these verbal descriptions in the birth records and then assigned each of them a

Census 2002 Occupation Code, which is a four-digit code. 13 In the end, 330 unique occupation

codes were applied to the NJDOH subset. Next, we linked each Census 2002 Occupation Code

to a MET value, with the linkage being defined by the 2002 Census Occupational Classification

System. 14 MET values are designed to reflect and increase with the intensity and strenuousness

of physical activities. A unit of MET is defined as the ratio of a person's working metabolic rate

relative to his or her resting metabolic rate. Thus, one MET is defined as the energy it takes to

sit quietly, and a MET of 1.5 is associated with typing or writing performed at a desk. 15

         We follow the epidemiology literature to group MET values into three categories: 1)

light-intensity activities, with MET < 3, including activities such as sitting (e.g., using computer

or fishing) and standing with light work (e.g., cooking or washing dishes); 2) moderate-intensity

activities, with 3  MET  6, including activities such as walking (e.g., very brisk walk at a

speed of 4 mph) and heavy cleaning (e.g., vacuuming or mopping); and 3) vigorous-intensity

activities, with MET > 6, including activities such as basketball game and tennis (singles). 16 In

our study we focus on the comparison between moderate-intensity and light-intensity activities,

since 99% of our birth records have MET values of maternal occupations between 1.5 and 4, and

only two birth records have MET values that are greater than 6.




13
   For details about the Census 2002 Occupation Codes, please see https://www.bls.gov/tus/census02iocodes.pdf
(pp. 7­17, accessed in April 2018).
14
   For details, see https://epi.grants.cancer.gov/physical/MET under the section titled "MET Values for Activities in
the 2002 Census Occupational Classification System (OCS)" (accessed in April 2018). We gave two examples here:
(1) For descriptions entered in the data such as "housing keeping", "house cleaning", "housekeeping", "cleaning
person", "cleaning lady", "cleaning houses", and "merry maids", we converted them to the occupation code 4230
("Maids and housekeeping cleaners") and the occupation code 4230 is linked to a MET value of 4.5; (2) For
descriptions entered in the data such as "administrative assistant", "admin assistant", "admin asst", and "secretary",
we converted them to the occupation code 5700 ("Secretaries and administrative assistants") and the occupation
code 5700 is linked to a MET value of 1.5.
15
   For the average adult, one MET represents about one calorie per every 2.2 pounds of bodyweight per hour.
16
   For more details, see https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/mets-activity-table (accessed in April 2018).

                                                         10
        We further match a set of variables capturing the socio-economic and demographic

composition of the mother's residential area. These include total population, population by race

and ethnicity (White, Black, and Hispanic), number of households, average household size,

average housing value, household income, and median age at the zip code level.

        Table 1 reports the summary statistics of variables related to MET, variables related to

pregnancy and birth, variables related to the mother, and variables related to the mother's

residential characteristics at the zip code level. 17 The summary statistics are reported for each of

the three cases: estimation sample including only cases of light-intensity activity at work,

estimation sample including only cases of moderate-intensity activity at work, and the full

estimation sample. Overall, women who engaged in moderate-intensity activity at work during

pregnancy, compared with those who had light-intensity activity at work during pregnancy,

appear to be younger, less likely to be White, more likely to be Black (or Hispanic), less likely to

complete a four-year college or higher, less likely to be married, less likely to have private

insurance, more likely to have Medicaid, more likely to smoke, living in zip codes with lower

average housing values, and living in zip codes with lower average annual household income; in

addition, they also have heavier body weight, or higher body mass index (BMI), prior to

pregnancy. In the full estimation sample, the rate of fetal macrosomia (defined as birth weight >

4,000 grams) among singleton births that occurred in New Jersey between 2014 and 2015--

8.6%--is similar to the U.S. singleton fetal macrosomia rate during that period, which is 8.3%.



17
  We purchased a zip code database from https://www.zip-codes.com/zip-code-statistics.asp. This database
provides the following zip code-level variables: the population size for each zip code based on the 2010 U.S. Census
and the associated White, Black and Hispanic subpopulation sizes for that zip code, the number of households for
each zip code based on the 2010 U.S. Census, the average number of individuals per household for each zip code
based on the 2010 U.S. Census, the average house value for each zip code based on the American Community
Survey five-year estimate, the average household income for each zip code based on the American Community
Survey five-year estimate, and the median age among all individuals for each zip code based on the 2010 U.S.
Census.

                                                        11
In the full estimation sample, we also see the rates of LBW (low birth weight, defined by birth

weight < 2,500 grams) and preterm birth (defined by gestational length < 37 weeks) are 5.2%

and 7.0%, respectively. Both rates are below the corresponding U.S. averages among singleton

births--6.3% for LBW and 9.6% for preterm birth. 18 The lower rates of LBW and preterm birth

in New Jersey are reasonable, given that New Jersey is a relatively more wealthy state, 19 and

higher income tends to correlate with fewer adverse birth outcomes (such as LBW and preterm

births), possibly due to better access to or greater utilization of health care.

3.2. Methodology

        The regression model for our main analysis is specified as follows and can be interpreted

as a reduced-form production function of infant health:

            = 0 + 1  +   +  +  +  +                                                                       (4)

In this equation yicjmt denotes the birth outcome (e.g., fetal macrosomia) of an infant born in

month m during year t, to mother i working in occupation c and living in zip code j during her

pregnancy. The variable d is binary, equal to one for moderate-intensity activity (i.e., 3  MET 

6) and equal to zero for light-intensity activity (i.e., MET < 3). In alternate specifications we

also assess the effects of a continuous measure of work intensity as measured by the MET value

for the occupation. The vector denoted x includes the following variables: the sex of the baby;

the mother's age, race and ethnicity, educational attainment, marital status, health insurance

status during pregnancy, prenatal care utilization, parity, whether or not having previous preterm

birth, and smoking status. The zip code fixed effect ( ) captures the time-invariant socio-



18
   The U.S. rates of LBW, preterm birth, and fetal macrosomia among singleton births averaged over 2014 and 2015
were all obtained from the CDC WONDER Online Database (https://wonder.cdc.gov/natality.html, accessed on
August 13, 2017).
19
   In our estimation sample, the average annual household income measured at the zip code level is approximately
$75,300 (shown in Table 1).

                                                      12
economic and demographic characteristics of the mother's zip code of residence. Also included

in the regression model are year-by-month of birth fixed effects ( ), to account for any

seasonality in fertility and births as well as common shocks affecting mothers over the sample

period. 20 We estimate the regression model using ordinary least squares (OLS) with standard

errors clustered at the mother's residential zip code level.

         In our study the use of an occupation-specific measure of work intensity bypasses some

of the endogeneity concerns that plagued earlier studies relying on self-reported measures of

workload or activity. For instance, women may sort non-randomly into jobs with varying levels

of physical activity within an occupation, or pregnant women who are particularly at risk could

shift jobs or request special accommodations. 21 The occupation-specific measure of work

intensity avoids these selection issues since it is not specific to a particular pregnant woman's

situation. However, there is still the possibility of non-random selection in occupational choice.

To address this possibility, we include maternal occupation fixed effects ( ). Regarding this

fixed effect, we are unable to apply it to every occupation code because each occupation code is

assigned a unique MET value according to the Census Occupational Classification System,

which results in no variation in MET within each occupation code. Therefore, we apply the

occupation fixed effects based on the 22 occupational groupings as categorized under the 2002

Census Occupational Classification System. 22 In our regression models we further include area


20
   An identifier for each mother is unobserved in our birth data. As a result, we are unable to add mother fixed
effects to our regression model.
21
   In New Jersey, all employers are required to provide reasonable accommodations to pregnant women, women
who have given birth or women affected by related medical conditions, if such accommodation is requested by the
worker based on physician advice, unless doing so would impose an undue burden on the employer (source:
http://www.nationalpartnership.org/our-work/resources/workplace/pregnancy-discrimination/reasonable-
accommodations-for-pregnant-workers-state-laws.pdf, accessed in August 2019).
22
   The 22 groups are: management; business and financial operations; computer and mathematical; architecture and
engineering; life, physical, and social science; community and social services; legal; education, training, and library;
arts, design, entertainment, sports, media; healthcare practitioner and technical; healthcare support; protective
service; food preparation and serving related; building and grounds cleaning and maintenance; personal care and

                                                          13
fixed effects, alternately at the county level or at the five-digit zip code level, to control for

unobserved time-invariant (over 2014 and 2015) area-specific factors, such as local

infrastructure, built environment, and access to health care. The identifying assumption is that

after controlling for mother's observed demographic characteristics, area fixed effects (in

particular, the zip code fixed effects) and within those occupational categories, physical intensity

at work, which is related to occupation choice, is unrelated to unobserved maternal

characteristics.

         We evaluate the plausibility of this assumption in Table 2 through the comparisons of

maternal demographic characteristics between those who had moderate-intensity activity at work

(the "treated" group) and those who had light-intensity activity at work (the "control" group).

Comparing columns (1) through (4), we see that controlling for mother's residential zip code

fixed effects (column 2 compared with column 1) and controlling for mother's occupation

dummy variables (column 3 compared with column 2) reduce the magnitude of the difference in

the observed maternal demographic characteristics between the "treated" group and the "control"

group. Besides, in column (4) where we also control for individual level demographic variables,

the magnitude of the difference in the observed maternal demographic characteristics between

the two groups is further reduced; in particular, in cases such as maternal education, whether

having previous preterm birth (related to maternal health), whether having private health

insurance, and whether having Medicaid (related to maternal income), the differences between

the "treated" group and the "control" group are statistically insignificantly different from zero.

Results reported in Table 2 are certainly not a definitive test of the aforementioned identifying



service; sales and related; office and administrative support; farming, fishing, and forestry; construction and
extraction; installation, maintenance, and repair; production; and transportation and material moving. For details,
see "MET values for activities in 2002 Census Occupational Classification System (OCS)" at
https://epi.grants.cancer.gov/physical/MET/#ocs, accessed in April 2018).

                                                         14
assumption. Nevertheless, those results are reassuring in the sense that controlling for residential

zip code fixed effects and maternal occupation fixed effects, in addition to the conventional set

of maternal demographic variables (such as age, race and ethnicity, education, marital status,

parity, and health insurance status), help mitigate the bias (in estimating the effect of having

moderate-intensity activity at work) that comes from selection on unobservables. In Section 4.3,

we give further discussions on assessing the impact of selection on unobservables, using the

method proposed by Oster (2019).

       In our robustness checks we also add controls for whether the mother's residence and

workplace are in the same county, and alternately the same zip code. By doing so, we assess the

impact of residential sorting, which may be correlated with access to jobs, proximity to work,

occupational choice and health. Furthermore, we add controls for job attributes and labor supply

behaviors, using data from the American Community Surveys (ACS). These control variables

help us evaluate the potential bias from omitting variables that are correlated with job

strenuousness and fetal (or maternal) health. However, because the ACS data and NJDOH data

are not perfectly matched, we view the results with these control variables as suggestive.

       We capitalize on the richness of the NJDOH data, which contain information on several

maternal characteristics prior to pregnancy, by adding measures of pre-pregnancy maternal

health, including body weight, BMI, diabetes, and whether the mother had a previous preterm

birth. As indicators of baseline maternal health endowment, these measures are potentially

correlated with both pregnancy outcomes as well as occupational choice. To the extent that

strenuous jobs may have cumulative effects on reproductive health, controlling for the mother's

baseline health endowment also serves to disentangle the effects of work intensity during

pregnancy per se. Pre-pregnancy outcomes, notably maternal diabetes prior to pregnancy,



                                                 15
further permit a placebo check. While work intensity during pregnancy can plausibly affect

gestational diabetes, we would not expect the strenuousness of the mother's job during

pregnancy to have any impact on her diabetes status prior to pregnancy.

          To the extent that the data allow, we also investigate biological mechanisms operating

through maternal heath during pregnancy. Specifically, we explore how job strenuousness

affects maternal weight gain during pregnancy and gestational diabetes, and the extent to which

these directly mediate any effects on fetal health. Finally, for outcomes where we find robust

effects, we examine heterogeneity by the infant's sex, parity, and maternal characteristics

(education, race, and marital status).



4. Results

4.1. Main Results

          In Table 3 we assess the effects of job strenuousness on standard birth outcomes. Panel

A reports the results based on the dummy variable d in equation (4). Panel B reports the results

of replacing that dummy variable with the continuous measures of the MET. In odd-numbered

columns we control for mother's residential county fixed effects and zip code level

characteristics (reported in Table 1, such as population size and average household income). In

even-numbered columns we saturate the models with mother's residential zip code fixed effects,

which is our preferred specification. In all columns we control for mother's pre-pregnancy

BMI. 23

          Overall, with our preferred specifications (in even-numbered columns), we find little

evidence that greater intensity of work activities during pregnancy is associated with LBW,


23
  The estimates remain very similar whether we control for mother's pre-pregnancy BMI or mother's body weight
prior to pregnancy.

                                                      16
gestational length or preterm birth, whether we use the dummy variable d in equation (4) or the

continuous measure of the MET. This result may partly reflect our focus on women who worked

during pregnancy (which is our estimation sample), a group that is on average healthier and at a

lower risk of LBW or preterm birth than those who did not work. 24 In the case for birth weight,

we find that intensive activities at work during pregnancy appear to be linked to increased

average birth weight (columns 1 and 2 of Panel A). This finding appears to be driven by the

upper tail of the birth weight distribution, that is, a greater risk of fetal macrosomia among

pregnant women who engaged in more intensive activities at work (columns 3 and 4 of Panel A).

         Specifically, we find that, compared with light-intensity activity, moderate-intensity

activity at work during pregnancy is associated with an increase of 1.9 percentage points in the

likelihood of fetal macrosomia. The estimates remain similar, whether using mother's residential

zip code fixed effects (column 4) or using mother's residential county fixed effects plus

controlling for residential zip code-level characteristics (column 3). These results suggest that

the zip code-level control variables used in our regression analysis adequately captured zip code-

level time-invariant heterogeneities that are unobservable to us. Estimates in Panel B (columns 3

and 4) are qualitatively the same as the results reported in Panel A (columns 3 and 4). Engaging

in work with an additional intensity of one MET is associated with about a one percentage-point

increase in the likelihood of fetal macrosomia. Given that the average difference between

moderate intensity and light intensity work amounts to about 1.3 MET's on average (Table 1),

these estimates imply a 1.3 percentage-point increase in the likelihood of fetal macrosomia

among pregnant women working in moderate intensity jobs.


24
  Casas et al. (2015) find that employed pregnant women had a significantly lower risk of having a preterm birth
relative to those who were non-employed. In our birth data we also find that the birth weight and gestational length
of babies born to mothers who worked during pregnancy are both slightly greater than those of babies born to
mothers who did not work during pregnancy.

                                                         17
4.2. Robustness Checks

         Estimates in Table 3 suggest that prenatal employment in more strenuous jobs raises birth

weight at the upper tail of the distribution, thus leading to a higher probability of fetal

macrosomia. We do not find any evidence of statistically or economically significant effects on

low birth weight or on gestational length. In Tables 4 and 5, we therefore focus on the effects on

fetal macrosomia, and conduct a series of checks to assess the plausibility of this finding.

         The most inclusive specification used in column 4 of Table 4 is the same one used in

column 4 (Panel A) of Table 3, which we view as our preferred specification. This specification

includes covariates that proxy for unobserved maternal health endowment and other sources of

heterogeneity, but could also constitute channels through which job attributes may affect

maternal and fetal health. Columns 1 through 3 of Table 4 report estimates from models that

alternately omit variables related to the mother's insurance status during pregnancy (column 1),

whether the mother had a previous preterm birth, which is used as a proxy for unobserved

mother's health status causing adverse birth outcomes (column 2), and the mother's smoking

status (column 3). 25 Estimates reported in columns 1 through 4 are very similar. This pattern

suggests that our finding of the greater risk of fetal macrosomia is unlikely to operate through

channels related to health insurance, maternal risk factors related to having previous preterm

births, or maternal risky behaviors such as smoking. Furthermore, the robustness of our results

provides some degree of validation that, within occupation categories, relatively higher intensity

of work activity is not conflating the effects of low socioeconomic status; note that, if anything,




25
  In the New Jersey birth data the variable on the mother's smoking status is binary (1/0), which is equal to one (or
zero) for a yes (or no) answer to this question: "Did mother smoke cigarettes before or during Pregnancy?" As a
result, this variable on the mother's smoking status can capture the mother's smoking behavior during three periods:
before pregnancy, during pregnancy, and up until childbirth.

                                                         18
the unconditional differences in Table 1 go in the opposite direction and show that the

prevalence of macrosomia is lower among those with relatively more physically-demanding jobs.

          In Table 4 it is notable that the R-squared remains the same except in column (2), where

we drop the variable on whether the mother had a previous preterm birth. This pattern suggests

that with respect to fetal macrosomia, mother's health status, partly captured by whether the

mother had a previous preterm birth, is an important explanatory variable. 26 In contrast, the R-

squared stays the same when adding the variables on the mother's insurance status and the

mother's smoking status. This result suggests that mother's insurance status and mother's

smoking status, although important for improving fetal health, have little explanatory power for

this specific outcome variable--fetal macrosomia. 27

         While the results in Table 4 are validating and suggestive that our estimate of the effect

of having moderate-intensity activity at work during pregnancy on fetal macrosomia might not

be biased due to the omission of variables related to work benefits (e.g., providing health

insurance) even if there is selection into occupation based on those work benefits, the concern

remains that these pregnant women with relatively more strenuous work may also differ with

respect to other job attributes and the labor supply behaviors. We assess this possibility more

directly in Table 5. Specifically, in Table 5 we utilize the information regarding maternal

employment in the birth data to include fixed effects regarding the mother's employer's location

(columns 1 and 2) and fixed effects regarding the geographic distance between the mother's

home and her employer (columns 3 and 4). 28 Compared with the results in Table 3 (column 4 of


26
   In the regression model used by column (4) of Table 4, the coefficient of this regressor--whether the mother had a
previous preterm birth--is highly statistically significant (p-value = 2.159×10-6).
27
   In the regression model used by column (4) of Table 4, the coefficients of these regressors--whether the mother
had private insurance during pregnancy, whether the mother had Medicaid during pregnancy, and whether the
mother smoked cigarettes before or during pregnancy--are all statistically insignificant.
28
   In our estimation sample all mothers live in New Jersey, and their employers are located in New Jersey (86.96%),
New York (8.51%) and Pennsylvania (4.53%).

                                                         19
Panel A), the estimates reported in Table 5 are somewhat smaller, 29 after we control for the

mother's employer's county fixed effect (column 1), the mother's employer's zip code fixed

effect (column 2), or the mother's home and employer being in the same county (column 3) or

being in the same zip code (column 4). Hence, factors related to the geographic areas of the

mothers' employers appear to be positively correlated with the intensity of the physical activity

at work and with the risk of fetal macrosomia. The coefficient magnitudes (columns 1 through

4) indicate about a 1.5 percentage-point increase in the likelihood of fetal macrosomia (about

17% relative to the sample mean, which is 8.6% reported in Table 1). The similarity in the

estimates between columns 3­4 and columns 1­2 suggests that those aforementioned possibly

omitted factors could be related to maternal travel distance between home and workplace.

Indeed, in a regression model in which we control for the travel distance between the mother's

home and the mother's workplace, the estimated coefficient for "moderate-intensity activity at

work (1) vs. light-intensity activity at work (0)" is 0.0152 (statistically significant at 10%, with

p-value equal to 0.069), which is very similar to the magnitude (around 0.015­0.016) reported in

Table 5 (columns 1 through 4). However, the coefficient for the travel distance variable is not

statistically significant, suggesting that it is not the travel distance itself, but other factors that are

related to the travel distance, such as sleep deprivation, which could result from greater intensity

of physical activities and also cause gestational diabetes leading to fetal macrosomia, that may

account for the reduction in the estimate from 1.9 percentage points (in column 4 and Panel A of

Table 3) to about 1.5 to 1.6 percentage points (in columns 1 through 4 of Table 5).




29
  The sample size in Table 5 is smaller than that in Table 3 because of missing values for mothers' employers'
counties or zip codes (columns 1 through 4) and also because of the merge with the ACS data (columns 5 through
8); standard errors in Table 5 are larger, compared with the standard errors in column 4 (Panel A) of Table 3.

                                                       20
        While the NJDOH data are unique in allowing us to observe whether the mother worked

during pregnancy and her occupation, they do not contain information on work hours, income,

and other attributes, which may be potentially correlated with the job strenuousness. We

therefore turn to the 2010­2017 ACS data to construct key labor supply measures for pregnant

women residing in New Jersey and who worked during their pregnancy. 30 Specifically, we

compute the means of the following variables by occupation, race/ethnicity, marital status,

educational attainment (college vs. less than college), and age group (ages 16­30 and ages 31­

50): weekly hours worked; annual wage income; prevalence of commuting to work by car,

public transportation, or by other means (bicycle, walking, taxi, or other); and the prevalence of

being able to work from home. We then match these to the NJDOH records by these socio-

demographic cells. 31 Columns (5) through (8) of Table 5 presents estimates from the models

used in columns 1 through 4 (including the employer's location) and now augmented with these

other job attributes and labor supply measures. While standard errors become larger (likely due

to loss in sample size), raising p-values (p-value  0.11 to 0.12) above the conventional

significance thresholds, it is validating that the coefficient magnitudes remain similar to those

reported in columns 1 through 4. Overall, results in Table 5 suggest that the effect of job

strenuousness does not appear to be picking up other heterogeneity related to job attributes and

labor supply behaviors. 32



30
   The ACS has information on whether the woman gave birth in the past 12 months, and a separate question on the
ages of biological children in the household. These can be used to identify women who were pregnant and gave
birth in the past year, along with labor market outcomes over this reference period to impute women who were
working during their pregnancy year.
31
   Ideally, we would want to use the 2014­2015 ACS data to merge with the 2014­2015 NJDOH data. However,
doing so makes the socio-demographic cells become too small. To ensure an adequate sample size after merging the
ACS data with the NJDOH data, we use the ACS data from 2010 to 2017.
32
   In a meta-analysis Mozurkewich et al. (2000) find no statistically significant association between long working
hours and adverse birth outcomes (e.g., preterm births), implying that omitting work hours may not lead to bias in
models of birth outcomes.

                                                       21
4.3. Pathways

         We further explore possible biological mechanisms through which higher intensity of

physical activities at work is associated with greater risk of fetal macrosomia. Results are

reported in Tables 6 and 7.

         Results in Table 6 (columns 2 and 3) show that maternal weight gain during pregnancy, 33

including excessive weight gain, 34 and gestational diabetes are strong predictors of fetal

macrosomia, which is consistent with the medical literature. Comparing the magnitudes of the

marginal effects between column (1) 35 and columns (2)­(3), it appears that pathways operating

through gestational diabetes and weight gain during pregnancy can account for at most one-third

of the impact of work intensity on macrosomia. 36

         In Table 7 (columns 1 and 2), we find that moderate-intensity activity at work during

pregnancy is associated with greater risk of gestational diabetes. 37 This finding is consistent

with the summary statistics reported in Table 1: the prevalence of gestational diabetes is higher

among pregnant women who had moderate-intensity activity at work (7.8%) than among those

who had light-intensity activity at work (6.7%). In Table 7 (columns 1 and 2) we also find,


33
   Weight gain is measured as the difference between body weight at delivery and pre-pregnancy body weight during
pregnancy. The average weight gain in our estimation sample is about 30 pounds and the standard deviation is
about 15 pounds. To avoid the influence of outliers in our estimation, we dropped from our estimation sample
weight gain that is below zero or above 60 pounds, that is, two standard deviations away from the mean.
34
   The definition of mother gaining too much weight during pregnancy (1/0) is given by the Institute of Medicine
Weight Gain Recommendations for Pregnancy (available at https://www.acog.org/Clinical-Guidance-and-
Publications/Committee-Opinions/Committee-on-Obstetric-Practice/Weight-Gain-During-Pregnancy, accessed in
April 2018), which gives a recommended range of weight gain specific to the mother's pre-pregnancy body weight
category (underweight, normal weight, overweight, and obese).
35
   Results in column (1) of Table 6 are from column (4) of Table 3, included in Table 6 for comparison purpose.
36
   Comparing the results of columns (2)­(3) between Panels A and B, we find that it is the MET exceeding a certain
threshold (Panel A), not the MET itself (Panel B), that is significantly associated with a greater risk of fetal
macrosomia, even after controlling for weight gain and gestational diabetes. This points to possible nonlinearities in
the effect of maternal job strenuousness during pregnancy on fetal health, for instance, when the strenuousness
exceeds a threshold, such as a MET of three, which is the lower bound used in the definition of moderate-intensity
activity.
37
   Results in Table 6 are suggestive since gestational diabetes and weight gain are endogenous mediators and
constitute "bad controls" in the parlance of Angrist and Pischke (2009). Thus, we also use gestational diabetes and
weight gain as outcome variables.

                                                         22
similar to the pattern revealed in Table 6 (columns 2 and 3), that it is the MET exceeding a

certain threshold (Panel A), not the MET itself (Panel B), that is associated with a greater risk of

gestational diabetes. Like the case of fetal macrosomia, the effect of maternal job strenuousness

during pregnancy on gestational diabetes appears to be nonlinear and may not materialize until

the strenuousness exceeds some threshold.

       In contrast, regarding body weight we find that it is the MET, not the MET exceeding the

threshold of three, that is associated with gaining too much weight during pregnancy (column 5

and Panel B of Table 7). This result, together with the results reported in Table 6 (column 3),

suggests that the effect of an average level of maternal job strenuousness during pregnancy on

fetal macrosomia could largely operate through maternal weight gain, specifically through

gaining too much weight, but the job strenuousness has an additional nonlinear effect on fetal

macrosomia, which becomes salient when the strenuousness exceeds a certain threshold (e.g., a

MET of three). Results in Table 7 (columns 3 and 4) also suggest that the average weight gain is

strongly associated with pre-pregnancy BMI, but not definitively related to MET (or MET

exceeding the threshold of three). We also view the link between excessive weight gain during

pregnancy and MET as inconclusive, since the association between the two becomes statistically

insignificant once we replace mother's residential county fixed effects with zip code fixed effects

(column 5 vs. column 6 of Panel B).

       Taken together, these results suggest that our findings are consistent with the existing

medical literature by showing that maternal weight gain during pregnancy and gestational

diabetes are two risk factors for fetal macrosomia, and also unique in identifying job

strenuousness during pregnancy as an independent risk factor for fetal macrosomia, adding to the

existing literature. One possible causal chain underlying this finding is sleep-deprivation-



                                                 23
induced diabetes (unmeasured or undiagnosed in our birth data), which can lead to fetal

macrosomia. Strenuous work has been found to correlate with stress and sleep deprivation

(Åkerstedt et al. 2002; Borodulin et al. 2010; Martins et al. 2016), 38, 39 and sleep deprivation has

been found to correlate with diabetes (Barone and Menna-Barreto 2011; Van Cauter et al. 2008).

         Although data limitations preclude direct assessment of the causal chain described above,

such as data on sleep deprivation, we conducted a falsification check (see Table 8), to assess the

validity of our preferred model. Specifically, we estimated the effect of maternal job

strenuousness during pregnancy on pre-pregnancy diabetes, which is known to be zero. If we

find any economically or statistically significant effects on pre-pregnancy diabetes, these would

point to unobserved selection bias. Results in Table 8 reassuringly show that the estimates (in

both Panels A and B) are statistically insignificant and close to zero in magnitude.

         We assess heterogeneity in the effects of job strenuousness during pregnancy on fetal

macrosomia in models reported in Table 9. These estimates suggest that the effect is more

salient among male infants, which is consistent with the "fragile male" hypothesis in medical

literature. We also find suggestive evidence of the effects being more concentrated among

mothers who are African American (p-value = 0.108) or unmarried. In addition, the effects

appear to be greater among mothers who have completed a four-year college or higher (i.e., those

who are presumably of higher socioeconomic status). This may be explained by the fact that




38
   Stress and sleep disturbances can go hand in hand, both being affected by job strenuousness. Once controlling for
physical exertion entailed in a job, however, Homer, James and Siegel (1990) do not find occupational
psychological stress to be independently associated with adverse birth outcomes.
39
   We conducted analyses with the American Time Use Surveys (2003­2018) to assess the link between job
strenuousness, as measured in this study, and sleep. Consistent with the findings of these other papers, we also find
that less sleep (measured by reduced sleep time) is significantly associated with working in more intense jobs
(measured by higher MET values) among females aged 18­40, based on a regression model that controls for total
time spent working on jobs, demographic characteristics (e.g., age, education, race and ethnicity), and county of
residence and time effects (e.g., day, month, year and holiday).

                                                         24
mothers who have a college degree or higher are more likely to work during pregnancy than

women have less education (Laughlin 2011).

       Finally, we evaluate the potential impact of selection on unobservables, using the method

proposed by Oster (2019). Specifically, we assess whether our estimate of the effect of having

moderate-intensity activity at work during pregnancy on fetal macrosomia (0.0192, reported in

column 4 and Panel A of Table 3) is robust to selection on unobservables, once we control for

mother's residential zip code effects and occupation fixed effects. The results of this evaluation

are summarized and reported in Figure 1. The maximal R-squared is obtained from a

hypothetical regression in which both observables and unobservables that affect the treatment

status and also the outcome of interest are included. In theory, this maximal R-squared can reach

one if the outcome is measured perfectly, without any measurement error, and all contributing

factors (either observed or unobserved) have been identified and included in the regression

model. In reality, however, this maximal R-squared will not reach one in the presence of

measurement error in the outcome or in the absence of perfect knowledge about the data

generating process. As a result, choosing a specific maximal R-squared, which is required in

Oster's method, is subjective and must be guided with empirical regularity. With our data, the

bias-adjusted estimate, which is the estimate with selection on unobservables taken into account

(calculated using Oster's method), starts to become implausibly large (0.1026, implying a more

than 100% increase in the likelihood of fetal macrosomia, relative to its average rate) when the

maximal R-squared approaches 0.069 (shown in Panel A of Figure 1). Therefore, we view the

range of the maximal R-squared above 0.05 and below 0.069 as being consistent with empirical

regularity. According to Oster (2019), assuming selection on unobservables is as important as

selection on observables and if the bias-adjusted estimate falls within the confidence interval of



                                                25
the original estimated effect (0.019), then it suggests that the original estimate could be robust to

selection on unobservables. Results reported in Panel A of Figure 1 suggests that in the range

between 0.05 and 0.061 of the maximal R-squared, the estimate of the effect (0.019) could be

viewed as robust to selection on unobservables. Note that the R-squared in the regression model

not controlling for mother's zip code fixed effect and occupation fixed effect is about 0.03, and it

increases to 0.05 by about 67%, once the model controls for those fixed effects. Results in Panel

A of Figure 1 also suggest that the estimate of the effect (0.019) could be robust to the inclusion

of unobservables into the regression model that raises the R-squared from 0.05 to 0.061 (by

22%).

        We conducted another evaluation proposed by Oster (2019) and reported the results in

Panel B of Figure 1. Here, we examined the relative importance of selection on unobservables

compared with selection on observables, referred to as the coefficient of proportionality. 40 These

coefficients reported in Panel B (as a function of the maximal R-squared) show how large

selection on unobservables has to be in order for unobserved selection to be able to fully explain

the observed effect of having moderate-intensity activity at work on fetal macrosomia. The

estimated treatment effect (0.019) could be viewed as robust if the coefficient of proportionality

exceeds one. As we previously discussed, the range of the maximal R-squared above 0.05 and

below 0.069 could be viewed as being consistent with empirical regularity, and within this range,

Panel B of Figure 1 shows that all coefficients of proportionality are substantially greater than

one. This indicates that our estimated impact of engaging in a relatively more strenuous job

during pregnancy could be viewed as robust to selection on unobservables; selection on


40
  In Oster (2019), the coefficient of proportionality is referred to as "delta," which is the ratio of selection on
unobservables divided by selection on observables. In Oster (2019), selection on observables (or unobservables) is
characterized by the covariance between the (binary) treatment dummy variable and the observables (or
unobservables).

                                                         26
unobservables would need to be several orders of magnitude greater than the selection on

observables to be able to fully drive the results.



5. Conclusion

       In this study we provide some of the first evidence of the impact of overall job

strenuousness on maternal and fetal health. In doing so, we contribute to and bridge two strands

of literature, one on how job conditions impact workers' health, and the other on how prenatal

inputs affect maternal and infant health. The focus on the intensity of physical activity at work

during pregnancy inevitably requires us to restrict the sample to women who worked during

pregnancy. With this selected sample, we are unable to generalize our findings to all women.

Nevertheless, the sample we focused on is of important policy interest, in light of a significant

and continuing increase in the share of women working during pregnancy. Data from the CPS

and the SIPP (Laughlin 2011) show that in 2017 almost 70% of women work at some point

during their pregnancy.

       Given that more pregnant women are working today, and working longer into their

pregnancy, it is critical to understand the maternal and fetal health implications of work-related

exposures. While the focus on hazardous exposures such as pollution and chemicals is

important, these exposures are relatively rare, especially in comparison with job strenuousness,

which can happen on a regular basis and cumulatively can result in a significant impact. In this

regard, we utilize a unique dataset from the NJDOH, which contains information not only on

pregnancy and birth outcomes but also on maternal employment during pregnancy. This dataset

allows us to provide some of the first evidence in the literature regarding how the overall




                                                     27
strenuousness of the type of job performed by a pregnant woman, as measured by the

occupational MET, affects her and her newborn's health.

       While we generally do not find adverse effects on the lower tail of the birth weight

distribution, we find consistent evidence showing a robust association between job strenuousness

during pregnancy and the risk of fetal macrosomia. Our finding on fetal macrosomia has

important public health implications since a macrosomic birth is associated with not only a

higher risk of being overweight at adolescence (Gillman et al. 2003; Lawlor et al. 2010) for the

child, but also a higher risk of having breast cancer for the mother (Bukowski et al. 2012).

Compared with light-intensity activity, our findings suggest that moderate-intensity activity at

work during pregnancy is associated with an increase in the likelihood of fetal macrosomia of

about 1.5 percentage points. Further checks confirm that our findings are not only consistent

with the existing literature by showing that maternal weight gain during pregnancy and

gestational diabetes are two risk factors for fetal macrosomia, but also unique in singling out job

strenuousness during pregnancy as an independent risk factor for fetal macrosomia, after

controlling for pregnancy weight gain and diagnosed gestational diabetes.

       One possible mechanism underlying this finding is sleep-deprivation-induced diabetes

(which is unmeasured or undiagnosed in our birth data), with gestational diabetes leading to fetal

macrosomia. There is some evidence suggesting an adverse effect of strenuous activities at work

on sleep quality (Åkerstedt et al. 2002; Borodulin et al. 2010; Martins et al. 2016), although

physical exercises in general are often recommended to pregnant women for health benefits.

Sleep deprivation has been found to correlate with diabetes (Barone and Menna-Barreto 2011;

Van Cauter et al. 2008).




                                                28
        The uniqueness and richness of the NJDOH data allow us to use a large set of control

variables and fixed effects, in an effort to address the endogeneity problem associated with the

maternal job strenuousness during pregnancy, which can be caused by residential sorting, non-

random selection in occupational choice, and the unobserved heterogeneity in maternal health.

Regarding fetal macrosomia, it is notable that the diagnosis can only be made after childbirth, by

measuring the birth weight. 41 As a result, it is unlikely for the mother to knowingly change her

behavior because of fetal macrosomia during pregnancy, therefore precluding an effect of fetal

macrosomia on maternal physical activity during pregnancy. In this case a causal interpretation

of our finding on fetal macrosomia is arguably less threatened by reverse causality. Admittedly,

data on other possible confounding factors, such as those related to compensatory behaviors

resulting from strenuous activities at work, remain unobserved. And, collecting more detailed

data on maternal activities during pregnancy and potential mechanisms underlying maternal and

fetal health (e.g., sleep deprivation and the resulting metabolic changes) would allow for

exploring alternative explanations on the association between maternal job strenuousness during

pregnancy and maternal and fetal health (e.g., fetal macrosomia) more fully. Regarding the

provision of accommodations at work for pregnant women who hold strenuous jobs, as of June

2019, only 27 states and D.C. have passed laws requiring some employers to do so. 42 The

effects of strenuous work activities on maternal and fetal health need to factor into any cost-

benefit calculus surrounding the policy debate of whether to require employers to provide

reasonable accommodations for female workers during pregnancy.




41
  For details, see https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/262679-overview (accessed in November 2018).
42
  For details, see: http://www.nationalpartnership.org/our-work/resources/workplace/pregnancy-
discrimination/reasonable-accommodations-for-pregnant-workers-state-laws.pdf (accessed in August 2019).

                                                      29
References

Åkerstedt, T., Knutsson, A., Westerholm, P., Theorell, T., Alfredsson, L. and Kecklund, G.,
2002. Sleep disturbances, work stress and work hours: A cross-sectional study. Journal of
Psychosomatic Research, 53(3): pp.741-748.

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2015. Physical activity and exercise
during pregnancy and the postpartum period. Committee Opinion No. 650. Obstet
Gynecol, 126(6), pp.e135-142.

Angrist, J. D. and Pischke, J.-S., 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's
Companion. Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.

Barnay, T., 2016. Health, work and working conditions: A review of the European economic
literature. The European Journal of Health Economics, 17(6), pp.693-709.

Barone, M. T. U. and Menna-Barreto, L., 2011. Diabetes and sleep: A complex cause-and-effect
relationship. Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice, 91(2): pp.129-137.

Bonzini, M., Coggon, D. and Palmer, K.T., 2007. Risk of prematurity, low birthweight and pre-
eclampsia in relation to working hours and physical activities: a systematic review. Occupational
and Environmental Medicine, 64(4), pp.228-243.

Borodulin, K., Evenson, K. R., Monda, K., Wen, F., Herring, A. H. and Dole, N., 2010. Physical
activity and sleep among pregnant women. Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology, 24(1): pp.45-
52.

Bukowski, R., Chlebowski, R. T., Thune, I., Furberg, A.-S., Hankins, G. D. V., Malone, F. D.
and D'Alton, M. E., 2012. Birth weight, breast cancer and the potential mediating hormonal
environment. PLOS One, 7(7): e40199.

Bussières, E.-L., Tarabulsy, G. M., Pearson, J., Tessier, R., Forest, J.-C. and Giguère, Y. 2015.
Maternal prenatal stress and infant birth weight and gestational age: A meta-analysis of
prospective studies. Developmental Review, 36, pp.179-199.

Casas, M., Cordier, S., Martínez, D., Barros, H., Bonde, J. P., Burdorf, A., Costet, N., Dos
Santos, A. C., Danilevicit, A., Eggesbø, M. and Fernandez, M. F., 2015. Maternal occupation
during pregnancy, birth weight, and length of gestation: combined analysis of 13 European birth
cohorts. Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment & Health, 41(4), pp.384-396.

Case, A. and Deaton, A. S., 2005. Broken down by work and sex: How our health declines.
In Analyses in the Economics of Aging (pp. 185-212). University of Chicago Press.

Colman, G. and Dave, D., 2013. Exercise, physical activity, and exertion over the business
cycle. Social Science & Medicine, 93, pp.11-20.



                                                30
Conway, K.S. and Kutinova, A., 2006. Maternal health: Does prenatal care make a difference?.
Health Economics, 15(5), pp.461-488.

Corman, H., Dave, D. and Reichman, N. E., 2018a. Evolution of the infant health production
function. Southern Economic Journal, 85(1), pp.6-47.

Corman, H., Dave, D. M. and Reichman, N., 2018b. Effects of prenatal care on birth outcomes:
Reconciling a messy literature (No. w24885). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Corman, H., Joyce, T. J. and Grossman, M., 1987. Birth outcome production function in the
United States. Journal of Human Resources, 22(3), pp.339-360.

Dave, D., Decker, S. L., Kaestner, R. and Simon, K. I., 2015. The effect of medicaid expansions
in the late 1980s and early 1990s on the labor supply of pregnant women. American Journal of
Health Economics, 1(2), pp.165-193.

Dave, D. M. and Kelly, I. R., 2012. How does the business cycle affect eating habits?. Social
Science & Medicine, 74(2), pp.254-262.

Gao, G. and Livingston, G., 2015. Working while pregnant is much more common than it used to
be. Pew Research Center, March, 31.

Gillman, M. W., Rifas-Shiman, S., Berkey, C. S., Field, A. E. and Colditz, G. A., 2003. Maternal
gestational diabetes, birth weight, and adolescent obesity. Pediatrics, 111(3), pp.e221-e226.

Grossman, M. and Kaestner, R., 1997. Effects of education on health. In J. R. Berhman and
N. Stacey Eds. The Social Benefits of Education, University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.

Gueorguieva, R., Sindelar, J. L., Falba, T. A., Fletcher, J. M., Keenan, P., Wu, R. and Gallo, W.
T., 2009. The impact of occupation on self-rated health: Cross-sectional and longitudinal
evidence from the health and retirement survey. Journals of Gerontology Series B:
Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 64(1), pp.118-124.

Hanna, E. Z., Faden, V. B. and Dufour, M. C., 1994. The motivational correlates of drinking,
smoking, and illicit drug use during pregnancy. Journal of Substance Abuse, 6(2), pp.155-167.

Hauge, L. J., Torgersen, L. and Vollrath, M., 2012. Associations between maternal stress and
smoking: findings from a populationbased prospective cohort study. Addiction, 107(6), pp.1168-
1173.

Homer, C. J., James, S. A. and Siegel, E., 1990. Work-related psychosocial stress and risk of
preterm, low birthweight delivery. American Journal of Public Health, 80(2): pp.173-177.

Jackson, R., Birsner, M. L., Terman, S. and Morris, L., 2018. Employment considerations during
pregnancy and the postpartum period. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 131(4), pp.E115-E123.



                                                31
Juhl, M., Strandberg-Larsen, K., Larsen, P. S., Andersen, P. K., Svendsen, S. W., Bonde, J. P.
and Andersen, A. M. N., 2013. Occupational lifting during pregnancy and risk of fetal death in a
large national cohort study. Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment & Health, 39(4),
pp.335-342.

Katz, V. L., Jenkins, T., Haley, L. and Bowes, J. W., 1991. Catecholamine levels in pregnant
physicians and nurses: A pilot study of stress and pregnancy. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 77(3),
pp.338-342.

Kelly, I. R., Dave, D. M., Sindelar, J. L. and Gallo, W. T., 2014. The impact of early
occupational choice on health behaviors. Review of Economics of the Household, 12(4), pp.737-
770.

Laughlin, L. L., 2011. Maternity leave and employment patterns of first-time mothers: 1961-
2008. US Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, US Census
Bureau.

Lawlor, D. A., Fraser, A., Lindsay, R. S., Ness, A., Dabelea, D., Catalano, P., Smith, G. D.,
Sattar, N. and Nelson, S. M., 2010. Association of existing diabetes, gestational diabetes and
glycosuria in pregnancy with macrosomia and offspring body mass index, waist and fat mass in
later childhood: Findings from a prospective pregnancy cohort. Diabetologia, 53(1), pp.89-97.

Lindsay, K. L., Buss, C., Wadhwa, P. D. and Entringer, S., 2017. The interplay between maternal
nutrition and stress during pregnancy: Issues and considerations. Annals of Nutrition and
Metabolism, 70(3), pp.191-200.

Lobel, M., Cannella, D. L., Graham, J. E., DeVincent, C., Schneider, J. and Meyer, B. A., 2008.
Pregnancy-specific stress, prenatal health behaviors, and birth outcomes. Health
Psychology, 27(5), p.604.

Martins, A. J., Vasconcelos, S. P., Skene, D. J., Lowden, A. and de Castro Moreno, C. R., 2016.
Effects of physical activity at work and life-style on sleep in workers from an amazonian
extractivist reserve. Sleep Science, 9(4), pp.289-294.

Mozurkewich, E. L., Luke, B., Avni, M. and Wolf, F. M., 2000. Working conditions and adverse
pregnancy outcome: A meta-analysis. Obstetrics & Gynecology, 95(4), pp.623-635.

Oster, E. (2019). Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence. Journal
of Business & Economic Statistics, 37(2): pp.187-204.

Palmer, K. T., Bonzini, M., Harris, E. C., Linaker, C. and Bonde, J. P., 2013. Work activities and
risk of prematurity, low birth weight and pre-eclampsia: An updated review with meta-
analysis. Occup Environ Med, 70(4), pp.213-222.

Pisko, S. A., 2016. Towards reasonable: The rise of state pregnancy accommodation laws. Mich.
J. Gender & L., 23, p.147.


                                                32
Reutrakul, S., Anothaisintawee, T., Herring, S. J., Balserak, B. I., Marc, I. and Thakkinstian, A.,
2018. Short sleep duration and hyperglycemia in pregnancy: Aggregate and individual patient
data meta-analysis. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 40, pp.31-42.

Saffer, H. and Dave, D., 2005. Mental illness and the demand for alcohol, cocaine, and
cigarettes. Economic Inquiry, 43(2), pp.229-246.

Saffer, H., Dave, D., Grossman, M. and Ann Leung, L., 2013. Racial, ethnic, and gender
differences in physical activity. Journal of Human Capital, 7(4), pp.378-410.

Theorell, T., 2000. Working conditions and health. In: L. Berkman, & L. Kawachi (Eds.). Social
Epidemiology. New York, NY: Oxford University Press, Inc.

Van Cauter, E., Spiegel, K., Tasali, E. and Leproult, R., 2008. Metabolic consequences of sleep
and sleep loss. Sleep Medicine, 9(Supplement 1), pp.S23-S28.




                                                33
Table 1: Summary Statistics
Samples:                                                                           Light-intensity activity at work   Moderate-intensity activity at work        Full sample
                                                                                      Mean                Std. dev.      Mean                Std. dev.       Mean          Std. dev.
Variables related to physical activity at work
Moderate-intensity activity at work (1) vs. light-intensity activity at work (0)      0.000                0.000           1.000               0.000         0.113                0.316
Metabolic Equivalent of Task (MET, a continuous measure)                              2.027                0.461           3.256               0.441         2.165                0.601
Variables related to pregnancy and birth
Birth weight (in grams), among singleton births                                     3,343.435            532.093        3,323.886            542.673        3,341.232            533.322
Fetal macrosomia (1/0): birth weight > 4,000 grams, among singleton births            0.086               0.280           0.083               0.277           0.086               0.280
Low birth weight (1/0): birth weight < 2,500 grams, among singleton births            0.051               0.221           0.056               0.230           0.052               0.222
Gestational length (in weeks), among singleton births                                38.763               1.723          38.722               1.754          38.759               1.726
Preterm (1/0): gestational length < 37 weeks, among singleton births                  0.070               0.255           0.070               0.255           0.070               0.255
Female baby (1/0)                                                                     0.491               0.500           0.512               0.500           0.493               0.500
Variables related to mother
Mother's body weight prior to pregnancy (in pounds)                                  153.842              37.749         156.881              39.081        154.184              37.913
Mother's BMI prior to pregnancy                                                       26.245               6.074          26.996               6.223         26.329              6.096
Mother's weight gain during pregnancy (in pounds)                                     29.836              12.009          28.728              12.821         29.713              12.107
Mother gaining too much weight during pregnancy (1/0)                                 0.460                0.498          0.459                0.498         0.460               0.498
Gestational diabetes (1/0)                                                            0.067                0.250          0.078                0.268         0.068               0.252
Prepregnancy diabetes (1/0)                                                           0.008                0.087          0.007                0.086         0.008               0.087
Mother's age                                                                          31.749               5.005          29.888               5.422         31.539              5.088
Mother being White (1/0)                                                              0.724                0.447          0.557                0.497         0.705               0.456
Mother being Black (1/0)                                                              0.118                0.322          0.280                0.449         0.136               0.343
Mother being Hispanic (1/0)                                                           0.171                0.376          0.287                0.452         0.184               0.387
Mother having completed a four-year college or higher (1/0)                           0.609                0.488          0.211                0.408         0.564               0.496
Mother being married (1/0)                                                            0.776                0.417          0.510                0.500         0.746               0.435
Number of previous live births the mother had                                         0.847                1.093          0.989                1.085         0.863               1.093
Having previous preterm birth (1/0)                                                   0.023                0.150          0.035                0.184         0.024               0.154
Mother had private insurance during pregnancy (1/0)                                   0.822                0.382          0.558                0.497         0.793               0.405
Mother had Medicaid during pregnancy (1/0)                                            0.156                0.363          0.381                0.486         0.181               0.385
Mother had prenatal care (1/0)                                                        0.988                0.110          0.987                0.114         0.988               0.110
Mother smoked cigarettes before or during her pregnancy (1/0)                         0.067                0.250          0.127                0.333         0.074               0.261
Variables related to mother's residential zip code's characteristics
Population size (in 10,000) for each zip code                                        3.021                 2.041          3.132                1.786         3.034                2.014
White subpopulation size (in 10,000) for each zip code                               2.126                 1.651          1.917                1.381         2.102                1.624
Black subopulation size (in 10,000) for each zip code                                0.456                 0.650          0.712                0.870         0.485                0.683
Hispanic subpopulation size (in 10,000) for each zip code                            0.582                 0.893          0.810                1.117         0.607                0.923
Number of households (in 10,000) for each zip code                                   1.071                 0.647          1.116                0.596         1.076                0.641
Average number of individuals per household for each zip code                        2.722                 0.338          2.731                0.324         2.723                0.337
Average house value (in $100,000) for each zip code ($)                              3.514                 1.270          3.011                1.039         3.457                1.257
Average household income (in $100,000) for each zip code ($)                         0.767                 0.268          0.641                0.230         0.753                0.267
Median age among all individuals for each zip code                                   38.621                5.474          37.560               5.413         38.502               5.477
Sample size                                                                                     27,726                              3,521                               31,247


                                                                                          34
Notes: Data are from the 2014 and 2015 New Jersey birth records on all live births collected by the New Jersey Department of Health. The summary statistics are based on the estimation sample including
live and singleton births among mothers who live in New Jersey. In the "light-intensity activity at work" sample, the variables "mother's weight gain during pregnancy (in pounds)" and "mother gaining too
much weight during pregnancy (1/0)" both have 26,763 observations. In the "moderate-intensity activity at work" sample, the variables "mother's weight gain during pregnancy (in pounds)" and "mother
gaining too much weight during pregnancy (1/0)" both have 3,350 observations. In the full sample, the variables "mother's weight gain during pregnancy (in pounds)" and "mother gaining too much weight
during pregnancy (1/0)" both have 30,113 observations. Values of the Metabolic Equivalent of Task (MET) are provided by the Census Occupational Classification System, reflecting the intensity and
strenuousness of the work activities performed. Our study compares moderate-intensity activity at work with light-intensity activity at work. That is, the variable named "moderate-intensity activity at work
(1/0)" is equal to one if 3  MET  6 and equal to zero if MET < 3. The definition of mother gaining too much weight during pregnancy (1/0) is given by the Institute of Medicine Weight Gain
Recommendations for Pregnancy (available at https://www.acog.org/Clinical-Guidance-and-Publications/Committee-Opinions/Committee-on-Obstetric-Practice/Weight-Gain-During-Pregnancy, accessed
in April 2018), which gives a recommended range of weight gain specific to the mother's pre-pregnancy body weight category (underweight, normal weight, overweight, and obese). The zip code database
is purchased from https://www.zip-codes.com/zip-code-statistics.asp. Zip code level control variables include the population size for each zip code based on the 2010 U.S. Census and the associated White,
Black and Hispanic subpopulation sizes for that zip code, the number of households for each zip code based on the 2010 U.S. Census, the average number of individuals per household for each zip code
based on the 2010 U.S. Census, the average house value for each zip code based on the American Community Survey five-year estimate, the average household income for each zip code based on the
American Community Survey five-year estimate, and the median age among all individuals for each zip code based on the 2010 U.S. Census.




                                                                                                     35
Table 2: Comparisons of Maternal Demographic Characteristics: Moderate-Intensity Activity at Work vs. Light-Intensity Activity at Work
                                                                               Coefficient on the dummy variable moderate-intensity activity at work (1/0), which is equal to one for
Mother's demographic characteristics:
                                                                                      moderate-intensity activity at work and equal to zero for light-intensity activity at work
                                                                                         (1)                            (2)                           (3)                             (4)
Mother's age                                                                        -1.8568***                     -1.1297***                    -0.4737***                       -0.2170*
                                                                                      (0.1601)                       (0.1184)                      (0.1480)                       (0.1174)
Mother being White (1/0)                                                            -0.1645***                     -0.0857***                    -0.0650***                      -0.0215**
                                                                                      (0.0157)                       (0.0106)                      (0.0121)                       (0.0107)
Mother being Black (1/0)                                                             0.1619***                      0.0879***                     0.0652***                      0.0286***
                                                                                      (0.0143)                       (0.0095)                      (0.0105)                       (0.0078)
Mother being Hispanic (1/0)                                                          0.1135***                      0.0529***                      -0.0166*                        -0.0112
                                                                                      (0.0173)                       (0.0101)                      (0.0101)                       (0.0091)
Mother having completed a four-year college or higher (1/0)                         -0.3973***                     -0.2906***                    -0.0399***                        -0.0122
                                                                                      (0.0114)                       (0.0096)                      (0.0125)                       (0.0118)
Mother being married (1/0)                                                          -0.2651***                     -0.1662***                    -0.0725***                     -0.0307***
                                                                                      (0.0104)                       (0.0111)                      (0.0128)                       (0.0106)
Number of previous live births the mother had                                         0.1405**                      0.1275***                       0.0414                         0.0401*
                                                                                      (0.0705)                       (0.0308)                      (0.0308)                       (0.0243)
Having previous preterm birth (1/0)                                                  0.0126***                      0.0072**                        0.0042                          0.0029
                                                                                      (0.0032)                       (0.0032)                      (0.0046)                       (0.0046)
Mother had private insurance during pregnancy (1/0)                                 -0.2618***                     -0.1828***                    -0.0598***                        -0.0079
                                                                                      (0.0163)                       (0.0103)                      (0.0122)                       (0.0061)
Mother had Medicaid during pregnancy (1/0)                                           0.2230***                      0.1496***                     0.0523***                        -0.0010
                                                                                      (0.0155)                       (0.0098)                      (0.0118)                       (0.0059)
Control variables:
Individual level demographic variables                                                  No                            No                             No                             Yes
Mother's occupation dummy variables                                                     No                            No                             Yes                            Yes
Mother's residential zip code fixed effects                                             No                            Yes                            Yes                            Yes
Year and month of birth (i.e., monthly) fixed effects                                   Yes                           Yes                            Yes                            Yes
Number of observations                                                                 31,247                        31,247                         31,247                         31,247
Notes: Data are from the 2014 and 2015 New Jersey birth records on all live births collected by the New Jersey Department of Health. The estimation sample includes live and singleton births
among mothers who live in New Jersey. Values of the Metabolic Equivalent of Task (MET) are provided by the Census Occupational Classification System, reflecting the intensity and
strenuousness of the work activities performed. Our study compares moderate-intensity activity at work with light-intensity activity at work. That is, the variable named "moderate-intensity
activity at work (1/0)" is equal to one if 3  MET  6 and equal to zero if MET < 3. Each column is an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression of each of the mother's demographic
characteristics (listed in the table) on that "moderate-intensity activity at work (1/0)" dummy variable and the control variables (listed at the end of the table). Columns (3) and (4) include 22
occupation dummy variables (with one used as the base category and dropped from the regression model). Their definitions are given by Table 3 through Table 24 (i.e., 22 tables) of "MET
values for activities in 2002 Census Occupation Classification System (OCS)" (available at https://epi.grants.cancer.gov/physical/MET/#ocs and accessed in April 2018). In column (4),
individual level demographic variables controlled for are mother's BMI prior to pregnancy, infant being female (1/0), mother's age, mother's race and ethnicity (1/0 dummy variables for White,
Black, and Hispanic), mother having completed a four-year college education or higher (1/0), mother being married (1/0), number of previous live births the mother had, mother having previous
preterm birth (1/0), mother having private insurance during pregnancy (1/0), mother having Medicaid during pregnancy (1/0), mother having prenatal care (1/0), and mother having smoked
before or during pregnancy (1/0), except the variable used as the dependent variable in the OLS regression. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the zip code level. * p -value
< 0.1; ** p -value < 0.05; *** p -value < 0.01.


                                                                                                     36
Table 3: Impacts of Physical Activity at Work during Pregnancy on Birth Outcomes

                                                                                              Fetal macrosomia (1/0, equal to Low birth weight (1/0, equal                                       Preterm (1/0, equal to 1 if
                                                                                                                                                                    Gestational length (in
Outcome variables:                                              Birth weigth (in grams)       1 if birth weight > 4,000 grams to 1 if birth weight < 2,500                                        gestational length < 37
                                                                                                                                                                           weeks)
                                                                                                       and 0 otherwise)         grams and 0 otherwise)                                            weeks and 0 otherwise)

                                                                    (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)            (8)            (9)            (10)
Panel A
Moderate-intensity activity at work (1) vs. light-intensity
activity at work (0)                                           37.2881***      38.9015***       0.0184**          0.0192**           -0.0001         0.0005         0.0717          0.0647        -0.0110*         -0.0107
                                                                (13.9632)       (14.1900)        (0.0078)          (0.0079)         (0.0058)        (0.0059)       (0.0461)        (0.0466)       (0.0064)        (0.0066)
Mother's BMI prior to pregnancy                                9.0248***       9.0410***        0.0043***         0.0043***          -0.0003         -0.0003      -0.0105***      -0.0099***     0.0009***       0.0008***
                                                                 (0.5636)        (0.5690)        (0.0003)          (0.0003)         (0.0002)        (0.0002)       (0.0019)        (0.0019)       (0.0003)        (0.0003)
R-squared                                                         0.064           0.081           0.030             0.050             0.016           0.031          0.034           0.053          0.017           0.035
Panel B
Metabolic Equivalent of Task (MET, a continuous                 14.2781          12.4802        0.0095**          0.0094**            0.0019          0.0024        0.0031          0.0017         -0.0009         -0.0006
measure)                                                        (8.7460)         (8.9440)        (0.0046)          (0.0047)         (0.0037)        (0.0038)       (0.0302)        (0.0310)       (0.0043)        (0.0044)
Mother's BMI prior to pregnancy                                9.0201***        9.0322***       0.0043***         0.0043***          -0.0003         -0.0003      -0.0105***      -0.0100***     0.0009***       0.0008***
                                                                (0.5640)         (0.5695)        (0.0003)          (0.0003)         (0.0002)        (0.0002)       (0.0019)        (0.0019)       (0.0003)        (0.0003)
R-squared                                                        0.064            0.081           0.030             0.050              0.016          0.031          0.034           0.053          0.017           0.035
Control variables used in Panels A and B
Individual level demographic variables                            Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
Mother's occupation dummy variables                               Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
Mother's residential county fixed effects                         Yes               No             Yes                No              Yes              No             Yes             No            Yes              No
Mother's residential zip code level control variables             Yes               No             Yes                No              Yes              No             Yes             No            Yes              No
Mother's residential zip code fixed effects                        No              Yes              No               Yes               No             Yes              No            Yes             No             Yes
Year and month of birth (i.e., monthly) fixed effects             Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
Number of observations                                           31,247           31,247          31,247            31,247           31,247          31,247          31,247         31,247         31,247          31,247
Notes: Data are from the 2014 and 2015 New Jersey birth records on all live births collected by the New Jersey Department of Health. The estimation sample includes live and singleton births among mothers who live in New
Jersey. Values of the Metabolic Equivalent of Task (MET) are provided by the Census Occupational Classification System, reflecting the intensity and strenuousness of the work activities performed. We use different
regression models in Panel A and Panel B. In Panel A, we use this dummy variable as a regressor: "moderate-intensity activity at work (1/0)", which is equal to one if 3  MET  6 and equal to zero if MET < 3. In Panel B, we
use MET (a continuous measure) as a regressor. Individual level demographic variables controlled for are infant being female (1/0), mother's age, mother's race and ethnicity (1/0 dummy variables for White, Black, and
Hispanic), mother having completed a four-year college education or higher (1/0), mother being married (1/0), number of previous live births the mother had, mother having previous preterm birth (1/0), mother having private
insurance during pregnancy (1/0), mother having Medicaid during pregnancy (1/0), mother having prenatal care (1/0), and mother having smoked before or during pregnancy (1/0). Zip code level control variables include the
population size for each zip code based on the 2010 U.S. Census and the associated White, Black and Hispanic subpopulation sizes for that zip code, the number of households for each zip code based on the 2010 U.S. Census,
the average number of individuals per household for each zip code based on the 2010 U.S. Census, the average house value for each zip code based on the American Community Survey five-year estimate, the average
household income for each zip code based on the American Community Survey five-year estimate, and the median age among all individuals for each zip code based on the 2010 U.S. Census. The estimation sample include 22
occupation dummy variables (with one used as the base category and dropped from the regression model). Their definitions are given by Table 3 through Table 24 (i.e., 22 tables) of "MET values for activities in 2002 Census
Occupation Classification System (OCS)" (available at https://epi.grants.cancer.gov/physical/MET/#ocs and accessed in April 2018). Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the zip code level. * p -value <
0.1; ** p -value < 0.05; *** p -value < 0.01.




                                                                                                            37
Table 4: Assessing Robustness to Maternal Health Endowment and Risk Factors in the Estimates of Impact of Having Moderate-Intensity
Activity at Work during Pregnancy on Fetal Macrosomia
                                                                                                       (1)                   (2)                 (3)                   (4)
Moderate-intensity activity at work (1) vs. light-intensity activity at work (0)                   0.0190**              0.0191**            0.0190**              0.0192**
                                                                                                    (0.0079)              (0.0079)            (0.0079)              (0.0079)
Mother's BMI prior to pregnancy                                                                    0.0043***             0.0042***           0.0043***             0.0043***
                                                                                                    (0.0003)              (0.0003)            (0.0003)              (0.0003)
Mother having private insurance during pregnancy (1/0)                                                 No                   Yes                 Yes                   Yes
Mother having Medicaid during pregnancy (1/0)                                                          No                   Yes                 Yes                   Yes
Mother having previous preterm birth (1/0)                                                            Yes                    No                 Yes                   Yes
Mother having prenatal care (1/0)                                                                     Yes                   Yes                 Yes                   Yes
Mother smoked cigarettes before or during her pregnancy (1/0)                                         Yes                   Yes                  No                   Yes
Other control variables
Individual level demographic variables                                                                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes
Mother's occupation dummy variables                                                                    Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes
Mother's residential zip code fixed effects                                                            Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes
Year and month of birth (i.e., monthly) fixed effects                                                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes
R-squared                                                                                             0.050                0.049                0.050                 0.050
Number of observations                                                                               31,247                31,247              31,247                31,247
Notes: Data are from the 2014 and 2015 New Jersey birth records on all live births collected by the New Jersey Department of Health. The estimation sample includes live and
singleton births among mothers who live in New Jersey. The variable named "fetal macrosomia (1/0)" is equal to one if birth weight > 4,000 grams and equal to zero if birth weight 
4,000 grams. Values of the Metabolic Equivalent of Task (MET) are provided by the Census Occupational Classification System, reflecting the intensity and strenuousness of the
work activities performed. Our study compares moderate-intensity activity at work with light-intensity activity at work. That is, the variable named "moderate-intensity activity at
work (1/0)" is equal to one if 3  MET  6 and equal to zero if MET < 3. Individual level demographic variables controlled for are infant being female (1/0), mother's age, mother's
race and ethnicity (1/0 dummy variables for White, Black, and Hispanic), mother having completed a four-year college education or higher (1/0), mother being married (1/0), number
of previous live births the mother had, and mother having prenatal care (1/0). The estimation sample include 22 occupation dummy variables (with one used as the base category and
dropped from the regression model). Their definitions are given by Table 3 through Table 24 (i.e., 22 tables) of "MET values for activities in 2002 Census Occupation Classification
System (OCS)" (available at https://epi.grants.cancer.gov/physical/MET/#ocs and accessed in April 2018). Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the zip code
level. * p -value < 0.1; ** p -value < 0.05; *** p -value < 0.01.




                                                                                            38
Table 5: Impact of Having Moderate-Intensity Activity at Work during Pregnancy on Fetal Macrosomia, Controlling for Employer Location, Commuting, and Labor
Supply Behaviors
                                                                                  (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)                (5)                (6)          (7)                 (8)
Moderate-intensity activity at work (1) vs. light-intensity activity           0.0159*          0.0160*         0.0153*         0.0152*             0.0137             0.0136       0.0130              0.0129
at work (0)                                                                    (0.0083)         (0.0083)        (0.0082)        (0.0082)           (0.0085)           (0.0086)     (0.0084)            (0.0084)
                                                                                [0.055]          [0.055]         [0.063]         [0.064]            [0.109]            [0.115]      [0.122]             [0.124]
Mother's BMI prior to pregnancy                                               0.0042***        0.0042***       0.0042***       0.0042***          0.0042***          0.0042***    0.0042***           0.0042***
                                                                               (0.0003)         (0.0003)        (0.0003)        (0.0003)           (0.0003)           (0.0003)     (0.0003)            (0.0003)
                                                                                [0.000]          [0.000]         [0.000]         [0.000]            [0.000]            [0.000]      [0.000]             [0.000]
Mother's residential zip code fixed effects                                       Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes                Yes          Yes                 Yes
Mother's employer's county fixed effecs                                           Yes              No              No              No                 Yes                No           No                  No
Mother's employer's zip code fixed effects                                        No               Yes             No              No                 No                 Yes          No                  No
Mother's home and employer are in the same county (1/0)                           No               No              Yes             No                 No                 No           Yes                 No
Mother's home and employer are in the same zip code (1/0)                         No               No              No              Yes                No                 No           No                  Yes
Other control variables
Individual level demographic variables                                           Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes                Yes                 Yes          Yes                 Yes
Mother's occupation dummy variables                                              Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes                Yes                 Yes          Yes                 Yes
Year and month of birth (i.e., monthly) fixed effects                            Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes                Yes                 Yes          Yes                 Yes
Labor supply measures obtained from the ACS data                                  No               No              No              No                Yes                 Yes          Yes                 Yes
R-squared                                                                       0.053            0.088            0.051          0.051              0.055               0.090        0.053               0.053
Number of observations                                                          28,503           28,503          28,503          28,503             27,473             27,473       27,473              27,473

Notes: Data are from the 2014 and 2015 New Jersey birth records on all live births collected by the New Jersey Department of Health. The estimation sample includes live and singleton births among mothers who
live in New Jersey. The variable named "fetal macrosomia (1/0)" is equal to one if birth weight > 4,000 grams and equal to zero if birth weight  4,000 grams. Values of the Metabolic Equivalent of Task (MET)
are provided by the Census Occupational Classification System, reflecting the intensity and strenuousness of the work activities performed. Our study compares moderate-intensity activity at work with light-
intensity activity at work. That is, the variable named "moderate-intensity activity at work (1/0)" is equal to one if 3  MET  6 and equal to zero if MET < 3. Individual level demographic variables controlled for
are infant being female (1/0), mother's age, mother's race and ethnicity (1/0 dummy variables for White, Black, and Hispanic), mother having completed a four-year college education or higher (1/0), mother being
married (1/0), number of previous live births the mother had, mother having previous preterm birth (1/0), mother having private insurance during pregnancy (1/0), mother having Medicaid during pregnancy (1/0),
mother having prenatal care (1/0), and mother having smoked before or during pregnancy (1/0). The estimation sample include 22 occupation dummy variables (with one used as the base category and dropped
from the regression model). Their definitions are given by Table 3 through Table 24 (i.e., 22 tables) of "MET values for activities in 2002 Census Occupation Classification System (OCS)" (available at
https://epi.grants.cancer.gov/physical/MET/#ocs and accessed in April 2018).

In columns (5) through (8) we repeat the estimations conducted in columns (1) through (4), respectively, with the addition of the following six labor supply measures obtained from the 2010­2017 American
Community Survey (ACS) data (in which we converted the 2010 Census occupation codes used in the ACS data to the 2002 Census occupation codes used throughout our study): i) usual hours worked in a given
week; ii) annual income from wages; iii) commutes to work by car/automobile/motorbike; iv) commutes to work by public transportation or ferryboat; v) commutes to work by bicycle, walking, taxi, or other; and
vi) works from home. We limit the ACS data to New Jersey residents, women who gave birth in the previous year or have an own child in the household one year of age or younger, and who worked in the previous
year. We merge the ACS data with the New Jersey birth records by each cell defined by having the same occupation code-race (white/black/other)-Hispanic-married-college (or above) educated-age group (16­30
and 31­50). To increase the sample size and statistical power, for observations in the birth data that do not find matches in the ACS data, we use the average values of the aforementioned six measures by each
occupation code; these observations are indicated by a dummy variable, which is included in the estimations conducted in columns (5) through (8).

Reported in [brackets] are p -values. Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the zip code level. * p -value < 0.1; ** p -value < 0.05; *** p -value < 0.01.




                                                                                                            39
Table 6: Impact of Physical Activity at Work during Pregnancy on Fetal Macrosomia, Controlling for Weight
Gain and Gestational Diabetes
                                                                                     (1)                    (2)                     (3)
Panel A
Moderate-intensity activity at work (1) vs. light-intensity activity            0.0192**                 0.0140*                0.0133*
at work (0)                                                                      (0.0079)                (0.0077)               (0.0077)
Mother's BMI prior to pregnancy                                                 0.0043***               0.0056***              0.0037***
                                                                                 (0.0003)                (0.0003)               (0.0003)
Mother's weight gain during pregnancy (in pounds)                                                       0.0025***
                                                                                                         (0.0002)
Mother gaining too much weight during pregnancy (1/0)                                                                          0.0503***
                                                                                                                                (0.0034)
Gestational diabetes (1/0)                                                                              0.0219***              0.0183***
                                                                                                         (0.0068)               (0.0068)
Panel B
                                                                                0.0094**                  0.0069                 0.0069
Metabolic Equivalent of Task (MET, a continuous measure)
                                                                                 (0.0047)                (0.0047)               (0.0048)
Mother's BMI prior to pregnancy                                                 0.0043***               0.0056***              0.0037***
                                                                                 (0.0003)                (0.0003)               (0.0003)
Mother's weight gain during pregnancy (in pounds)                                                       0.0025***
                                                                                                         (0.0002)
Mother gaining too much weight during pregnancy (1/0)                                                                          0.0503***
                                                                                                                                (0.0034)
Gestational diabetes (1/0)                                                                              0.0221***              0.0184***
                                                                                                         (0.0068)               (0.0068)
Other control variables used in Panels A and B
Individual level demographic variables                                             Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Mother's occupation dummy variables                                                Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Mother's residential zip code fixed effects                                        Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Year and month of birth (i.e., monthly) fixed effects                              Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Number of observations                                                            31,247                  30,113                 30,113
Notes: Data are from the 2014 and 2015 New Jersey birth records on all live births collected by the New Jersey Department of Health. The
estimation sample includes live and singleton births among mothers who live in New Jersey. In columns (2) and (3), the variables "mother's
weight gain during pregnancy (in pounds)" and "mother gaining too much weight during pregnancy (1/0)" both have 30,113 observations.
The variable named "fetal macrosomia (1/0)" is equal to one if birth weight > 4,000 grams and equal to zero if birth weight  4,000 grams.
Values of the Metabolic Equivalent of Task (MET) are provided by the Census Occupational Classification System, reflecting the intensity
and strenuousness of the work activities performed. We use different regression models in Panel A and Panel B. In Panel A, we use this
dummy variable as a regressor: "moderate-intensity activity at work (1/0)", which is equal to one if 3  MET  6 and equal to zero if MET <
3. In Panel B, we use MET (a continuous measure) as a regressor. The definition of mother gaining too much weight during pregnancy (1/0)
is given by the Institute of Medicine Weight Gain Recommendations for Pregnancy (available at https://www.acog.org/Clinical-Guidance-
and-Publications/Committee-Opinions/Committee-on-Obstetric-Practice/Weight-Gain-During-Pregnancy, accessed in April 2018), which
gives a recommended range of weight gain specific to the mother's pre-pregnancy body weight category (underweight, normal weight,
overweight, and obese). Individual level demographic variables controlled for are infant being female (1/0), mother's age, mother's race and
ethnicity (1/0 dummy variables for White, Black, and Hispanic), mother having completed a four-year college education or higher (1/0),
mother being married (1/0), number of previous live births the mother had, mother having previous preterm birth (1/0), mother having
private insurance during pregnancy (1/0), mother having Medicaid during pregnancy (1/0), mother having prenatal care (1/0), and mother
having smoked before or during pregnancy (1/0). The estimation sample include 22 occupation dummy variables (with one used as the base
category and dropped from the regression model). Their definitions are given by Table 3 through Table 24 (i.e., 22 tables) of "MET values
for activities in 2002 Census Occupation Classification System (OCS)" (available at https://epi.grants.cancer.gov/physical/MET/#ocs and
accessed in April 2018). Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the zip code level. * p -value < 0.1; ** p -value < 0.05; ***
p -value < 0.01.




                                                                      40
Table 7: Impacts of Physical Activity at Work during Pregnancy on Gestational Diabetes and Weight Gain
                                                                                                                                                               Mother gaining too much
                                                                          Mother having gestational diabetes            Mother's weight gain during
Outcome variables:                                                                                                                                             weight during pregnancy
                                                                                       (1/0)                              pregnancy (in pounds)
                                                                                                                                                                        (1/0)
                                                                                  (1)                    (2)                  (3)                 (4)               (5)               (6)
Panel A
Moderate-intensity activity at work (1) vs. light-intensity activity           0.0127*               0.0139*               -0.1336             -0.1681            0.0084            0.0069
at work (0)                                                                    (0.0073)              (0.0074)             (0.3084)            (0.3157)           (0.0132)          (0.0135)
Mother's BMI prior to pregnancy                                               0.0048***             0.0047***            -0.4886***          -0.4901***         0.0139***         0.0137***
                                                                               (0.0003)              (0.0003)             (0.0131)            (0.0132)           (0.0007)          (0.0007)
Panel B
                                                                                0.0016                0.0010               0.2736              0.2368            0.0145*            0.0123
Metabolic Equivalent of Task (MET, a continuous measure)
                                                                               (0.0043)              (0.0044)             (0.1960)            (0.1993)           (0.0085)          (0.0087)
Mother's BMI prior to pregnancy                                               0.0048***             0.0047***            -0.4883***          -0.4898***         0.0139***         0.0137***
                                                                               (0.0003)              (0.0003)             (0.0131)            (0.0132)           (0.0007)          (0.0007)
Other control variables used in Panels A and B
Individual level demographic variables                                           Yes                   Yes                   Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes
Mother's occupation dummy variables                                              Yes                   Yes                   Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes
Mother's residential county fixed effects                                        Yes                    No                   Yes                  No               Yes                No
Mother's residential zip code level control variables                            Yes                    No                   Yes                  No               Yes                No
Mother's residential zip code fixed effects                                       No                   Yes                    No                 Yes                No               Yes
Year and month of birth (i.e., monthly) fixed effects                            Yes                   Yes                   Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes
Number of observations                                                          30,113                30,113                30,113              30,113            30,113            30,113
Notes: Data are from the 2014 and 2015 New Jersey birth records on all live births collected by the New Jersey Department of Health. The estimation sample includes live and singleton births
among mothers who live in New Jersey. The definition of mother gaining too much weight during pregnancy (1/0) is given by the Institute of Medicine Weight Gain Recommendations for
Pregnancy (available at https://www.acog.org/Clinical-Guidance-and-Publications/Committee-Opinions/Committee-on-Obstetric-Practice/Weight-Gain-During-Pregnancy, accessed in April
2018), which gives a recommended range of weight gain specific to the mother's pre-pregnancy body weight category (underweight, normal weight, overweight, and obese). Values of the
Metabolic Equivalent of Task (MET) are provided by the Census Occupational Classification System, reflecting the intensity and strenuousness of the work activities performed. We use
different regression models in Panel A and Panel B. In Panel A, we use this dummy variable as a regressor: "moderate-intensity activity at work (1/0)", which is equal to one if 3  MET  6
and equal to zero if MET < 3. In Panel B, we use MET (a continuous measure) as a regressor. Individual level demographic variables controlled for are infant being female (1/0), mother's
age, mother's race and ethnicity (1/0 dummy variables for White, Black, and Hispanic), mother having completed a four-year college education or higher (1/0), mother being married (1/0),
number of previous live births the mother had, mother having previous preterm birth (1/0), mother having private insurance during pregnancy (1/0), mother having Medicaid during pregnancy
(1/0), mother having prenatal care (1/0), and mother having smoked before or during pregnancy (1/0). Zip code level control variables include the population size for each zip code based on
the 2010 U.S. Census and the associated White, Black and Hispanic subpopulation sizes for that zip code, the number of households for each zip code based on the 2010 U.S. Census, the
average number of individuals per household for each zip code based on the 2010 U.S. Census, the average house value for each zip code based on the American Community Survey five-year
estimate, the average household income for each zip code based on the American Community Survey five-year estimate, and the median age among all individuals for each zip code based on
the 2010 U.S. Census. The estimation sample include 22 occupation dummy variables (with one used as the base category and dropped from the regression model). Their definitions are given
by Table 3 through Table 24 (i.e., 22 tables) of "MET values for activities in 2002 Census Occupation Classification System (OCS)" (available at
https://epi.grants.cancer.gov/physical/MET/#ocs and accessed in April 2018). Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the zip code level. * p -value < 0.1; ** p -value < 0.05;
*** p -value < 0.01.



                                                                                              41
Table 8: Impact of Physical Activity at Work during Pregnancy on Prepregnancy Diabetes, Falsification Check
                                                                                                            (1)                       (2)                      (3)                     (4)
Panel A
Moderate-intensity activity at work (1) vs. light-intensity activity at work (0)                           -0.0013                  -0.0012                 -0.0013                  -0.0012
                                                                                                          (0.0024)                 (0.0024)                (0.0024)                 (0.0024)
Mother's body weight prior to pregnancy (in pounds)                                                      0.0001***                                        0.0001***
                                                                                                          (0.0000)                                         (0.0000)
Mother's BMI prior to pregnancy                                                                                                   0.0008***                                        0.0008***
                                                                                                                                   (0.0001)                                         (0.0001)
Panel B
Metabolic Equivalent of Task (MET, a continuous measure)                                                   -0.0011                  -0.0010                 -0.0013                  -0.0013
                                                                                                          (0.0017)                 (0.0017)                (0.0018)                 (0.0018)
Mother's body weight prior to pregnancy (in pounds)                                                      0.0001***                                        0.0001***
                                                                                                          (0.0000)                                         (0.0000)

Mother's BMI prior to pregnancy                                                                                                   0.0008***                                        0.0008***
                                                                                                                                   (0.0001)                                         (0.0001)
Other control variables used in Panels A and B
Individual level demographic variables                                                                     Yes                        Yes                     Yes                      Yes
Mother's occupation dummy variables                                                                        Yes                        Yes                     Yes                      Yes
Mother's residential county fixed effects                                                                  Yes                        Yes                      No                      No
Mother's residential zip code level control variables                                                      Yes                        Yes                      No                      No
Mother's residential zip code fixed effects                                                                 No                        No                      Yes                      Yes
Year and month of birth (i.e., monthly) fixed effects                                                      Yes                        Yes                     Yes                      Yes
R-squared                                                                                                 0.008                      0.009                   0.025                    0.026
Number of observations                                                                                    31,247                    31,247                   31,247                  31,247
Notes: Data are from the 2014 and 2015 New Jersey birth records on all live births collected by the New Jersey Department of Health. The estimation sample includes live and singleton births
among mothers who live in New Jersey. Values of the Metabolic Equivalent of Task (MET) are provided by the Census Occupational Classification System, reflecting the intensity and
strenuousness of the work activities performed. We use different regression models in Panel A and Panel B. In Panel A, we use this dummy variable as a regressor: "moderate-intensity activity at
work (1/0)", which is equal to one if 3  MET  6 and equal to zero if MET < 3. In Panel B, we use MET (a continuous measure) as a regressor. Individual level demographic variables controlled
for are infant being female (1/0), mother's age, mother's race and ethnicity (1/0 dummy variables for White, Black, and Hispanic), mother having completed a four-year college education or
higher (1/0), mother being married (1/0), number of previous live births the mother had, mother having previous preterm birth (1/0), mother having private insurance during pregnancy (1/0),
mother having Medicaid during pregnancy (1/0), mother having prenatal care (1/0), and mother having smoked before or during pregnancy (1/0). Zip code level control variables include the
population size for each zip code based on the 2010 U.S. Census and the associated White, Black and Hispanic subpopulation sizes for that zip code, the number of households for each zip code
based on the 2010 U.S. Census, the average number of individuals per household for each zip code based on the 2010 U.S. Census, the average house value for each zip code based on the
American Community Survey five-year estimate, the average household income for each zip code based on the American Community Survey five-year estimate, and the median age among all
individuals for each zip code based on the 2010 U.S. Census. The estimation sample include 22 occupation dummy variables (with one used as the base category and dropped from the regression
model). Their definitions are given by Table 3 through Table 24 (i.e., 22 tables) of "MET values for activities in 2002 Census Occupation Classification System (OCS)" (available at
https://epi.grants.cancer.gov/physical/MET/#ocs and accessed in April 2018). Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the zip code level. * p -value < 0.1; ** p -value < 0.05; ***
p -value < 0.01.




                                                                                                    42
Table 9: Heterogeneous Impact of Having Moderate-Intensity Activity at Work during Pregnancy on Fetal Macrosomia
                                                                                                                                           Mother having completed a
                                                           Infant's sex                      Parity                      Mother's race     four-year college or higher             Mother's marital status
Estimation by subsample:                               Male          Female       First born    Not first born         White        Black       Yes           No                  Married     Not married
                                                        (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)               (5)          (6)        (7)           (8)                    (9)            (10)
Moderate-intensity activity at work (1) vs.          0.0237*        0.0163*        0.0196*        0.0220**           0.0191*       0.0299    0.0234*       0.0191*                0.0191*        0.0204*
light-intensity activity at work (0)                 (0.0131)       (0.0096)       (0.0107)        (0.0107)          (0.0106)     (0.0186)   (0.0141)      (0.0101)               (0.0104)       (0.0121)
                                                      [0.072]        [0.090]        [0.068]         [0.041]           [0.072]      [0.108]    [0.097]       [0.059]                [0.068]        [0.091]
Mother's BMI prior to pregnancy                     0.0050*** 0.0035***           0.0033***       0.0050***         0.0050*** 0.0024*** 0.0047*** 0.0039***                      0.0046***     0.0036***
                                                     (0.0005)       (0.0004)       (0.0004)        (0.0004)          (0.0004)     (0.0006)   (0.0005)      (0.0004)               (0.0004)       (0.0005)
                                                      [0.000]        [0.000]        [0.000]         [0.000]           [0.000]      [0.000]    [0.000]       [0.000]                [0.000]        [0.000]
Other control variables
Individual level demographic variables                 Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes               Yes
Mother's occupation dummy variables                    Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes               Yes
Mother's residential zip code fixed effects            Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes               Yes
Year and month of birth fixed effects                  Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes               Yes
Number of observations                                15,838         15,409         14,010            17,237          22,021         4,254         17,633          13,614          23,324            7,923
Notes: Data are from the 2014 and 2015 New Jersey birth records on all live births collected by the New Jersey Department of Health. The estimation sample includes live and singleton births among mothers
who live in New Jersey. The variable named "fetal macrosomia (1/0)" is equal to one if birth weight > 4,000 grams and equal to zero if birth weight  4,000 grams. Values of the Metabolic Equivalent of
Task (MET) are provided by the Census Occupational Classification System, reflecting the intensity and strenuousness of the work activities performed. Our study compares moderate-intensity activity at
work with light-intensity activity at work. That is, the variable named "moderate-intensity activity at work (1/0)" is equal to one if 3  MET  6 and equal to zero if MET < 3. Individual level demographic
variables controlled for are infant being female (1/0) except columns (1) and (2), mother's age, mother's race and ethnicity (1/0 dummy variables for White except column 5, Black except column 6, and
Hispanic), mother having completed a four-year college education or higher (1/0) except columns (7) and (8), mother being married (1/0) except columns (9) and (10), number of previous live births the
mother had except columns (3) and (4), mother having previous preterm birth (1/0) except column (3), mother having private insurance during pregnancy (1/0), mother having Medicaid during pregnancy
(1/0), mother having prenatal care (1/0), and mother having smoked before or during pregnancy (1/0). The estimation sample include 22 occupation dummy variables (with one used as the base category and
dropped from the regression model). Their definitions are given by Table 3 through Table 24 (i.e., 22 tables) of "MET values for activities in 2002 Census Occupation Classification System (OCS)" (available
at https://epi.grants.cancer.gov/physical/MET/#ocs and accessed in April 2018). Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the zip code level. Reported in [brackets] are p -values. * p -value <
0.1; ** p -value < 0.05; *** p -value < 0.01.




                                                                                                        43
                                                                                                                                                                                                Panel A
                                                       0.1400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.
                                                       0.1200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.
                                                       0.1000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.
                                                       0.0800




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           83
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  83
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                05
                                                       0.0600




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                51
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               70
                                                                                                                                                                                                              41



                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.
                                                       0.0400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            03
                                                                                                                                                                                                             16

                                                                                                                                                                                                            03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.
                                                                                                                                                                                           95

                                                                                                                                                                                                          03
                                                                                                                                                                                          77




                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.
                                                                                                                                                                         61




                                                                                                                                                                                         02
                                                                                                                                                                        48




                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.
                                                                                                                                                                                        02
                                                                                                                                                       36




                                                                                                                                                                       02




                                                                                                                                                                                      0.
                                                                                                                                                      25
                                                                                                                                     16




                                                                                                                                                                      02




                                                                                                                                                                                     0.
                                                                                                                                    07




                                                                                                                                                     02
                                                                                                                   99
                                                                                                                  92




                                                                                                                                                                    0.
                                                                                                                                                    02
                                                                                                                                  02




                                                                                                                                                                   0.
                                                                                                                                  02




                                                                                                                                                  0.
                                                                                                                01
                                                                                                                01




                                                                                                                                                 0.
                                                                                                                               0.
                                                                                                                               0.




                                                       0.0200
                                                                                                             0.
                                                                                                             0.




                                                       0.0000
                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                                        1

                                                                                                                                 2

                                                                                                                                          3

                                                                                                                                                   4

                                                                                                                                                            5

                                                                                                                                                                     6

                                                                                                                                                                              7

                                                                                                                                                                                       8

                                                                                                                                                                                                9

                                                                                                                                                                                                         0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                             05

                                                                                                                      05

                                                                                                                               05

                                                                                                                                        05

                                                                                                                                                 05

                                                                                                                                                          05

                                                                                                                                                                   05

                                                                                                                                                                            05

                                                                                                                                                                                     05

                                                                                                                                                                                              05

                                                                                                                                                                                                       06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 07
                                                                                                          0.

                                                                                                                   0.

                                                                                                                            0.

                                                                                                                                     0.

                                                                                                                                              0.

                                                                                                                                                       0.

                                                                                                                                                                0.

                                                                                                                                                                         0.

                                                                                                                                                                                  0.

                                                                                                                                                                                           0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.
                                                                                                                                                                                        Maximal R-squared

                                                                                                                                       bias-adjusted estimate of the effect                                                                                    estimate of the effect
                                                                                                                                       95% confidence interval of the estimate of the effect



                                                                                                                                                                                                Panel B
                                                                                                                   17




                                                                                                    350
                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                               2.
                                                                                                            33
                  the coefficient of proportionality (i.e., "delta") for which the effect is zero




                                                                                                    300


                                                                                                    250


                                                                                                    200


                                                                                                    150


                                                                                                    100
                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                        96
                                                                                                                        .6
                                                                                                                     69



                                                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                                                 32




                                                                                                     50
                                                                                                                                 .9


                                                                                                                                              06
                                                                                                                              38




                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                             1

                                                                                                                                                   78


                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                          .0




                                                                                                                                                                         77
                                                                                                                                                            51




                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                       27




                                                                                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                                                                   .6




                                                                                                                                                                              40
                                                                                                                                                                        7
                                                                                                                                                            .7




                                                                                                                                                                                                96

                                                                                                                                                                                                         23
                                                                                                                                                 20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   96

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13
                                                                                                                                                                                          7
                                                                                                                                                                     .0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     92

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              31

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       80

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                28

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            87
                                                                                                                                                                              .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     90

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              84
                                                                                                                                                         16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       24
                                                                                                                                                                                       .6

                                                                                                                                                                                                51
                                                                                                                                                                  14




                                                                                                                                                                                                       59

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 82

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          19
                                                                                                                                                                            12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   64

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            18

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     77

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               42
                                                                                                                                                                                    10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 82

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          57

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   35
                                                                                                                                                                                              9.

                                                                                                                                                                                                      8.

                                                                                                                                                                                                               7.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4.




                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                           0

                                                                                                                    1

                                                                                                                             2

                                                                                                                                      3

                                                                                                                                               4

                                                                                                                                                        5

                                                                                                                                                                 6

                                                                                                                                                                          7

                                                                                                                                                                                   8

                                                                                                                                                                                            9

                                                                                                                                                                                                     0

                                                                                                                                                                                                               1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                          05

                                                                                                                   05

                                                                                                                            05

                                                                                                                                     05

                                                                                                                                              05

                                                                                                                                                       05

                                                                                                                                                                05

                                                                                                                                                                         05

                                                                                                                                                                                  05

                                                                                                                                                                                           05

                                                                                                                                                                                                    06

                                                                                                                                                                                                             06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                07
                                                                                                      0.

                                                                                                               0.

                                                                                                                        0.

                                                                                                                                 0.

                                                                                                                                           0.

                                                                                                                                                   0.

                                                                                                                                                            0.

                                                                                                                                                                      0.

                                                                                                                                                                              0.

                                                                                                                                                                                        0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.




                                                                                                                                                                                       Maximal R-squared


      Figure 1: Estimates of the Effect of Having Moderate-Intensity Activity at Work during Pregnancy on Fetal Macrosomia
Notes: In Panel A, the red line represents the estimate of the effect, which is 0.0192, also reported in column (4) and Panel A of Table 3.
The bias-adjusted estimate of the effect is referred to as "beta star" in Oster (2019). Also in Oster (2019), the coefficient of proportionality is
referred to as "delta," which is the ratio of selection on unobservables divided by selection on observables. In Oster (2019), selection on
observables (or unobservables) is characterized by the covariance between the (binary) treatment dummy variable and the observables (or
unobservables).




                                                                                                                                                                                                      44
