                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         UNDISCLOSED DEBT SUSTAINABILITY

                                         Laura Alfaro
                                        Fabio Kanczuk

                                     Working Paper 26347
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26347


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2019




The paper does not reflect the views of the World Bank Group, the World Bank Board or any of
the Governments represented by Fabio Kanczuk. Support from Harvard Business School research
budget acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Laura Alfaro and Fabio Kanczuk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Undisclosed Debt Sustainability
Laura Alfaro and Fabio Kanczuk
NBER Working Paper No. 26347
October 2019
JEL No. F0,F34

                                         ABSTRACT

Over the past decade, non­Paris Club creditors, notably China, have become an important source
of financing for low- and middle-income countries. In contrast with typical sovereign debt, these
lending arrangements are not public, and other creditors have no information about their
magnitude. We transform the traditional sovereign debt and default model to quantitatively study
incomplete information arrangements and find they greatly reduce traditional/Paris Club
creditors' debt sustainability. Disclosure of nontraditional debt would imply significant welfare
gains for the recipient countries but would reduce its sustainability. We discuss the implications
of nontraditional lending on standard assumptions of sovereign debt models in particular
defaulting costs.


Laura Alfaro
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 263
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lalfaro@hbs.edu

Fabio Kanczuk
University of São Paulo
R. Dr Alberto Cardoso de Melo Neto 110/131A
Sao Paulo-S.P.-CEP 01455-100
BRAZIL
kanczuk@usp.br
1. Introduction


         China's development has reshaped the world economy. In the last two decades, strong

domestic growth and the related demand for natural resources led China to search for markets

abroad. Countries in Africa, East Asia, and Latin America were natural partners, with an

abundance of commodities and need for infrastructure development. In addition to redefining

world trade patterns, China's venturing abroad has reshaped international lending. Low- and

middle-income countries have increased their reliance on financing from nontraditional sources

(Figure 1). It has been suggested, for example, that over the last decade China has financed

more than 3,500 projects in Africa, worth almost $300 billion in official financing. As a result,

China has become the region's largest creditor, accounting for 15% of sub-Saharan Africa's

total debt stock (AidData Project and Foresight Africa, 2018).

         China, as a non-member of the Paris Club, does not report on its official lending and,

there is no comprehensive data on Chinese overseas financing (Horn, Reinhart, Trebesch,

2010).1 In recent years, China's increased presence in international financial markets, and the

lack of information of the actual extent of its investments, has attracted the attention of

multilateral institutions and international investors. According to the World Bank

(International Debt Statistics, 2018), non­Paris Club (NPC) debt accounted for about 13% of

low-income countries' public debt in 2016 (World Bank, 2018b). Given the lack of official

data, these are estimates compiled from different sources.

         This paper studies how undisclosed debt affects debt sustainability. We transform the

now traditional sovereign debt and default model to include incomplete information

arrangements. In addition to the usual traditional "international investors" (Paris Club) credit



1
  China is not a member of the Paris Club and does not follow its disclosure requirements. Horn, Reinhart,
Trebesch (2010) estimate that almost all of China's overseas lending is official and close to half of China's lending
to developing countries is "hidden" and not recorded in the main databases.



                                                                                                                   1
market, the sovereign may borrow an undisclosed amount of debt from an NPC investor.

International investors thus have to assess NPC debt to adequately charge for their lending.

       The lack of consistent statistics highlights a critical issue across NPC borrowing and

lending: limited transparency. Unlike usual sovereign debt, lending arrangements by non­Paris

Club creditors are not public. As such, they increase funding costs from the original

international creditors, who reassess the probability of being repaid. Increased exposure to NPC

members and commercial creditors may pose coordination challenges for debt resolution,

making the consequences of debt distress even more disruptive.

       The IMF and the World Bank have recently highlighted debt transparency as a critical

issue in the current G20 agenda. At a 2018 IMF meeting, Christine Lagarde urged borrowers

and their new creditors to be more transparent about their liabilities. "Borrowing from non-

Paris Club lenders also means that creditor coordination will likely become more

complicated...A key challenge is preventing `debt surprises,' which can be driven by poor

governance, off­balance sheet borrowing, and weak debt recording and reporting" (Reuters,

September 13, 2018). Horn, Reinhart, Trebesch (2010) summarize the state of affairs by stating

that "these hidden overseas debts pose serious challenges for country risk analysis and bond

pricing. Debt sustainability metrics are poorer than generally perceived, especially so in about

two dozen developing countries that borrowed heavily from China during the boom decade of

2003­2013. Moreover, private investors may not appreciate the extent to which they are junior

to the Chinese government."

       In this paper, we model an economy populated by a continuum of private households,

a benevolent government, a continuum of risk-neutral international investors, and an NPC

investor that is also assumed to be risk-neutral. Preferences are concave, implying that

households prefer a smooth consumption profile. The novelty of our model is that the

international investors have no information regarding the amount of a government's debt to the



                                                                                               2
NPC investor, thus mirroring scenarios with opaque information. Lending from nontraditional

sources also requires rethinking the costs associated with defaulting including potential

exclusions from different capital markets. In the benchmark case, we assume a government

that defaults on its debts to be temporarily excluded from borrowing in the market in which it

defaulted.

       We choose to calibrate our model to the Angolan economy. With an estimated debt of

over US$25 billion, Angola is one of the African countries most indebted to China. In the

robustness check section, we analyze additional countries with different perceived exposures

to Chinese borrowing and lending.

       We solve three scenarios with our model: (i) a case without the NPC investor (to reflect

the environment before China's recent economic growth and its Belt and Road strategy); (ii)

the current equilibrium, with the presence of the NPC investor and incomplete information

about its debt; (iii) a hypothetical case where there is disclosure of NPC debt and information

is transparent. When compared to the original environment (version i), NPC undisclosed

lending (version ii) results in a reduction in the original investor's debt sustainability. We

quantitatively study this effect and determine that greater original debt results in more severe

decreases in debt sustainability; defaults and market exclusion episodes happen more often,

but there is a substantial increase in the recipient country's welfare. We also find that version

(iii)--the hypothetical case with complete information--results in even higher welfare gains

for the recipient country. However, this equilibrium results in significant reduction in the NPC

debt sustainability.

       In the robustness check section, we analyze alternative scenarios in terms of defaulting

costs. In particular, we present a case in which China's lending is a substitute rather than a




                                                                                               3
complement to the other countries, with different implications for output costs. We also

analyzed the role of collateralized lending.2

           Our paper contributes to the growing literature that examines debt sustainability (see

Aguiar and Amador (2014) and Aguiar et al. (2016) for recent surveys of the literature). An

important implication of our analysis relates to the cost traditionally associated with debt

default. Some of our results depend crucially on different assumptions that have been at the

core of the traditional sovereign debt models, such as defaulting costs and exclusion (Eaton

and Gersovitz, 1981; Bulow and Rogoff, 1989; Cole and Kehoe, 1995; Alfaro and Kanczuk,

2005, 2009; Arellano, 2008; Mendoza and Yue, 2012). These assumptions matter for debt

sustainability. As countries increasingly transition to borrowing and lending to non-traditional

markets and non-atomistic players such as China, consequences of defaulting may unravel

differently from previous episode.

           This paper also complements previous research that has studied the role of sovereign-

to-sovereign capital flows and lending (Alfaro and Kanczuk, 2009; and Alfaro et al., 2014). In

addition, it aims to understand the role of China's capital exports in the world economy. Recent

work has begun to document China's role in world financial markets (Horn et al., 2019;

Agarwal, Gu, and Prasad, 2019) and monetary systems (Farhi and Maggiori, 2019; Ilzetzki,

Reinhart and Rogoff, 2019.

           Section 2 describes the model and the equilibrium concept. Section 3 reports the

parameter calibration. Section 4 shows the simulation results and links them to current

discussions. Section 5 presents robustness checks that evaluate the sensitivity of results to

parameters and analyzes the case of collateralized NPC debt. Section 6 concludes.




2
    Collateralized debt has become common in various lending arrangements (e.g. case of Sri Lanka).



                                                                                                      4
2 Model


        We model an economy populated by a continuum of private households, a benevolent

government, a continuum of risk-neutral international investors, and a non-Paris Club investor

that is also assumed to be risk-neutral. The continuum of risk-neutral investors is meant to

represent the international credit market, which is composed of private investors, governments,

and multilateral banks. Although heterogenous and not fully competitive, this market is

estimated to have a constant (marginal) lending rate and must disclose the amount loaned. We

similarly model the NPC investor by setting a lending rate meant to represent its opportunity

cost. However, in contrast with the "international investors," the NPC investor does not release

information about the amount loaned.

        Preferences are concave, implying that households prefer a smooth consumption

profile. To smooth consumption, the benevolent government may choose optimally to default

on its commitments. A government that defaults on its debts is assumed to be temporarily

excluded from borrowing in the market in which it defaulted. That is, if the government defaults

on debt to international investors, it is temporarily excluded from borrowing from them but can

still borrow from the NPC investor. Similarly, if the government defaults on the debt to NPC

investor, it can still borrow from international investors. As mentioned, the novelty of our

model is that the international investors do not have information on the amount of NPC debt.

        We assume the sovereign's preferences to be given by:

                                          =  +   &
                                             &,-   (& ),


with:

                                                  (./0)
                                         () =           ,
                                                (1 - )

where E is the expectation operator ct denotes households' consumption, s > 0 measures the




                                                                                              5
curvature of the utility, and b Î (0, 1) is the discount factor. Households receive a stochastic

stream of a tradeable good yt, which is a Markov process with transition function f(yt+1, yt).

        If the government chooses to repay its debt to both international and NPC investors, the

country's budget constraint is given by:
                                 7       :
                             & + & &9. + & &9. = & + & + & ,

where Bt denotes the debt owed to international investors, Dt the debt owed to the NPC, and yt

the output endowment. The debt price schedules qB and qD are endogenously determined and

are dependent on the state of the economy, st, as well as on the government's decisions. The

state of the economy is completely defined by the ordered set:

                                       &  =  (& , & , & ).

        When the government defaults in the international investors' debt, the economy's

constraint is:
                                    :
                                & + & &9. = & (1 -  7 ) + & ,

where B corresponds to the output cost of having defaulted on debt B. After defaulting, the

sovereign is temporarily excluded from issuing international investors' debt. We assume B to

be the probability that the sovereign regains access to international investors' credit markets.

        When the government defaults in the NPC investor debt, the economy's constraint is:
                                        7
                                    & + & &9. = & (1 -  : ) + & ,

where D corresponds to the output cost of having defaulted on debt D. We assume D to be the

probability that the sovereign regains access to the NPC credit market. When the government

defaults on both the international and NPC investors' debts, the economy's constraint is:

                                       & = & (1 -  7 )(1 -  : ).

The same parameters B and D govern the probabilities of regaining access to the international

investors and NPC credit.




                                                                                                   6
       International investors are risk-neutral and have an opportunity cost of funds given by

rB, which denotes the risk-free rate. Investors choose the debt price qB, which depends on the

perceived likelihood of default. For these investors to be indifferent between the riskless asset

and lending to the sovereign, it must be the case that:

                                                         ./@ A (BC ,7C ,7CDE)
                                     7 (&, & , &9. ) =        (.9FA )
                                                                              ,

where B is the default probability on B debt endogenously determined and depends on the

sovereign's incentives to repay the debt.

       Similarly, we assume the NPC investor is risk-neutral and has an opportunity cost given

by rD. The NPC investor chooses the debt price qD, which satisfies:

                                                           ./@ G (BC ,7C ,7CDE,:C ,:CDE)
                            : (& , & , &9. , & , &9. ) =            (.9FG )
                                                                                         ,

where D is the endogenously determined probability of default on debt D. Note that while qD

depends on both types of debt, qB is a function only of the debt B as we assume that international

investors not to have information about D.

       The timing of the decisions is as follows. In the beginning of each period, the

government starts with debt levels Bt and Dt and observe income yt. It faces the price schedules

qB(yt, Bt+1, Bt+1) and qD(yt, Bt, Bt+1, Dt, Dt+1). Taking these schedules as given, the government

chooses: (i) whether to repay its debt obligations to international investors; (ii) whether to repay

its debt obligations to the NPC investor; (iii) if it decided not to default on the international

investors, the next level of debt Bt+1; or (iv) if it decided not to default on the NPC investor,

the next level of debt Dt+1. With this timing of events, there is no possibility of default at

settlement and no rollover crisis (or "sunspot equilibrium"), as in Aguiar et al. (2016).

       The model described is a stochastic dynamic game with incomplete information. We

focus on the Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium, whereby the government does not have

commitments and players act sequentially and rationally. This equilibrium concept is similar



                                                                                                  7
to the traditional (Markov Perfect) equilibrium used in sovereign default models, adapted to

accommodate the fact that international investors have incomplete information about the

sovereign debt to the NPC investor.

        A Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium has two components: strategies and systems of beliefs.

The strategy determines how players act in their information set. Players' belief determines

what node in that information set they believe they are playing. The system of beliefs is a

probability distribution over the nodes in the information set. In the present case, international

investors need to have a belief about the level of the NPC debt; that is, a probability distribution

of Dt. Strategies and beliefs satisfy the following conditions: (i) sequential rationality; that is,

each strategy should be optimal in expectation, given the beliefs, and (ii) consistency; that is,

each belief should be updated according to the strategies and Bayes' rule in every path of

positive probability.

        To describe the equilibrium, notice first that the international investors and the NPC

investor are passive, and their actions can be completely described by the expressions for qD

and qB. To write the sovereign problem recursively, let nO,BD(yt, Bt, Dt) denote the value

function for the government that has the option to default in both types of debt and that starts

the current period with output level yt debt levels Bt and Dt. Given the option to default, nO,BD

satisfies:

              I,7: J& , &, , & K = O 7: J& , &, , & K,  7 J& , &, K,  : (& , & ),  PI (& )Q,

where nBD is the value associated with not defaulting on any type of debt, nB is the value

associated with defaulting D type of debt, nD is the value associated with defaulting on B type

of debt, and nNO is the value associated with defaulting on both types of debt.

        Analogously, we can write the value functions in the beginning of the period when the

government does not have good credit with either type of investor. Let nO,B(yt, Bt) denote the




                                                                                                  8
value function in which the government can choose only whether it defaults on international

investors' debt (it had lost credit access to the NPC investor), and nO,D(yt, Dt) denote the value

function when the government can choose only whether it defaults on the NPC investor's debt

(it lost credit access to the international investors). Then

                                 I,7 J& , &, K = O 7 J& , &, K,  PI (& )Q,

                                 I,: (& , & ) = { : (& , & ),  PI (& )}.

        The value functions after the government chose whether or not to default are:

        7: (& , & , & ) = {(& ) +  I,7: (&9. , &9. , &9. )},

        7 (& , & ) = {(& ) + [ :  I,7: (&9. , &9. , 0) + (1 -  : ) I,7 (&9. , &9. )]},

        : (& , & ) = {(& ) + [ 7  I,7: (&9. , 0, &9. ) + (1 -  7 ) I,: (&9. , &9. )]},

           PI (& ) = (& ) + [ 7 (1 -  : ) I,7 (&9. , 0) +  : (1 -  7 ) I,: (&9. , 0) +

                       7  :  I,7: (&9. , 0,0) + (1 -  7 )(1 -  : ) PI (&9. )],

with the correspondent budget constraints, and E denoting the expected value with respect to

yt+1 conditional on yt, which is determined by the transition function f (yt+1, yt). Note that the

maximizations are over choices of Bt+1 and Dt+1 or both, depending on the case, and thus

define the debt-holding policies. The default policies can be characterized by the default sets.

When the government can choose only whether it defaults on international investors' debt (it

has lost credit access to the NPC investor), the default set is given by:

                             7,7 (&, ) = {&  :  PI (& ) >   7 (& , &, )}.

        Similarly, when the government can choose only whether to default on the NPC

investor, the default set is:

                                   :,: (&, ) = {&  : PI (& ) >  : (& , &, )}.

        When the government can default on both debt types, there are three default sets,

which define the default in debt B debt, in debt D, and in both types of debt:

                  7,7: J&, & K = {&  : 7 >  7:  7   :  7   PI },




                                                                                                     9
                  :,7: (&, & ) = {&  : : >  7:  : >  7  :   PI },

                7:,7: (&, & ) = {&  : PI >  7:  PI >  7  PI >  : }.

        The recursive equilibrium is defined by the set of policy functions for government debt

holdings and default choices, the price functions for international investors and the NPC

investor debt, and the belief system  (Dt /yt, Bt) such that: (i) taking the price functions as

given, the government policy functions satisfy the government optimization problem, (ii)

prices of debt are consistent with the government's decisions given the belief system, and (iii)

the belief system is consistent with the government policies and debt prices.

        The consistency of prices implies that the default probabilities and the default sets are

related as follows. When a government can default only on debt to international investors (it

had lost credit access to the NPC investor),

                              7 (& , & , &9. ) = dA,A ( &9. , & )&9. .

        When a government can default only on debt to the NPC investor,

                              : (& , & , &9. ) = dG,G ( &9. , & )&9. ,

while when a government can default on both types of debt,


            7 (& , & , &9. ) = e                  (&9. /&9. , &9. )( &9. , & )&9. &9.
                                 d A,AGhd AG,AG


                     : (& , & , &9. , & , &9. ) = dG,AG hdAG,AG ( &9. , & )&9. .

        To have a belief system  (Dt /yt, Bt) that is consistent with all policies and prices, we

make it consistent with the invariant distribution of the states (yt, Bt, Dt). That is, given a (Dt/yt,

Bt), we solve for all policies and prices. We then obtain the invariant distribution for the states

(yt, Bt, Dt). We also make sure that this invariant distribution implies the same conditional

probability  (Dt /yt, Bt) that was assumed.




                                                                                                    10
3 Calibration


        We calibrate our model to Angola, one of the largest countries in Africa, with a GDP

of US$125 billion. Since NPC lending is a recent phenomenon, we first calibrate the model

without D type debt, making the parameters consistent with the historical means of observable

variables. We then consider the parameters associated with the NPC investor, for which we

conduct many robustness tests.

        We assume each period corresponds to one year. We set the intertemporal substitution

parameter at  = 2 and international interest rate at B = 0.04, as is typical in real business-cycle

research. Setting the probability of redemption at  = 0.5 implies an average remainder in

autarky for two years, in line with estimates (see Aguiar and Amador (2014) and references

therein).

        We set yt = exp(zTt) and assume that zTt can take a finite number of values and that it

evolves over time according to a Markov transition matrix with elements pT ( zTi ,zTj ); that is,

the probability that zTt+1 = zTj, given that zTt = zTi, and the matrix p element of row i and

column j. We calibrate the technology state zT by considering the logarithm of the Angolan

GDP to follow an AR(1) process; that is, zt+1 = azt + t+1 where   N(0,s2). Using data from

1990 to 2017, we find that a = 0.75 and s = 0.074.

        The parameters output costs B and intertemporal factor  jointly determine the average

debt level and average interest spread (which is directly linked to the probability of default).

We calibrate output costs to be B = 0.10, in line with the empirical evidence (Furceri and

Zdzienicka, 2012) and set the intertemporal factor at the relatively low value of  = 0.50, which

is common practice in debt models. By doing so, as seen in the next section, we find that the

average debt level is equal to 44.5% of GDP. This matches Angola's debt level over the period

2002­2016 (the available time horizon; World Bank data). Information on the Angolan interest



                                                                                                11
spread is scarce. The EMBI+, which is available from November 2012, has an average of

540bps, but refers to bonds with a duration of over five years. The CDS spread, with the

adequate duration of one year, is available from May 2017 and has averaged 250bps. Our

calibration implies an average spread of 350bps, which is within the interval of the available

data.

        We now consider the full model in which the sovereign can also borrow from the NPC

investor. In our benchmark calibration, we set the NPC interest rate opportunity cost at D =

0.04 and the probability of redemption of D type debt equal to  D= 0.5. We thus keep symmetry

with the international investors and can more accurately evaluate the effect of the incomplete

information assumption. We then measure how the results change with these parameters in the

robustness section.

        To calibrate the output cost of defaulting on the NPC debt, we resort to Angola's

international trade (exports plus imports) information. In 2016, Angola's trade volume with

China was 52% of its total trade. Accordingly, we calibrate D = 0.052 and keep B = 0.10.

Given our lack of understanding about the nature of output costs, it is not clear that B remained

the same after China became a relevant player in the global economy. It could be that China

played a role of substitute rather than complement to the other countries, and that B should be

reduced. We also evaluate the implications of having different values for B and D in the

robustness section.

        Table 1 reports the parameter calibration for our benchmark economy.


4 Simulation results


        We solve three versions of our model, representing the past, the present, and perhaps

the future environments: (1) the sovereign has access only to the international investors' market

(no NPC investor), that is, the environment before the Belt and Road initiative, (2) the current



                                                                                              12
situation, with both types of investors and incomplete information about the NPC debt, and (3)

an environment with complete information, in which the NPC debt is disclosed. Table 2 reports

various results for the (invariant distribution) equilibria of these three economies.

       Version 1 (shown in in the top lines of the table) is mainly used for calibration. Since

the NPC investor is not present, in this economy there are only two possible market-access

conditions: either the sovereign has access to the international investor market or it does not

have access to any market. As the table shows, the probabilities of these two conditions

occurring are 96.7% and 3.2%, respectively. Conditional on having market access, a

sovereign's average debt is 42.5%, which is consistent with Angola's average debt during the

last 16 years. We normalize the sovereign welfare level, measured by consumption, to zero.

       Version 2 of the model represents the current situation and warrants more discussion.

There are four market access conditions: (i) the sovereign has access to both types of investors,

(ii) the sovereign has access only to international investors (it has defaulted on the NPC debt),

(iii) the sovereign has access only to the NPC market (it has defaulted on the international

investors), and (iv) the sovereign does not have access to any credit market (it has defaulted on

both types of debts).

       When the sovereign has access to only one type of investor, the solution of the model

is similar to that of an economy with only international investors (version 1). The sovereign

can take two actions: default or accept the next period level of debt. As shown in other papers

(e.g. Arellano, 2008), default is more likely at higher levels of original debt and in low-

endowment states. Next-period debt is an increasing function of this period debt, and also an

increasing function of the endowment; that is, even though the sovereign wants to borrow more

in tough periods, it is too expensive to do so (see Alfaro and Kanczuk, 2004).

       When the sovereign has access to both credit markets, it can decide on four actions:

whether to default on the international investors, whether to default on the NPC investor, and,



                                                                                              13
conditional on not defaulting, whether to accept debt for the next period from international

investors and NPCs. We find that these four policy functions have exactly the same properties

as before: (i) default (on a certain type of debt) is more likely with higher debt levels, (ii) default

is more likely with lower output endowment; (iii) next-period debt (of a certain type) is higher

with higher this period debt (of the same type), (iv) debt is higher for lower endowments.

        As expected, what drives the novel results of our model is that it depicts how defaulting

on one type of debt relates to the level of the other type of debt. Figure 1 reports the decision

to default on international investors' debt as a function of the amount of both types of debt for

a given endowment shock equal to zero. (The decision to default on NPC, not reported, has the

same characteristics). It shows that defaulting on international investors is more likely with

higher NPC debt. The reason is that, after having defaulted, the sovereign can still use the NPC

debt to smooth consumption and can do so more powerfully when it has higher debt (especially

because the sovereign can default on NPC debt as well). Because the cost of defaulting on

international investors is ameliorated by accepting higher NPC debt, it happens more often.

        This is an important intuition, which determines much of the debt sustainability results.

There is some complementarity between the two types of debt. As a consequence, one should

expect that the advent of NPC investors would reduce international investors' debt

sustainability. The question is whether this is quantitatively relevant or not.

        Another important issue is how incomplete information affects actions. The easiest

approach is to observe how private investors assess the probability that the sovereign will

default on the debt. Figure 2 shows that this probability is conditional on the endowment

(technology shock equal to zero) and conditional on the international investors' debt (equal to

3% of GDP). If there were complete information, the probability of default would be either one

or zero, depending on the value for NPC debt. This is a horizontal slice of Figure 1 taken at the

point B = 3%.



                                                                                                    14
       In contrast, when there is incomplete information, the probability of default is constant,

equal to about 78%, regardless of the NPC debt level; that is, it is equal to the complete

information default decision weighted by the invariant distribution probability for the NPC

debt. Conditional on zero technology shock and international investors' debt B=3%, the NPC

debt D is above its sustainable level 78% of the time.

       The lesson from Figure 2 is simply that incomplete information is potentially very

costly. Since international investors cannot observe NPC debt, they will often assign a

probability of default on their lending that is very different from the actual probability.

Consequently, the sovereign will end up having lower benefits from access to the international

credit markets. We next quantify these effects by looking at the invariant distributions.

       Going back to Table 2, the second and third groups of rows report the invariant

distribution information for versions 2 and 3 of the model. It is easier to first analyze version 3

of the model, as this is more similar to version 1.

        Comparing version 3 with version 1, one can notice that the inclusion of NPC markets

reduces the sustainability of the international investor's debt. When only international markets

are lending, the average debt is 38.5% of GDP, which is close to the average debt in version 1.

But this state now happens less often. Its frequency dropped from 96.7% to 62.2%, as the

sovereign now has more options. The state with both credit markets operative occurs 32% of

the time, but debt levels are small. The state in which both credit markets are closed occurs

2.8% of the time, less often than in the version 1.

       In comparing version 3 with version 1, one notices that the NPC is more like a substitute

than a complement to the international investor. But it is not a perfect substitute, as the

sovereign uses this additional option to achieve more consumption smoothing.

       Another observation from version 3 is the asymmetry between the NPC investor and

the international investors. As this version assumes full information, the only reason for



                                                                                                15
asymmetry between the two types of lending is the different output costs from defaulting. Since

the output costs from defaulting on NPC debt are smaller, the sustainability of this type of debt

is much smaller than the international investor's debt.

         Version 2 introduces another asymmetry between the two types of debt by assuming

that NPC debt is not observable to international investors. As international investors reassess

the probability of default, they cannot price debt with the same precision, and the sovereign

benefits from this market are reduced. Consequently, as in models of credit rationing, the

equilibrium displays smaller amounts of international investors' debt. Note in Table 2 that for

the state in which only the international investors' market is open, the average debt is 24.7%,

but this state happens only 27.5% of the time.

         Another consequence of the incomplete information is that of increased NPC debt

sustainability. This is expected if one sees the two types of debt as (imperfect) complements.

With the increase in international investor debt price, the sovereign opts to borrow more from

the NPC investor. Note that average NPC debt increases to 9.6% and 6.7% of GDP,

respectively, in the states with both debts and with only NPC debt. These numbers are much

higher than in their correspondents in version 3, but they are smaller than the international

investors' numbers (version 2). Thus, even though incomplete information reduces the

difference in debt sustainability between the two types of debt, its effect is not strong enough

to make NPC debt more sustainable than international investors' debt. In other words,

incomplete information is not as strong a device to increase debt sustainability as default output

costs.

         A final observation of Table 2 refers to welfare. As expected, sovereign welfare

increases from version 1 to version 2, and increases from version 2 to version 3. This calls for

reflection and speculations about the present and future of undisclosed sovereign debt. Our




                                                                                               16
results indicate that the welfare gains from tapping into the NPC credit market are substantial.3

Another present-day issue is the lack of transparency of NPC lending. Multilateral banks have

expressed concern about this lack of transparency, listing it as a top priority. The IMF, in

particular, is urging creditors to disclose more information. Our model provides a framework

for thinking about this issue, indicating that NPC debt works as a (imperfect) substitute to the

traditional international investor (Paris Club) debt. Moreover, it quantifies the reduction in debt

sustainability.


5 Robustness

5.1 Sensitivity Analysis


         Here we look at how different parameter calibrations affect our results; in particular,

the sustainability of international investors' debt. First we solve our model for different 

values (sovereigns' impatience). In models of sovereign debt, as that used in this paper, this is

the most critical parameter in determining debt sustainability. By changing , we can evaluate

what the model would predict if it was calibrated to economies that initially supported more

(or less) debt. We can think about these other economies as resembling other middle- and low-

income countries that have recently tapped into the NPC market.

         Figure 3 shows how different values of  affect private investors' debt with and without

the presence of the NPC investor. (These correspond to the results of version 1 and version 2

of the model). As expected, debt sustainability decreases with beta and decreases if the NPC

investor is present. An interesting quantitative result is that the effect of the NPC presence on

sustainability is much more severe when beta is low. Regardless of the initial level of




3
 Our model is silent about political issues, such as the interests of the governing elites not being aligned with
those of the population; see Dreher at al. (2019).



                                                                                                                    17
sustainability, the presence of the NPC investor will reduce debt sustainability to a fairly low

value.

         Next, we see how our results change if the NPC has a smaller opportunity cost of

lending. Figure 4 shows how international investors' and NPC debt changes with different

values of D (always in the state with both credit markets open in version 2). Note that

reductions in D may result in large changes in debt sustainability. This could mean that NPC

debt sustainability is higher than in our benchmark calibration. But that would mean that

international investors' debt sustainability is substantially lower.

         We perform sensitivity analysis to assess changes in output costs of default (B and D)

and the probability of redemption (B and D). These are equivalent cases since both parameters

affect the sovereign costs of defaulting. Results are as expected. Higher costs of default imply

more debt sustainability. Increases in NPC debt imply a reduction in international investors'

debt.


5.2 Collateralized Debt

         A fairly common observation of China's lending is that it is collateralized, or not

subject to "traditional" default. Thus, even if the sovereign wants to interrupt service payments,

contracts allow for some form of recovery and service. If the collateral is an asset, it could be

seized and its dividends collected in place of debt services. (The seizure of Sri Lanka's

Hanbantota port in 2017 is commonly cited as evidence.) On the other hand, there is also

evidence that deferments, refinancing, and new terms are much more common than asset

seizures.4 Our model, consistent with sovereign debt literature, assumes that the sovereign can

default, and that willingness to pay rather than ability to pay determines debt sustainability.


4
  "An examination of 38 Chinese debt renegotiations with 24 countries..., concluded that China's leverage
remains limited, with many of the renegotiations resolved in favour of the borrower" (Financial Times, 29
April, 2019, "China Renegotiated $50bn to developing countries").



                                                                                                            18
The rationale is that military actions motivated by default have now become rare. In contrast,

it is much more common that sovereigns "nationalize," or seize foreign assets in their

territories.

        Notwithstanding the above comments, it is interesting to evaluate how international

investors' debt sustainability would be affected if NPC debt were fully collateralized and the

sovereign could not default on it. Consider the following simplification. Suppose the sovereign

borrowed D from the NPC investor and has already consumed this amount in previous periods.

That is, the sovereign has reached a "steady state" in which it has to pay the debt services, D,

to the NPC investor, and cannot default or avoid this payment.

        In this case, since the sovereign has no choices related to the NPC debt, the environment

is exactly like one in which there is only one type of debt, but with an additional constant in

the budget constraint. Rather than receiving an endowment output of yt, the sovereign receives

yt­D , where D is constant. Therefore, the solution will be as in the case with only

international investors, but with a different calibration, with yt'=yt­D. Put differently, since

the endowment would be smaller, the economy would be like one with a smaller GDP, and

therefore a higher debt over GDP.

        For an extreme example, consider that Angola's NPC debt is 50% of GDP. Since =4%,

debt service is D=2% of GDP. Therefore, the effect of the NPC debt over international

investor debt sustainability will be approximately 2%. Rather than the original 42.5%, the new

sustainable debt level will be approximately 41.7% of GDP.

        Why is the effect of a collateralized NPC debt much smaller than if it were not

collateralized? The reason is that debt sustainability depends on the marginal benefits and costs

of defaulting. The benefits of defaulting on the international investor's debt is not to pay debt

services, which is (about) the same whether the sovereign has other types of debt. In contrast,

the costs of defaulting on the international investors depends a lot on what the sovereign has



                                                                                              19
left as alternative devices to smooth consumption once it is excluded from the international

investor's credit market. When NPC debt is collateralized, the sovereign does not apply any

device to smooth consumption. When NPC is not collateralized, the sovereign can still default

on this debt to smooth consumption. The costs of defaulting on the international investor debt

are much smaller if NPC debt is not collateralized. Hence, it is in this case that debt

sustainability is greatly affected.


6 Conclusion


        By uniquely presenting a hypothetical scenario in which non-Paris Club lending and

borrowing is fully disclosed, we illustrate that transparency has potential effects of decreased

debt sustainability for investors such as China and significant welfare gains for recipient

countries. We find that these implied effects are particularly strong if the debt is large. We

caveat the results of this model by showing how the relationships between borrowers,

traditional investors and NPC investors affect these results. These results vary even further

when the opportunity cost of lending changes, with sovereigns choosing to default on debts to

one type of investor in order to smooth consumption and alleviate debts to the other. These

varying factors affect the level of debt sustainability significantly, and must be recognized as

forming a complex, interactive system.


References

Aguiar, Mark and Manuel Amador (2014). "Sovereign Debt." In Handbook of International

        Economics, vol. 4, eds. Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman and Kenneth Rogoff,

        Elsevier.




                                                                                             20
Aguiar, Mark, Satyajit Chatterjee, Harald Cole, and Zachary Stangebye (2016). "Quantitative

       Models of Sovereign Debt Crises," Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 4, eds. Harald

       Uhlig and John Taylor.

Agarwal, Isha, Grace Weishi Gu, and Eswar Prasad (2019). "China's Impact on Global

       Financial Markets," Working Paper.

Alfaro, Laura and Fabio Kanczuk (2005). "Sovereign Debt as a Contingent Claim: A

       Quantitative Approach," Journal of International Economics 65(2): 297­314.

Alfaro, Laura and Fabio Kanczuk (2009). "Optimal Reserve Management and Sovereign

       Debt," Journal of International Economics 77(1): 23­36.

Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych (2014). "Sovereigns,

       Upstream Capital Flows and Global Imbalances." Journal of the European Economic

       Association 12 (5): 1240­1284

Arellano, Cristina (2008). "Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Economies,"

       American Economic Review 98(3): 690-712.

Bulow, Jeremy and Kenneth Rogoff (1989). "Sovereign Debt: Is to Forgive to Forget?"

       American Economic Review 79: 43-50.

Cole, Harold L. and Patrick J. Kehoe (1995). "The Role of Institutions in Reputation Models

       of Sovereign Debt," Journal of Monetary Economics 35: 45-64.

Dreher, Axel, Andreas Fuchs, Roland Hodler, Bradley C. Parks, Paul A. Raschky, and Michael

       J. Tierney (2019). "African Leaders and the Geography of China's Foreign Assistance,"

       Journal of Development Economics 140: 44-71.

Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz (1981). "Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and

       Empirical Analysis," The Review of Economic Studies 48: 289-309.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Matteo Maggiori (2019). "China versus the United States: IMS meets

       IPS." American Economic Review 109 (May): 476-481.



                                                                                         21
Foresight Africa (2018). "Top Priorities for the Continent in 2018," Africa Growth Initiative

       at Brookings.

Furceri, Davide and Aleksandra Zdzienicka (2012), "How Costly Are Debt Crises?, Journal of

       International Money and Finance 31(4): 726-742.

Horn, Sebastian, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Christoph Trebesch (2019). "China's Overseas

       Lending," NBER Working Paper No. 26050.

Ilzetzki, Ethan, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth Rogoff (2019). "Exchange Arrangements

       Entering the 21st Century: Which Anchor Will Hold?" Quarterly Journal of Economics

       134(2): 599-646.

Mendoza, Enrique and Vivian Yue (2012). "A General Equilibrium Model Of Sovereign

       Default and Business Cycles," Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(2): 889-946.

World Bank, 2018. International Debt Statistics, Washington DC.




                                                                                          22
                                       Table 1: Calibration

Parameter                                      Calibration              Data matched
Risk aversion                                      s=2               Real Business Cycle
International riskless interest rate             rB = 0.04           Real Business Cycle
Technology shock autocorrelation                 a = 0.75            GDP AR(1) process
Technology shock standard deviation             s = 0.074            GDP AR(1) process
Probability of international redemption          qB = 0.50      Duration of each default
International Output costs                       B = 0.10            Interest Rate Spread
Discount factor                                  b = 0.50              Debt over GDP
NPC investor interest cost                      rD = 0.04            Same as International
Probability of NPC redemption                    qD = 0.50      Duration of each default
NPC debt output cost                            D = 0.052            China-Angola trade




                         Table 2: Invariant Distribution Properties

Economy                State                   Probability    Debt        Debt         Welfare
                       (Investor Types)           (%)         Type      (% GDP)       (% GDP)
                       Both                        -           B            -
Version 1:                                                     D            -
Without NPC            International              96.7         B          42.5               0
Investors              NPC                         -           D            -
                       None                       3.2          -            -
Version 2:             Both                       24.7         B          20.3
With NPC Investors,                                            D           9.6
Incomplete             International              27.5         B          24.7            7.2
Information            NPC                        11.0         D           6.7
                       None                       36.8         -            -
Version 3:             Both                       32.5         B          16.5
With NPC Investors,                                            D           1.0
Complete               International              62.2         B          38.5            9.0
Information            NPC                        2.5          D           0.1
                       None                       2.8          -            -




                                                                                                 23
                                 Figure 1: Default Set for Neutral Technology Shock


                      1.0

                      0.9

                      0.8
B (Fraction of GDP)




                      0.7                                 DEFAULT SET
                      0.6

                      0.5

                      0.4
                      0.3              NO DEFAULT
                      0.2
                      0.1

                      0.0
                        0.00    0.12      0.24   0.36     0.48     0.60    0.72     0.84     0.96
                                                   D (Fraction of GDP)




                        Figure 2: International Investors' Assessment of Probability of Default

            1.2


            1.0


            0.8


            0.6                                  Complete Information

            0.4                                  Incomplete Information


            0.2


            0.0
                       0.00    0.12      0.24    0.36    0.48     0.60     0.72    0.84     0.96

        -0.2

                                                   D (Fraction of GDP)




                                                                                                    24
                                                                    Figure 3: Undisclosed Debt Sustainability

                                       1.0

                                       0.9
Suststainable Debt (Fraction of GDP)




                                       0.8

                                       0.7

                                       0.6

                                       0.5

                                       0.4

                                       0.3

                                       0.2

                                       0.1

                                       0.0
                                                           0.20         0.30          0.40               0.50          0.60          0.70       0.80
                                                                                                     Beta

                                                                           Without NPC Investors                With NPC Investors




                                                              Figure 4: Sensibility to NPC Opportunity Interest Rate


                                                      30


                                                      25


                                                      20
                                       Debt (% GDP)




                                                      15


                                                      10


                                                      5


                                                      0
                                                                   -2                        0                     2                        4
                                                                                NPC Investor Oportunity Interest Rate (%)
                                                                               International Investors            NPC Investor




                                                                                                                                                       25
