                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  CAN MICROFINANCE UNLOCK A POVERTY TRAP FOR SOME ENTREPRENEURS?

                                       Abhijit Banerjee
                                        Emily Breza
                                        Esther Duflo
                                       Cynthia Kinnan

                                     Working Paper 26346
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26346


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2019




We thank Bruno Barsanetti, Ozgur Bozcaga, Janjala Chirakijja, Ofer Cohen, Harris Eppsteiner,
Zoe Hitzig, Taylor Lewis, Cecilia Peluffo, Sneha Stephen, Laura Stilwell and Yuta Toyama for
their excellent research assistance. We thank the Centre for Microfinance at the Institute for
Financial Research and Management, especially Parul Agarwal, for their help with the survey
implementation. We thank Paco Buera, Edward Glaeser, Rema Hanna, Dan Keniston, Asim
Khwaja, Maggie McMillan, Rohini Pande, Michael Peters, K.B. Prathap, Neng Wang and Bilal
Zia for their comments as well as numerous seminar and conference participants. We are grateful
to the NSF for generous financial support (SES 1156182). Previous title: "Does Microfinance
Foster Business Growth? The Importance of Entrepreneurial Heterogeneity." MIT IRB
#1203004973. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Abhijit Banerjee, Emily Breza, Esther Duflo, and Cynthia Kinnan. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Microfinance Unlock a Poverty Trap for Some Entrepreneurs?
Abhijit Banerjee, Emily Breza, Esther Duflo, and Cynthia Kinnan
NBER Working Paper No. 26346
October 2019
JEL No. D25,O1,O14,O16

                                         ABSTRACT

Can microcredit help unlock a poverty trap for some people by putting their businesses on a
different trajectory? Could the small microcredit treatment effects often found for the average
household mask important heterogeneity? In Hyderabad, India, we find that "gung ho
entrepreneurs" (GEs), households who were already running a business before microfinance
entered, show persistent benefits that increase over time. Six years later, the treated GEs own
businesses that have 35% more assets and generate double the revenues as those in control
neighborhoods. We find almost no effects on non-GE households. A model of technology choice
in which talented entrepreneurs can access either a diminishing-returns technology, or a more
productive technology with a fixed cost, generates dynamics matching the data. These results
show that heterogeneity in entrepreneurial ability is important and persistent. For talented but
low-wealth entrepreneurs, short-term access to credit can indeed facilitate escape from a poverty
trap.

Abhijit Banerjee                                Esther Duflo
Department of Economics, E52-540                Department of Economics, E52-544
MIT                                             MIT
50 Memorial Drive                               50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142                             Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER                                        and NBER
banerjee@mit.edu                                eduflo@mit.edu

Emily Breza                                     Cynthia Kinnan
Harvard University                              Department of Economics
Littauer Center, M28                            Tufts University
1805 Cambridge Street                           8 Upper Campus Road
Cambridge, MA 02138                             Medford, MA 02155
and NBER                                        and NBER
ebreza@fas.harvard.edu                          cynthia.kinnan@tufts.edu
                                MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                              2

                                           1. Introduction

   The idea that non-convexities may play a role in the persistence of poverty has a long
history (Dasgupta and Ray (1986); Banerjee and Newman (1993); Ahgion and Bolton
(1997); Lloyd-Ellis and Bernhardt (2000); Banerjee and Duflo (2005); Buera et al. (2011)).
This idea is supported by anecdotal evidence that, within the same sector, poor (mi-
cro)entrepreneurs use technologies that are ine cient but cheap, while wealthier en-
trepreneurs use technologies that are more e cient but have high up-front costs (Lewis
et al., 2001). However, rigorous empirical support for this idea has been elusive.1
   In this paper we document evidence that non-convexities2 can and do give rise to
poverty-trap dynamics. We also uncover an important reason why the search for such
evidence has been challenging: households are heterogeneous, with some households hav-
ing the potential to move up into a more-e cient, higher-fixed-cost mode of operation
while others are unable or unwilling to do so. For example, some households are able
to supervise several employees working with sewing machines--if they can buy or rent
the machines and find space for them--while others are only able to sew by hand by
themselves and face steeply diminishing returns.
   In such a world, the impact of improved access to credit would be heterogeneous in a
specific way. Some people are borrowing for consumption and are not interested in starting
a business. Even among those who are willing to start a business, some may only have
access to an ine cient technology with diminishing returns. Cheaper credit may prompt
them to start a new business, but their target business size is small and therefore any
revenue and profit e ects will be small. In contrast, those who have access to the high
return-high fixed cost technology, who we call gung-ho entrepreneurs (henceforth GEs)
have a larger target business size and therefore will take full advantage of the additional
credit. As a result, the revenue and profit e ects will be large. Moreover, access to
credit will allow some intermediate-wealth GE households to escape the poverty trap, and
consequently their treatment e ects will persist and increase over time, even if credit is
withdrawn.
1
  Kaboski and Townsend (2011) estimate a structural model assuming production non-convexities. Specif-
ically, each period, households have access to a single, indivisible and illiquid project of stochastic, fixed
scale, and households must decide whether to operate that specific business or work in the labor mar-
ket. However, this assumption of non-convexities in production is not directly testable in their data, and
they are unable to precisely detect any average impacts on investment. Instead, their structural model of
consumption smoothing, precautionary savings, and investment has more power to explain the observed
consumption patterns in the data. McKenzie and Woodru (2006) argue that fixed costs of starting a
business do not appear to constrain Mexican microentrepreneurs. (Note this is distinct from whether
there are fixed costs of moving from one mode of production to another.)
2
  The literature examining the persistence of poverty and the possibility of multiple equilibria uses vari-
ous concepts including non-convexities, local increasing returns, and fixed costs. It is challenging if not
impossible to di erentiate these concepts, which have similar implications ­ some firms will be `trapped'
at a small scale while others, with similar fundamentals but better initial conditions, will be able to grow
much larger. We will use these notions interchangeably.
                           MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                  3

   We look for evidence of non-convexities and poverty traps using a new wave of data
collection on the sample of households that were included in a microcredit RCT in Hy-
derabad, India (Banerjee et al., 2015). In 2006, a microfinance lender, Spandana, entered
into 52 neighborhoods, randomly selected out of 104 in a matched-pair design. The main
finding of our original study was that, on average, the e ects of microfinance were very
small, two years and four years after introduction. These results are broadly consistent
with those of five other RCTs (Attanasio et al. (2015); Augsburg et al. (2015); Crépon
et al. (2015); Karlan and Zinman (2009); Tarozzi et al. (2015); Angelucci et al. (2015)).
However, for businesses that existed before Spandana entered, we found an expansion in
businesses scale (sales, inputs and investment) after two years, and an average increase
in profits of Rs. 2,206 in treatment areas, representing a 100% increase relative to the
control mean of Rs. 2,000. The overall e ect on an index of business outcomes was sig-
nificant and positive (0.09 standard deviation, with a p-value of 0.057 after correcting for
multiple inference). Immediately after the first endline, the control neighborhoods became
eligible for microcredit. Two years later, the control group where as likely to have taken a
microcredit loan, but the treatment group had borrowed for longer and had larger loans.
The di erences between business performance were not significant any more, even for the
group that had a business before, although we still find that they had higher profits on
average (p-value 0.125).
   Meager (2019) shows that the di erence between those with a pre-existing business and
those without one is a common pattern in microfinance studies. In a meta-analysis she
finds that that, on average and in 5 of the 6 sites she studies, existing business owners
experience more-positive treatment e ects than other households. Moreover, in a study
using data from a Moroccan microcredit RCT leveraging machine learning methods to
detect heterogeneous treatment e ects, Chernozhukov et al. (2018) use double machine
learning and find that the existence of a prior business is the only household level vari-
able that consistently predicts a higher treatment e ect. It makes economic sense: In the
absence of microcredit, the cost of capital is high. Therefore, only those with high net
returns ­ either due to high productivity, preferences for self-employment, or lower out-
side options ­ should select into entrepreneurship. We therefore identify the pre-existing
business owners as the gung-ho entrepreneurs (GE). The rest of the sample is a mix of
consumption borrowers and "reluctant entrepreneurs" (REs), who may start a business
when credit is cheap but do not intend to grow it.
   Shortly after our second endline survey, there was a severe crisis of the microfinance
movement in Andhra Pradesh and the entire microfinance sector discontinued its activities
in Hyderabad. (A timeline of events appears in Figure 2.) By that time, GE households in
control neighborhoods had borrowed Rs. 2428 in total from Spandana on average, and GE
households in treatment households had borrowed Rs. 4625, or 76% more on average. Two
                                MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                           4

years later, six years after the treatment neighborhoods were first exposed to microcredit,
four years after the control neighborhoods got access, and two years after everyone lost
access to microfinance, we went back to all the households included in the original study.
While we still do not detect significant impacts on consumption on average, we now
do find positive, statistically significant average impacts on a number of key business
outcomes including total entrepreneurship rates, profits, business scale (purchases and
stock of assets), turnover (expenses and revenues) and employment (employees and wage
bill).3 The 6-year business impacts we document here are more precise and larger than
those seen 2 or 4 years after the initial intervention.
   Crucially, while detectable on average, these positive impacts are driven by the GE
subsample. Panel A of Figure 1 presents the GE treatment e ects pictorially across
the three survey waves for a subset of business outcomes. These firms' asset stocks,
investment, self-employment hours, business expenses, revenues and profits are all higher
in treatment neighborhoods by statistically and economically significant margins. Self-
employment hours increase almost 20%, the stock and flow of business assets increase by
almost 25% and 40%, respectively, business expenses increase by 80%, and revenues more
than double, relative to GEs in control areas. We also find positive and significant e ects on
the average profits of GEs, with e ects concentrated in the top tercile of the distribution.
For the GE subsample, we also find large significant impacts on both business and non-
business durables spending.4 They are also borrowing more from informal lenders. This
is consistent with the presence of a non-convexity: in response to additional microcredit
access, these households seek out even more credit from other sources. Finally, while we
find no impact on average non durable consumption in this group, we do see positive
impacts for most of the distribution, for the 30th to 80th quantiles. (See figure 3, panel
E.) The results for this group demonstrate that the e ects of a temporary influx of cheaper
credit persist, and even increase over time, even though the control group got access as
well, and even though both groups eventually lost access to microcredit.
   In contrast, for the non-GEs (comprising REs and consumption borrowers), there is no
evidence of impacts on most business outcomes or on consumption. Panel B of Figure
1 presents a subset of business treatment e ects for the non-GE sample across the three
survey waves for a subset of business outcomes. The e ects are much smaller than those
for the GEs, are generally not significantly di erent from zero, and show no tendency to
increase over time. We also find that their informal borrowing went down. The lack of
e ect on non GEs is is driven by two facts. First, only 20% of these households start
3
  The findings on wages and employment are consistent with the general equilibrium predictions laid out
theoretically by Buera et al. (2017) and tested empirically in the context of India by Breza and Kinnan
(2018).
4
  If household durables, which include both items like gold and those like television, are a combination of
savings and consumption, this suggests that the income gains experienced by the GEs are partly saved
and partly consumed.
                                MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                           5

businesses after 2006, either in treatment areas or in control.5 Many of these households
use cheaper credit to replace existing, more expensive sources of credit (Banerjee and
Duflo, 2014). Second, even the businesses they do start remain small.
   Our analysis of the di erences between the GE and non-GE samples poses several
challenges. First, the GE businesses are, by definition, older on average than the non-GE
businesses. Thus, it could be the case that the non-GE businesses simply need more time
and/or experience before their trajectory starts to resemble that of the GEs---this would
be a story not of heterogeneity, but of a head start. Related, it could be that the GEs
are not inherently better, but instead are benefiting from a first-mover advantage (eg,
setting up the first grocery store in the community instead of the fourth). A di erent set
of challenges relates to the fact that, as mentioned above, only a small share of non-GEs
(approximately 20%), start businesses after Spandana's entry. This raises the concern that
the businesses which are started are equally productive as the GEs, but the e ects are
attenuated by a large number of zeros. This in turn makes it challenging to test the idea
that the presence of microfinance induces some reluctant entrepreneurs to start new small
businesses, which look negatively selected compared to the existing (ie, GE) businesses.
   To overcome these challenges, we take advantage of the fact that Spandana entered
di erent neighborhoods in a staggered fashion, over 13 months between April 2006 and
April 2007. As a result, we observe businesses in di erent treatment areas that opened
up at the exact same time (say, August of 2006): some opened before Spandana opened
in its area (e.g., Spandana's branch may have opened in October); others opened after
Spandana opened in its area (e.g., Spandana may have opened in May). Moreover, ran-
domization was done at the matched pair level. Therefore, for each treated area, we
have a pre-identified control area which serves as a counterfactual. Comparing firms that
opened in this common period before Spandana arrived in a treatment area to those that
opened at the same time in the matched pair gives us the pure GE treatment e ect for
the youngest pre-Spandana firms. Comparing firms that opened in this common period
but after Spandana arrived in a treatment area to those in the matched pair gives the
combined selection treatment e ects, again on the youngest firms. If the GEs are in fact
advantageously selected on productivity (or alternatively, the non-GEs are negatively se-
lected), then the treatment-control di erences for the pre-Spandana firms should be larger
than those for the post-Spandana firms created at the same point in calendar time.6 If,

5
  Among households that did not have a business in 2006 (ie, the non-GEs), 18% have opened a business
by our third endline survey in 2012.
6
  The idea of comparing a set of business selected without microcredit access and that are then "shocked"
with microcredit to identify a pure treatment e ect on an advantageously selected sample is akin to a
non-experimental version of the experiment in Beaman et al. (2015). In contrast to them, we lack a source
of identification that allows us to estimate a pure selection e ect (microfinance cannot be taken away from
the businesses that selected in post microfinance entry). We are, however, able to follow the businesses
over time to understand if and how the e ects persist.
                           MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                 6

on the other hand, the GEs are simply benefiting from a head start, then within this
"overlapping" sample we should see no di erential treatment-control di erences.
    In fact, we find that, within this sample, the GEs demonstrate large positive treatment
e ects, while the non-GEs demonstrate "e ects" (comprising treatment and selection ef-
fects) that are imprecise but negative. A back-of-the-envelope decomposition shows that,
if the true treatment e ect on the non-GE entrepreneurs (the "reluctant entrepreneurs") is
zero, then the negative selection e ect is large: the non-GEs would be worse by two-thirds
of a standard deviation along an index of business outcomes.



   Motivated by these large and persistent e ect of early access to microcredit on the GE,
we explore quantitatively how they could have arisen as a result of an intervention which
provided only temporary di erential exposure to microcredit for the treatment group. We
use the data to structurally estimate a simple model of firm growth in the presence of
credit constraints. The model allows for two di erent technologies, one with diminishing
returns and one with constant returns, with a fixed cost required to adopt the better (ie,
CRS) technology. There is also heterogeneity among the entrepreneurs­one group has
access both technologies (we think of these as the GEs) while the other (the REs) can
only access the diminishing returns technology.
   This model generates a process in which the impact of temporary access to some addi-
tional credit cause a divergence among the GE firms­but not among the RE firms­thereby
helping to explain the large persistent impacts on the GEs. This divergence occurs in large
part because the model generates a poverty trap: without cheap credit, talented but low-
wealth households cannot a ord the minimum e cient scale of the better technology and
so remain stuck at the maximum e cient scale for the diminishing returns technology.
Households with enough wealth, on the other hand, can a ord the fixed cost of operating
the constant returns technology and thereafter do not face diminishing returns. The key
role of microcredit in this model is to reduce the minimum wealth level at which house-
holds can switch into the better technology, allowing intermediate-wealth households to
escape the poverty trap. (See Figure 9.) Thus the impacts of even a short-term headstart
in microfinance access can persist because the extra wealth that households earned when
they have access to microcredit can make them rich enough to continue to run the high
technology even when microcredit is withdrawn.
   The model does a good job in generating impacts very similar to what we observe in the
data. We also show that households escaping from the poverty trap are a quantitatively
important driver of the persistent e ects we observe: these households explain two-thirds
of growth in revenues and almost three quarters of growth in capital stocks. The remainder
is explained by households who were already out of the poverty trap zone further scaling
up their businesses.
                               MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                         7

   This paper builds on a large body of evidence studying the returns to microfinance
(Attanasio et al. (2015); Augsburg et al. (2015); Crépon et al. (2015); Karlan and Zinman
(2009); Tarozzi et al. (2015); Angelucci et al. (2015)). While we follow others in our focus
on heterogeneity in the returns to credit (specifically, Angelucci et al. (2015); Banerjee
et al. (2015); Meager (2019); ?), we are the first to document a pattern of divergence over
time between treatment and control groups. In our case, this is driven by a predictable
group ­ individuals who opted into self-employment when credit constraints were tight.7
Importantly, we combine two previously unstudied sources of variation from the original
Spandana experiment ­ the date of establishment of household businesses and the timing
of the lender's roll-out through Hyderabad - to show that the heterogeneity is driven by
selection, not experience or entrepreneur age. This also allows us to show that businesses
started because of microfinance are indeed worse, holding age and experience fixed.
   As we mention above, while many theoretical papers are built on the idea that non-
convexities can be a source of poverty traps, finding concrete evidence has been very
challenging, and this is the first paper that illustrates the mechanism for small-scale
entrepreneurs outside of extreme poverty. Our paper joins two contemporary studies
presenting evidence of non-convexities and poverty trap dynamics in di erent settings.
Balboni et al. (2018) find evidence consistent with poverty traps among the ultra-poor
in Bangladesh, following up on the evaluation of a large productive asset transfer an-
alyzed in Bandiera et al. (2017). Kaboski et al. (2019) also investigate the possibility
of non-convexities in an experiment in which Ugandan households were given a choice
over riskier vs. safer lotteries. They find evidence of increasing returns, but driven by a
completely di erent mechanism­land purchases.
   These findings have a number of important implications for credit market policy. First,
microcredit organizations often emphasize the non-selective nature of their lending as an
advantage. But if most of the business growth comes from a minority of firms--who in turn
provide employment opportunities which may help others avoid "reluctant" entrepreneur-
ship--then a more selective approach may be better. While we have no reason to question
the fact that even the REs benefit from the loan (see the discussion of distributional ef-
fects below, and in Angelucci et al. (2015) who carefully explore the possibility that some
groups end up doing worse from microcredit), there may be a case for focusing more en-
ergy on identifying the GEs and helping them grow. Second, it raises the issue of whether,
from the point of view of growth, much bigger (and more selective) loans are desirable.8

7
  Additionally, Karaivanov and Yindok (2015) estimate a model which makes a distinction between "vol-
untary" and "involuntary" entrepreneurship using data from urban Thailand and examines heterogeneous
responses to credit.
8
  La Porta and Shleifer (2008) make the case that most of the firms in the informal economy are marginal
to the main story of growth. Related, Diao et al. (2016) show that, in Tanzania, a small subset of firms
experience growth in employment and labor productivity, suggestive of positive returns to capital, while
the remainder do not.
                                MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                           8

Moreover, our results on the crowd-in of other credit sources for GEs--and the opposite
for REs--demonstrate that households are aware of their ability (or lack thereof) to scale
up their business. (Hussam et al. (2018) also provide evidence that microentrepreneurs
in India are aware of the marginal returns to additional capital of their own businesses,
and those of their peers.) This has important implications in terms of designing a menu
of credit contracts that can induce GEs and REs to select di erent options.9
   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we describe the
experimental setup of Banerjee et al. (2015), the AP microfinance ordinance, and our
2012 survey. Section 3 presents results for the full sample. Section 4 presents results for
a unique subsample which allows us to distinguish selection from other reasons GEs and
REs could di er. In Section 5, we present our model and estimation results, and show
how the parameters shed light on the poverty trap. Section 6 concludes.



                              2. Data and Experimental Design

2.1. Setting and Previous Work. We build upon two existing rounds of panel data
collected by Banerjee et al. (2015). As discussed in that paper, 104 neighborhoods in
Hyderabad were randomized so that 52 received access to credit from Spandana, a large
lender that was then moving into Hyderabad, starting in early 2006. The remaining
neighborhoods only received access in mid-2008 after a round of data collection conducted
in late 2007 - early 2008. A second round of data collection was conducted in mid-2010 to
examine longer-term impacts of access to microfinance. Coincidentally, this second endline
was completed just a few months before the microfinance landscape abruptly changed, as
we discuss below. Figure 2 shows the timeline of the data collection as it relates to changes
in microfinance access.
   Banerjee et al. (2015) examined the e ects of the intervention on outcomes measured in
2007-8 and in mid-2010.10 Key outcomes examined in that work include borrowing from
various sources, consumption, business creation, and business income, as well as measures
of human development outcomes such as education, health, and women's empowerment.11


9
 Related, Maitra et al. (2017) show that incentivized agents can identify productive and lower-risk bor-
rowers in West Bengal.
10
   As described below, the survey instrument for this paper is based on that used in Banerjee et al. (2015)
to facilitate comparisons across time, although new modules were added.
11
   We interpret the comparisons between treatment and control as measuring the e ects of increased expo-
sure to microfinance in general. The loans o ered by Spandana were very similar to those of the competitors
operating in Hyderabad at the time. Borrowers, who were organized into joint liability groups, met on a
weekly basis and made weekly installment payments. At the successful completion of a loan cycle, bor-
rowers were o ered larger loan sizes for subsequent cycles. In fact, conversations with former borrowers in
2011 indicate that residents of Hyderabad viewed the lenders as exchangeable.
                               MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                           9

At the first (2007-8) endline, treated households did borrow more from microcredit in-
stitutions (though fewer than a third of treated households borrowed).12 No significant
di erence was found on consumption, but there were significant positive impacts on invest-
ment in durables. Treated households started more businesses, and those whose businesses
were already in existence before microcredit (ie, the GEs) invested more in those busi-
nesses. The average profits of these existing businesses increased, with particularly large
gains at higher quantiles, while the median marginal new (ie, RE) business was both less
profitable and less likely to have even one employee in treatment than in control areas.
   At the second (mid-2010) endline, when microcredit was available both in treatment
and control groups but treatment group households had the opportunity to borrow for
a longer time, businesses in the treatment group had significantly more assets. But the
average business was still small and not very profitable, though, once again, a tail of
businesses appeared to experience gains from longer microfinance access. There was still
no di erence in average consumption. No e ect was found on women's empowerment or
human development outcomes either 2 or 4 years after the initial treatment.
   These results hint at important heterogeneity. However, many unresolved issues re-
mained. Since during the 2006-2010 period, treatment households always had access to
microfinance, one question is whether the impacts seen, particularly those on business
outcomes, are sustainable in the absence of continued access to new loans. Another ques-
tion is whether newly created businesses will, given more time, catch up to the existing
businesses, or whether they are on permanently di erent trajectories. These are among
the questions we address in this paper.

2.2. Andhra Pradesh Microfinance Ordinance. The second round of endline data
analyzed in Banerjee et al. (2015) was collected in mid-2010, only a few months before
the Andhra Pradesh (AP) state government put forth a sweeping new regulation of the
microfinance sector. On October 15, 2010, the AP government unexpectedly issued an
emergency ordinance (The Andhra Pradesh Micro Finance Institutions Ordinance, 2010)
to regulate the activities of MFIs operating in the state. The government was worried
about widespread over-borrowing by its citizens and alleged abuses by microfinance col-
lection agents. The provisions of the Ordinance (promulgated as a law in December 2010)
brought the activities of the MFIs in the state to a complete halt. Under the law, MFIs
were not permitted to approach clients to seek repayment and were further barred from
disbursing any new loans.13 In the months following the ordinance, almost 100% of micro-
finance borrowers in AP defaulted. Furthermore, Indian banks pulled back tremendously
on their willingness to lend to any MFI across the country, and MFIs even outside of
12
   As discussed in Banerjee et al. (2015), other MFIs entered Hyderabad between 2006 and 2008, when the
control group was treated. That the control group had access to microfinance before Spandana entered
may make the initial treatment less powerful, but it does not invalidate the original experimental design.
13
   However, it was not illegal for borrowers to seek out their lenders to make payments.
                                MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                             10

Andhra Pradesh were forced to contract their lending activities, at least temporarily.14
In mid-2011, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) issued new guidelines for the microfinance
sector and established itself as the national regulator for the industry. In 2012, when we
returned to collect an additional survey round, the environment for MFIs in the rest of
India had improved in large part due to the RBI's actions, but MFIs in AP were still not
permitted to operate under state law and were unable to collect on their loans or issue
new credit.
   The respondents surveyed for the Banerjee et al. (2015) study experienced the direct
consequences of the AP ordinance. Approximately one third of respondents reported
having a loan outstanding at the time of the second endline survey in mid-2010, and close
to 50% had taken at least one microloan from any lender between 2004 and 2010.15 The
AP Ordinance had two e ects on borrowers in our sample ­ the default (windfall) e ect
and the e ect of a reduction in future credit. In Section 3.6, below, we provide evidence
that will help disentangle those two e ects (and strongly suggests that the e ects are not
driven by the windfall e ects).

2.3. Follow-Up Data Collection. In mid-2012, we returned to the respondents of the
2010 survey round of Banerjee et al. (2015) and conducted a follow-up survey with 5,744
households located in 103 of the original 104 combined treatment and control neighbor-
hoods.16 In addition to the outcomes analyzed in Banerjee et al. (2015), we added a
module to capture the household's worries, happiness, and time preferences, and retro-
spective questions about the household's exposure to the AP crisis and desire to borrow
form MFIs in the future. We also added survey questions about the respondent's social
network.17
   At the time of the survey, it had been 6 years since the original treatment group was
first exposed to microfinance and 4 years since the control group had gained access to
microfinance from Spandana, the implementing partner. All of the respondents experi-
enced a simultaneous withdrawal of microfinance from Hyderabad in response to the AP
ordinance shortly after the 2010 survey round. Therefore, when we compare outcomes
between the original treatment and control groups, we measure the impacts of the inten-
sity of past exposure to microfinance against a backdrop where microfinance is no longer
available.
14
   See Breza and Kinnan (2018) for an analysis of the impacts of the ordinance on lending outside of Andhra
Pradesh.
15
   See Table 2, columns 3 and 4, respectively.
16
   One (treatment) area was dropped because it was used for piloting. It was crucial to pilot in an area where
past waves of surveying had taken place since familiarity with surveyors significantly increases households'
willingness to respond accurately. All our results below control for strata dummies from the original strata
assignment and therefore also omit the control area assigned to the same stratum.
17
   The network outcomes are analyzed more fully in a separate paper (Banerjee et al., 2018b), which focuses
specifically on the impact of microfinance on social networks.
                              MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                      11

   Table 1 provides a description of the households surveyed in the 2012 round. The table
displays the means of demographic, consumption, and business outcomes for households
in the control group. We also include information about the borrowing behavior of these
households at the time of the second endline (2010), which is a close proxy for the house-
hold's borrowing right before the AP crisis. Note that approximately 30% of the control
group had an outstanding microloan at that time.

                                 3. Reduced Form Results

   We aim to use the empirical setting to explore the long-run, persistent impacts of mi-
crofinance. In the first part of our empirical analysis, we follow Banerjee et al. (2015)
and investigate the intent to treat (ITT) comparisons between the initial treatment neigh-
borhoods and control neighborhoods. We interpret the results of such comparisons as the
impacts of having greater access to microfinance for four years instead of two (in the past).
The average treatment e ects regression takes the form

                               yin = ­ + --  T reatn + "s­n + Áin

where i indexes individuals and n indexes neighborhoods, yia are outcome variables (gener-
ally measured in 2012), T reatn is an indicator for treatment neighborhoods in the original
study (where microfinance entered in 2006), and -- is the coe cient of interest. "s­n is
a stratum fixed e ect.18 For all specifications, standard errors are clustered at the area
level.
   While we are interested in tracking the average impacts of microfinance over the entire
population, we are especially keen to understand the di erential impacts for gung-ho
entrepreneurs vs. other households. For these specifications, the regressions take the form

             yin = ­ + " GEin + --1  T reatn + --2 GEin  T reatin + "s­n + Áin

Here, we indicate that household i in area a is a gung-ho entrepreneur by setting GEin = 1.
The coe cient --1 can be interpreted as the treatment e ect on the non-GEs (who include
both consumption borrowers and REs, who started a business because of the greater credit
access), while the coe cient --2 is the di erential treatment e ect for the GEs above and
beyond the impact on the non-GEs. Thus, the total treatment e ect for the GEs is --1 + --2 .
   The following sections discuss results for intent-to-treat estimates of treatment e ects
on multiple sets of outcomes. For most, we present each set of results in a regression
table with two panels: Panel A shows average treatment e ects for each outcome variable
(the first specification described above), while Panel B shows heterogeneous e ects by
entrepreneurial status (the second specification described above). We report the p-values
18Altogether, there were 52 strata, or pairs. Pairs were formed to minimize the sum across pairs A, B
(area A avg loan balance ­ area B avg loan balance)2 + (area A per capita consumption ­ area B per
capita consumption)2 . Within each pair one neighborhood was randomly allocated to treatment.
                               MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                          12

of the total treatment e ect --1 + --2 for the gung-ho entrepreneurs at the bottom of each
table.

3.1. E ects on Microcredit Borrowing. We aim to identify the persistent, long-run
impacts of microfinance two years after the withdrawal of microfinance from the entire
state of Andhra Pradesh. Before doing so, it is important to first understand how the
exposure to microfinance was a ected by the initial treatment status. Over the course of
the three survey rounds, we have collected a number of measures that capture the exposure
to microfinance. Table 2 presents the treatment e ects for a set of these measures.
   A natural measure of exposure is the likelihood of ever borrowing from any MFI. Panels
A and B contain regressions of indicators for past borrowing at di erent points in time
on treatment status. In column 1 of panel A, the outcome is an indicator for having
borrowed in the three years prior to endline 1 (in 2007/2008); since there was essentially
no microfinance lending in Hyderabad prior to 2005 this is equivalent to an indicator for
having ever borrowed. Treatment households were approximately 11 percentage points
more likely to have ever borrowed than control households.19 Columns 2 and 3 measure
the incidence of borrowing around the time of endline 2 (2010). Column 2 captures
any borrowing from microfinance in the three years prior to endline 2, while Column 3
reports the e ects of the initial treatment on having a loan outstanding in October 2010,
immediately before the AP Ordinance and 3-11 months after endline 2 was administered.20
There are no detectable di erential impacts on the probability to have a current loan before
or after the time of endline 2. This evidence suggests that by 2010, the control group had
caught up to the treatment group in terms of current access to credit. However, the
treatment group did get a head start, and they had a long time to try microfinance. In
column 4, we consider an indicator for whether the household ever reported borrowing at
any time in any survey round. This is the union of the outcomes from Columns 1-3 and a
retrospective question asked at the time of endline 3 about loans outstanding in October,
2010 at the time of the crisis. While approximately 50% of the control group had ever
borrowed before the AP ordinance, households in the treatment group were 4.4 percentage
points more likely to have ever borrowed (a 9% increase).
   The original treatment could have also a ected households via the intensive margin,
namely the number of loans taken over time, the number of MFIs from which the household
borrowed, and the total amount of credit taken. Panels C and D focus on this intensive
margin. All outcomes in these panels are snapshots at the time of endline 2.21 Here,
19This is slightly larger than the 8.4pp treatment e ect on having an MFI loan reported by Banerjee et al.
(2015) because that number includes only loans outstanding at endline 1, while the 11pp value includes
loans already fully repaid.
20This variable is measured using retrospective questions in endline 3.
21We would ideally also like to measure each household's total stock of microfinance taken between 2006
and October 2010 from all MFIs. However, this is infeasible because the value of loans taken and fully
repaid between survey waves was not measured. However, the existence of such loans (though not the
                                MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                            13

Column 1 captures whether a household had an active loan at the time of endline 2.
Columns 2 and 3 explore the number and the total value of the MFI loans outstanding at
the time of the second endline survey. While the number of MFI loans22 is no di erent in
treatment and control neighborhoods, the overall amount of credit is larger in treatment
areas. The average treatment household reports Rs. 946 more borrowing than the average
control household. This amounts to a 14% increase in credit over the control group.
Because treatment group borrowers had earlier access to microfinance through Spandana,
this e ect captures the fact that most microlenders increase the loan size o ered to clients
over time.23 In column 4, we report that treatment households are 50% more likely to
have a Spandana loan than households in the control group, and column 5 shows that
they had Rs. 1,132 more credit from Spandana in 2010.
   We next ask whether the exposure e ects vary between GEs and non-GEs. Panels
B and D capture the heterogeneous treatment e ects. On the extensive margin, we do
not detect any significant di erences in ever borrowing from a microfinance institution
between gung-ho entrepreneurs and others (Panel B and cols 1 to 2 of Panel D). However,
the point estimate for the di erential impact on the total amount of MFI credit taken in 2
at endline 2, is large, although insignificant (Panel D, column 3). We do find a treatment
e ect on the amount borrowed from Spandana in 2010 of Rs. 800 for non-GEs. This
treatment e ect is twice as large for the GEs (Panel D, column 5).
   Overall, households in the original treatment neighborhoods started borrowing earlier
and were more likely to ever borrow from an MFI. They also had more credit outstanding
before the AP crisis. Though we cannot measure the total value of loans ever taken from
microfinance, the evidence also suggests that treatment households borrowed for longer
(more loan cycles) and had a larger overall stock of microfinance credit. We also find
some suggestive evidence that the gung-ho entrepreneurs were taking larger loans (but
were equally likely to be borrowers) from microlenders a few months before the crisis.
   Finally, we note that there is no single su cient statistic that captures all of these
e ects. In the results that follow, we focus on the reduced form ITT treatment e ects.

3.2. Total borrowing. We can also look at treatment e ects on borrowing from non-
microcredit sources, and borrowing overall. This is instructive for several reasons. First,
households who are not constrained should simply refinance older, more expensive debt
with newer, cheaper debt, with no net impact on total borrowing as long as they borrowed
more from informal sources than was available from microfinance. Credit-constrained
households, on the other hand, will increase total borrowing (Banerjee and Duflo, 2014).

amount) was measured, so we can construct a proxy for ever borrowing at any time, presented in Panels
A and B.
22This can be interpreted as the number of lenders since it is extremely rare for a borrower to have multiple
loans from one lender at a point in time.
23Increases of between Rs. 2,000 and Rs. 5,000 between loan cycles are common.
                                MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                            14

From a policy perspective, understanding e ects on total borrowing are relevant: if new
credit fully crowds out existing sources, the e ect is not to increase total liquidity, but only
to reduce the interest rate at which the marginal unit of capital is borrowed. Any crowd-in,
especially among GEs, is also relevant for interpreting the magnitudes of the treatment
e ects on business inputs, revenues and profits. And, as we argue below, patterns of
crowd-in or -out are informative about whether households are aware of their own "type."
   Table 3 reports treatment e ects on households borrowing from sources other than
microfinance. Panel A shows the average treatment e ects. averaging across GEs and
others, total credit (col 1) and informal credit (col 2) increase, but not significantly. Infor-
mal loans taken for business does increase significantly.24 As mentioned above, our survey
also collected information on individuals' social networks. The final two columns of table 3
examine these measures, since social networks are an important source of informal credit.
Column 4 shows treatment e ects on individuals' overall network degree­the number of
other households with whom they interact, or could interact if the need arose, across both
financial interactions (eg, borrow or lend small amounts of money, cooking oil or kerosene)
and non-financial interactions (eg, ask for advice, socialize together). Column 5 shows the
measure examining only financial networks. For the full sample, overall network degree
and financial network degree both fall significantly. This crowd-out of network relation-
ships for the average borrower is further examined in Banerjee et al. (2018b).
   Next, in Panel B, we examine whether these e ects di er for GEs vs. others. The
main treatment e ect identifies the e ects for the non-GEs. For these households, total
borrowing, total informal borrowing, and total loans taken for business purposes show
no significant changes. The di erential e ect for GEs, on the other hand, is large and
significant for all of these outcomes. Summing the main and interaction e ects, GEs in the
treatment group had, on average, Rs. 12,400 more in outstanding informal debt relative
to the control group (significant at the 5% level), and Rs. 12,000 more in outstanding
informal debt used for business purposes (significant at the .1% level). The fact that
increased access to microfinance increases demand for other sources of credit among the
GEs is already at odds with a simple globally concave production function, and instead
suggests that the GEs face a non-convexity in their choice set.25
   The final two columns of Panel B shed light on the di erential e ects on informal
credit seen for GEs vs. non-GEs. Column 4 shows treatment e ects on individuals'
overall network degree. The e ect for non-GEs is negative, significant, and substantial
in magnitude, representing roughly a 9% fall in total links. The di erential e ect for
24To classify whether a loan was used for a business purpose, we code survey responses coding the primary
purpose of the loan.
25This argument assumes the increase in borrowing from other sources is purely demand driven. However,
it is possible that the intervention may have also relaxed credit supply by either signaling borrower quality
or because of the (real or perceived) junior status of microfinance debt. We discuss below a number of
other pieces of evidence that point to a non-convexity as an explanation.
                               MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                          15

GEs, however, shows that for these households, there is no significant net change in social
networks. Column 5 shows that, examining only financial networks, the pattern is similar.
In short, non-GEs appear to experience shrinking social networks, while GEs' networks
are maintained.

3.3. Business Outcomes. Table 4 reports treatment e ects on outcomes related to
household businesses. We find that the e ects of microfinance on business creation de-
scribed inBanerjee et al. (2015) persist even in the absence of ongoing microcredit: treat-
ment households were 3.8% more likely to have a business, and own 0.056 more businesses
on average, than control households (Panel A, columns 1 and 2). On average, businesses
in the treatment group are larger as well. Households in the treatment group have over Rs.
1,500 more in business assets than households in the control group (column 4), and report
27.3 log points higher expenses and 31 log points higher revenues from their businesses
than the control group (columns 5 and 6). Profits, reported in column 7 (in levels due to
zero and negative values) are significantly higher on average, by just under 600 Rupees
per month.26
   This finding­on average, microfinance improves business outcomes in a way that per-
sists even once loans are no longer available­is novel (and contrasts with our own short
term e ects and that of the other studies), and is in itself important for policy and for
future research examining the e ect of microcredit. Even if policy makers or microfinance
organizations could not distinguish between GE and non-GE applicants, these results are
reassuring in that microfinance lending can durably improve business outcomes on average,
at least in a context like Hyderabad.
   While positive business e ects are apparent for the treatment group as a whole, as Panel
B shows, these results are driven almost entirely by e ects on gung-ho entrepreneurs alone.
GEs in the treatment group are 6.4% more likely to own a business and own, on average,
0.10 more businesses than those in control (columns 1 and 2). Their businesses are larger
and more profitable, as well: GEs in treatment own over Rs. 3100 more in business assets
(column 4) and report spending 83% more in business inputs (column 5), receiving 60.5 log
points, or 104%, more in business revenue (column 6) and earning almost 1300 Rupees, or
28%, higher profits. As Panel A of Figure 1 shows, these treatment e ects are also larger
in magnitude than those measured at either endline 1 or endline 2.27 In contrast, these
26Recall that some of this increase in the business outcomes reported in columns 4 to 7 is driven by the
extensive margin--treated households have more businesses. Below, when we focus on a sample entirely of
business owners, we show that there are significant e ects on the intensive margin as well--again, driven
by the GEs.
27The figure also shows that for several of the outcomes, the treatment e ects appear to become smaller
at endline 2 before expanding again at endline 3. We have one working hypothesis for why this pattern
might emerge. If treated GE households spent the first few years post-microfinance access investing in the
household business, they may have decided to take a small break and increase their consumption and/or
spending on household durables at endline 2.
                           MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                 16

same outcomes for the non-GE households in the treatment group are no di erent than
the outcomes for those in the control group.
   One question that OLS results alone cannot answer is how the e ects we document are
distributed throughout the population. For instance, are the results for GEs driven by
a few businesses experiencing extremely large e ects on business scale, or are the e ects
distributed more broadly? Could the null e ects for non-GEs be masking o setting pos-
itive and negative e ects at di erent points in the distribution? To shed light on this,
Figure3, Panel A plots the results of bootstrapped quantile regressions for business profits
on treatment status for GEs. As this figure shows, a large section of the distribution of
households by business profits (from around the 75th to 95th percentiles) experienced sig-
nificant positive treatment e ects on their business profits. No portion of the distribution
for non-GE households, on the other hand, experienced such results, as Panel B shows.
Next we examine business assets: Figure 3 Panel C plots the quantile results for business
assets for GEs. Here the e ects are even more broadly distributed: from roughly the 30th
to the 90th percentile, GEs in treatment have significantly larger businesses than their
counterparts in control areas. Panel D shows that, as with profits, there is no e ect on
business scale anywhere in the distribution for the non-GEs, with the possible exception
of at the very top (90 to 95th percentile): these may be true GEs who happened to start
their businesses later. Similarly, there are surely some non-GEs who, due to wealth, easy
access to credit, etc. happened to start their businesses before Spandana's entry. Misclas-
sifying such firms will have the e ect of making the two groups appear more similar and
thus making it harder to reject the null that GEs and non-GEs have similar treatment
e ects.

3.4. Labor Demand. The potential for microfinance to a ect local labor markets through
its e ect on firms' labor demand has been noted theoretically (Buera et al., 2017) and
demonstrated empirically (Breza and Kinnan, 2018; Fink et al., 2018). Table 5 reports
e ects on employment in household firms, wage bills, and household labor supply. As
Panel A shows, treatment households on average are more likely to have more than one
and more than two workers (cols 1 and 2); have 0.21 more employees in their largest
business (col 3); pay out Rs. 370 more in wages to employees each month, more than
100% of the control group mean; and work 2.75 more hours per week in their businesses
(col 6) than do control group households. These results when taken together, show that
treatment households on average increase their total labor demand, consistent with the
e ects observed for microfinance on labor markets in other contexts.
   However, as Panel B reveals, there is significant heterogeneity in these treatment e ects.
Non-GEs in the treatment group have .174 more employees in their largest business (col
3) and pay out Rs. 275 more in wages than in the control group (col 4), but show no
significant di erences in their total or self-employment labor supply relative to the control
                                MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                          17

group. Gung-ho entrepreneurs, on the other hand, show multiple significant treatment
e ects, which are uniformly larger than the e ects for non-GEs: GEs in treatment areas
are 5.7pp more likely to own a business with multiple employees (column 1), 3.2pp more
likely to own a business with over two employees (column 2), have .277 more employees in
their largest business (col 3), and pay out Rs. 587 more in monthly wages to employees (col
4); work an additional 6.65 total hours per week (col 5), of which 5.827 hours are in self-
employment (column 6). Thus, not only do GEs in treatment neighborhoods have larger
businesses several years after the introduction of microcredit; they are also contributing
more labor time to their businesses on a weekly basis.28 Moreover, the fact that GEs'
businesses increase their hiring suggests that the benefits to their businesses may spill
over to non-GE households in the form of greater opportunities for employment.29

3.5. Consumption. Table 6 shows intent-to-treat estimates for treatment e ects on
household expenditure. As Panel A, column 1 shows, we find no significant average e ect
of increased exposure to microfinance on monthly consumption per adult equivalent. Once
again, this lack of a significant average treatment e ect masks considerable heterogeneity,
both between GEs and non-GEs and within each group of households. We find no signif-
icant average treatment e ects on consumption for either GEs or non-GEs, as Panel B,
column 1 shows. But as demonstrated in Panel E of Figure 3 (displaying the results of
bootstrapped quantile regressions for per capita consumption for gung-ho entrepreneurs),
among the GEs, more than half of the distribution of per capita consumption (from around
the 30th to the 85th percentile) experienced positive treatment e ects on consumption.
At the 75th percentile of the distribution, we find a gain of just under Rs. 350 in monthly
household consumption per adult equivalent, an increase of 10.4% over the 75th percentile
of consumption among GEs in the control group (Rs. 3325). However, at no point in
the distribution of per capita consumption for non-GEs (Figure 3, Panel F) do we find
any significant positive (or negative) treatment e ects: the e ect is a fairly precise zero
throughout the distribution.
   Columns 3, 4, and 5 report results for annual household spending on durable goods,
both in total and broken into spending on durables for business use and non-business
use.30 We find a marginally significant average treatment e ect of Rs. 560 in increased
total spending on durable goods (Panel A, column 3) and a highly significant, though
small, average treatment e ect of Rs. 24 in increased spending on durable goods for

28As with the e ects on business outcomes discussed above, some of the e ects on labor demand are driven
by the extensive margin--treated households are more likely to operate any business.
29To the extent that this generates positive spillovers to non-GE households in treatment areas in the form
of higher earnings/consumption, it makes the (already small and insignificant; see section 3.5) treatment
e ects on non-GEs an upper bound on the true e ect.
30Because of outliers in these distributions, we Winsorrize data of reported spending on durables in each
category at the 95th percentile of each distribution.
                                MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                          18

household businesses (Panel A, column 5). These results, as Panel B reveals, are driven
entirely by gung-ho entrepreneurs. In the treatment group, GEs spent Rs. 1,937 more
on durables and Rs. 61 more on business durables in the previous year than GEs in the
control group, while non-GEs in treatment and control show no di erences in either of
these outcomes (columns 3 and 5). Moreover, GEs show a large and highly significant
increase in spending on non-business durables: Rs. 1,540, or 18.9% of the mean for GEs
in the control group (Panel B, column 4).
   Consistent with Banerjee et al. (2015)'s results for the second endline survey (in 2010),
we find no di erence between treatment and control households - whether among GEs
or non-GEs - in spending on festivals (column 6). But in contrast to that study, as
column 2 shows, we also find no di erence in spending on "temptation goods," goods
that households in the baseline survey said that they would like to spend less on (alcohol,
tobacco, betel leaves, gambling, and food consumed outside the home).31 Additionally,
there is no di erence between treatment and control households in monthly spending on
education (column 7) and health (column 8).
   One of the most disappointing features of the first wave of microfinance impact eval-
uations is the the lack of a positive e ect on household consumption. Banerjee et al.
(2015) and others do find an initial increase in durable consumption. However, they do
not observe positive e ects in overall consumption or in longer-run household durable
consumption. Our results point to some optimism, at least when microfinance is directed
toward gung-ho entrepreneurs. While in 2012, the GEs continued to invest their labor
hours and capital in their businesses, we also observe that a sizable subset of the distri-
bution does in fact enjoy a consumption increase, and that the average household is able
to purchase more household durables. If the marginal returns to business capital are still
high, then we might expect even larger consumption increases in the future. For these sea-
soned entrepreneurs, a high marginal value to an additional rupee of business investment
may explain the absence of a short-run consumption e ect.32
   On a less positive note, in Appendix Table 10, we consider whether access to mi-
crofinance in the past caused any di erences in happiness and worries, as measured by
responses to survey questions. We find that that treatment households are both more
worried and less happy than control households. We are not able to statistically distin-
guish the impacts by GE status. These results are consistent with the results in Banerjee,

31The fact that we do not find an e ect on temptation good spending may not be surprising in our setting
where MFIs are no longer operating. One possible source of the initial Banerjee et al. (2015) temptation
goods e ect may have been individuals scaling back unnecessary consumption in order to make the weekly
MFI loan repayment. When microfinance is no longer present, there is no need to come up with the weekly
payment amount.
32The fact that, at the very top of the distribution for the GEs, treatment e ects on consumption appear
(insignificantly) negative is suggestive evidence of the presence of high returns leading to earnings being
re-invested. (See Panel E of Figure 3.)
                              MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                    19

Duflo, and Hornbeck (2018a), which show that business-owning households are willing to
give up microfinance when the real price goes up slightly, despite large negative e ects
on their business: households clearly care about other things than profits, and business
success is not welfare.

3.6. Threats to Validity.

Attrition. Given the long time horizon since the sampled households were first contacted,
it is perhaps unsurprising that some individuals have attrited from the sample, i.e., could
not be found. Appendix Table 11 shows that, relative to the first endline (2007), ap-
proximately 84% of households were located at endline 3 in 2012. The attrition rate is
not di erential across treatment vs. control. Nonetheless, to address whether our results
might be sensitive to attrition, we compute Lee (2009) bounds for key outcomes. Appen-
dix Table 12 shows the results. With a few exceptions, the Lee bounds are informative, i.e.
when the non-attrition-adjusted estimate is significantly di erent from zero, the bounds
do not include zero.

Windfall E ects of the AP Ordinance. It is also important to understand the di erential
repercussions of the AP ordinance on the treatment and control groups. Note that the
e ects were twofold. First, all households--uniformly in treatment and control areas--lost
access to future credit. Second, households with outstanding loans received an implicit
write-o of the remaining principal and interest, i.e. a windfall equal to the amount they
would otherwise have had to repay. Borrowers who had received a new loan just before
the ordinance received a large windfall, while those who were close to fully repaying the
loan and obtaining a new loan received a small windfall.33 Again, this occurred in both
treatment and control areas. We would like to interpret di erences in the treatment
versus the control group we find in this paper as coming through increased past exposure
to microfinance and to nothing else. However, if the treatment-control di erences are also
driven by di erential windfalls when microfinance was withdrawn, then the interpretation
would be muddied.
   As we describe above, in Section 3.1, there are no di erences in borrowing on the
extensive margin between treatment and control on the eve of the AP Ordinance. However,
there are di erences in total microcredit balance coming through the extensive margin.
Panel C of Table 2 shows that treated households had Rs. 946 more microcredit at endline
2. This implies that the treatment group did most likely have a slightly larger windfall
(i.e., balance outstanding in October 2010). One should note that the size of the windfall
was likely significantly smaller than the Rs. 946, which is the treatment e ect on the
initial loan amount, not the principal remaining at the time of the AP crisis. Given that
33In a companion paper (Banerjee et al., 2014) we consider the e ects of the windfall on household
consumption and investment.
                               MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                         20

microfinance installment payments are typically of equal size, occurring weekly over 50
weeks, the implied average di erence in windfall would have been approximately half that
amount, or Rs. 473.
   A priori, a roughly Rs. 470 di erence in windfall in 2010 is unlikely to drive the
outcomes we observe in 2012. However, are also able to directly examine the extent to
which larger windfall di erences had any impacts on business outcomes. To do this, we
use data collected at endline 3 about each household's microfinance loans in October 2010.
Specifically, households reported the size of their loans and how many installments of the
loan had not yet been repaid as of October 2010.34 This allows us to compare households
who are otherwise very similar, but who received very di erent windfalls. Imagine two
households, both of whom took loans in late 2009. One who borrowed in, say, September
2009 would have finished repaying that loan and gotten a fresh loan just before the crisis.
They would have only made a few installment payments on this new loan prior to the
ordinance and therefore received a large windfall. Another household, who borrowed in,
say, November 2009, would have repaid almost that full loan, but not yet received a new
loan, at the time of the crisis. Therefore, they received a small windfall.Thus, small
di erences in timing of the initial loan disbursement (e.g., September vs. November 2009)
can lead to large di erences in the size of the windfall, allowing a regression discontinuity
design to identify the causal e ect of receiving a larger windfall.
   Appendix Table 13 shows that, among the sample with a loan maturity near the time
of the crisis, having a slightly earlier maturity is associated with a large and significant
increase in the share of the loan balance outstanding at the time of the AP crisis. Column
1 uses a broader measure of having a maturity near the crisis, i.e. households within
+/- 10 weeks of the loan maturity date. Column 2 uses a narrower measure, households
within +/- 8 weeks of the loan maturity date. In either case, those with the later maturity
dates--who have almost but not quite finished repaying the previous loan--have only 4
to 4.5% of their loan balance outstanding; this is the amount they received as a windfall.
In contrast, those whose maturity date was earlier--and had therefore repaid their loan
and obtained a new loan--have approximately 80-85 additional percentage points of the
loan balance outstanding; they received a large windfall. In other words, the loan timing
instrument has a first stage that is quite large and highly significant.
   Next, Appendix Table 14 presents the corresponding reduced form, comparing the main
business outcomes across individuals with large versus small windfalls. In each specifica-
tion, we control for an indicator of whether the respondent had a loan outstanding in
October 2010, and therefore had any windfall (this would include both the Sept 2009 and
Nov 2009 borrowers in the example above). Our coe cient of interest is an indicator for
34The AP Ordinance was very salient to all of the respondents at this time. This is especially true given
that at the time of the survey, households were unable to take new loans from any microlender. Many
households even showed us their microfinance loan cards when answering these questions.
                                MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                           21

having received a large windfall (this would be 1 for the Sept 2009 borrower and 0 for the
Nov 2009 borrower). This regressor measures the di erence in outcome for large windfall
recipients, relative to those who received a small windfall. In panels A and B, a large or
small windfall is defined as someone with less than 10 or more than 40 weeks remaining
in the loan cycle, i.e. households within +/- 10 weeks of their loan maturity date. In
panels C and D, we consider a narrower window of plus or minus 8 weeks. In all cases, we
find no evidence that receiving a larger windfall in 2010 is associated with better business
outcomes in 2012, either on average or separately for GE or non-GE households. In fact,
many of the point estimates are negative.
   These results show that even large di erences in windfall amount­of roughly 80% of
loan balance, or approximately Rs. 8,000­led to no improvement in business outcomes two
years later.35 This makes it highly unlikely that the much smaller di erence in windfall
between treatment and control (approximately Rs. 470, or less than 5% of the balance of
a Rs. 10,000 loan) can explain any portion of the long run results.

      4. A test of the selection mechanism: Overlapping sample results

   We have so far argued that the di erences observed between the GEs and non-GEs
reflect that fact that households di er in their underlying potential productivity as en-
trepreneurs, and that when microlenders lend to households who have not demonstrated
entrepreneurial potential, they screen in those who are less well-positioned to benefit
(at least in terms of marginal product of capital). However, other explanations could be
driving our results--namely, the GE businesses are older, on average, and have more expe-
rience. It could be that, with time, the non-GEs would accumulate enough age/experience
and would then look like the GEs. Moreover, the non-GEs comprise both consumption
borrowers and reluctant entrepreneurs (REs), making it di cult to draw conclusions about
the REs alone. Recall that only 20% of non-GE households (those who did not have a
business in 2006) start new businesses by 2012.
   To overcome these challenges, we use the fact that Spandana did not enter all treated
neighborhoods at exactly the same time: branches opened in treatment areas between
April 2006 and April 2007.36 As a result, we observe treatment-area businesses that
opened at the exact same point in time, but some opened before Spandana's entry to the
area (because Spandana's branch in that area opened relatively late), while others opened
after Spandana's entry (because Spandana's branch in that area opened relatively early).
Of course, Spandana's decision of where to open early vs late was not random­Spandana
may have opened first in the largest areas, those closest to its headquarters, etc. However,
35Recall that the "experiment" that identifies this e ect does not exploit treatment assignment, but instead
relies on the discontinuity generated by the timing of the crisis.
36The timing of the first endline was such that no area was surveyed fewer than 12 months after Spandana
entered.
                             MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                    22

because randomization was done at the matched pair level, for each treated area, the con-
trol area in the same matched pair serves as a counterfactual--in expectation, Spandana
would have opened a branch there at the same time. We refer to the sample of businesses
that opened during the time that Spandana was opening branches as the "overlapping
sample."
   Figure 4 shows a schematic illustrating the idea behind this overlapping sample. In
Matched Pair A, Spandana entered the treated area AT , at t1 ; in Matched Pair B, Span-
dana did not enter the treated area B T , until t3 . In both pairs, Spandana did not enter the
control areas, AC and B C , until after the first endline. In each of the 4 areas, there is a set
of businesses that opened at time t2 , after Spandana entered AT but before it entered B T .
Finally, at t4 , endline outcomes, y , are measured. The comparison y     ¯AT  y  ¯AC identifies
the treatment e ect on businesses opened after Spandana's entry, while the comparison
¯B T  y
y       ¯B C identifies the treatment e ect on businesses of the same age, but opened before
Spandana's entry.
   If the di erential treatment e ects found for GEs are simply due to the fact that GEs
are older or more experienced, benefit from a first-mover advantage, etc., then among this
overlapping sample, those that opened pre-Spandana (because Spandana opened relatively
late in their area) should have indistinguishable treatment e ects from those that opened
post-Spandana (because Spandana opened relatively early in their area), since both the
pre- and post-Spandana businesses among this sample are the same in terms of age,
experience, etc. If, on the other hand, microfinance induces businesses to enter that
have lower returns than those who enter in the absence of microfinance, then the firms
that opened pre-Spandana should have di erent (larger) long-term treatment e ects than
those that opened post-Spandana but at the same point in calendar time. We note that
this sample is small--approximately 300 households who opened a business during the
overlapping sample window­which will reduce our statistical power but, as we show below,
the e ects for the GEs (i.e., the pre-Spandana businesses within this sample) are strong
enough to nonetheless be detectable.

E ects on business outcomes. Table 8 shows the results. Panel A shows the EL1 treatment
e ects on business outcomes for businesses opened pre-2006, before Spandana opened any
branches in Hyderabad. These businesses are not in the overlapping sample but fit the
definition of GEs. The treatment e ects for this sample are large and positive, though
in some cases imprecisely estimated; however, the index of business incomes is 0.071
standard deviations higher in treatment than control, significant at 10%. The standard
errors partly reflect systematic heterogeneity in treatment e ect. Next, Panel B shows
EL1 treatment e ects for businesses opened in the overlapping sample window, before
Spandana had opened in their area (equivalent to B T in Figure 4). The counterfactual
is given by businesses opened in the same time frame in the control areas in the same
                               MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                        23

matched pairs (equivalent to B C in Figure 4). The treatment e ects for these businesses
are similar to those for pre-2006 businesses (the older GEs) in Panel A. If anything,
the e ects are stronger: the e ect on the index of business incomes is 0.148 standard
deviations, significant at 5%.
   Finally, Panel C shows the EL1 treatment e ects for businesses opened in the overlap-
ping sample window, after Spandana had opened in the treatment area of the matched
pair (equivalent to AT in Figure 4). Again, the comparison is between businesses in treat-
ment and control areas within a matched pair (equivalent to AT vs. AC in Figure 4). The
treatment versus control di erences for these businesses, while imprecisely estimated, are
uniformly negative. The e ect on the index of business incomes is -0.183; while this is not
significantly di erent from zero, it is significantly di erent from the e ect of plus 0.148
seen for the pre-Spandana (but same-aged) businesses.
   Note that this comparison combines two separate e ects ­ the treatment e ect for the
post-Spandana businesses and any selection e ect. Given that the businesses are the
same age as the businesses studied in Panel B, these results are strongly indicative of
negative selection e ects. In fact, we can use the results in Panels B and C to get a
back-of-the envelope estimate of how much worse the average RE is, due to selection. We
use the index of business outcomes (column 6 of table 8) for this calculation. We make
two simplifying assumptions. First, we assume that, for this sample, the true, causal
treatment e ect of microfinance for REs is zero, and second, that the treatment - control
comparison for the post-Spandana sample is zero. (The point estimate is -0.183, but is
not significantly di erent from zero; to be conservative, we assume it is zero.) Given that
entry by microfinance induced 18% more businesses to start in treatment vs. control,
this implies that those new businesses must be 0.67 standard deviations worse than the
pre-Spandana businesses.
   Figure 10 further investigates whether age or experience e ects could be at play in
generating the observed di erences between the GE and RE samples. Businesses opened
before 2006 are separated into quintiles of age (with quintile 1 being the oldest and 5 the
newest), and treatment e ects on the index of business outcomes are estimated separately
for each quintile, using the corresponding quintile in control areas as the counterfactual.
The dashed gray horizontal line shows the overall treatment e ect for the pre-2006 busi-
nesses.37 Panel A shows the EL1 results, which were summarized above. Panel B shows
the results at EL2, which are quite similar: all age quintiles of pre-2006 businesses show
treatment e ects which are indistinguishable from each other. In Panel C, the EL3 ef-
fects are plotted. There is now more loss of precision, in part because some entrepreneurial
households have now closed their businesses, but the qualitative pattern remains the same.
37Note that, for some businesses, we know that they opened prior to 2006 (i.e., they meet the definition
of GEs), but they did not report a specific year in which they opened. Such businesses are dropped from
this figure since we cannot assign them an age quintile.
                               MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                       24

The fact that--among businesses of the same age--those opened pre-Spandana show sig-
nificant, positive treatment e ects while treatment-control comparisons for those opened
post-Spandana show insignificant, negative coe cients; and the fact that, as Figure 10
shows, there is no systematic tendency of older businesses to have di erent treatment ef-
fects than newer businesses among the pre-2006 sample, both buttress our interpretation
that the di erential e ects we observe for GEs vs. others are due to selection rather than
age or experience.

E ects on total borrowing. Table 9 shows how treatment assignment a ects households'
demand for overall borrowing at the first endline, within the overlapping sample. We
again allow the treatment e ect to di er for those who entered entrepreneurship before
MFI entry (ie, the GEs) vs. those who entered later (who are a mix of "reluctant en-
trepreneurs", or REs, and some GE who happened to have entered later). We report
e ects on total borrowing (from any source, formal or informal); total borrowing which
the respondent states was used for a business purpose38; total informal borrowing (from
family, friends, neighbors, and business associates such as suppliers and customers); and
informal borrowing for business purposes. Column 1 shows that the REs' demand for
overall borrowing actually appears to fall (though this e ect is not significant due to the
small sample size). For GEs, the point estimate suggests a large positive e ect (again,
not significant). In column 2 we focus on borrowing for business purposes. Again, the
treatment e ect is (insignificantly) negative for the non GEs. The di erential e ect for the
GEs is large--approximately RS. 43,000--and, despite the small sample size, significant
at the 10% level. Column 3 looks at total borrowing from informal sources. As with total
borrowing, REs' demand for overall informal borrowing appears to fall (though this e ect
is not significant), while for GEs, the point estimate suggests a large (but insignificant)
positive e ect. In column 4, we examine informal loans taken for business purposes. For
non GEs, there is a negative (insignificant) e ect, while the di erential e ect for GEs is
large (approximately Rs. 12,500) and significant at the 10% level.
   These results have two important implications. First, for the gung-ho entrepreneurs,
access to microcredit has a crowd-in e ect, facilitating additional borrowing from informal
sources as well. The opposite appears to be true for the REs: their total and informal
borrowing does not increase and even appears to fall. These results also show that en-
trepreneurs are aware of their type: the GEs appear to know that, once they have access to
microcredit, they can productively invest even more capital than they are able to access
from microlenders directly. (We will argue below that access to microfinance increases
their demand for non-microfinance credit due to a nonconvexitiy in the production func-
tion that GEs­but not REs­can access.) The REs, on the other hand, do not respond to
38Households were asked, for all outstanding loans "For what purposes did you actually use the loan?"
Purposes relating business investment and business expenses were classified as business purposes.
                               MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                 25

greater microcredit access by increasing their borrowing from other sources--if anything,
other sources of borrowing appear to fall. This is consistent with the evidence from other
settings that households are aware of their potential returns to capital (Beaman et al.,
2015; Hussam et al., 2018).

                                   5. Model and Estimation

   Our reduced form analyses of the full and overlapping samples suggest that relaxing
credit constraints through microfinance has large, persistent, and even divergent e ects for
the gung-ho entrepreneurs (GEs), and that the GEs appear to be advantageously selected
relative to the reluctant entrepreneurs (REs) who entered in response to microcredit. We
next present a simple framework to explore whether microfinance might unlock a poverty
trap for a subset of GEs. Importantly, we are able to investigate whether the underlying
production frontier available to the GEs exhibits non-convexities, which in turn, could
lead to poverty trap dynamics.
   We first write down a simple dynamic household optimization problem with borrowing
limits. Our empirical treatment of the model then proceeds in four steps: A) we use the
first endline data from the overlapping sample to estimate the production frontier; B) we
solve the household's dynamic program and obtain the implied policy functions; C) we
ask whether the resulting policy functions give rise to a wealth-based poverty trap; D) we
simulate the model forward for the GEs in our data in both treatment and control areas
and compare the simulated long run treatment e ects to the empirical findings presented
above.

5.1. Dynamic Household Optimization Problem. Households maximize the dis-
counted sum of the utility from consumption
                                                        OE
                                                        ÿ
(5.1)                                    U (ct )OE
                                                t=0 =         u (ct )
                                                        t=0

subject to wealth and borrowing constraints, introduced below.

Production Function. We next consider the production frontier for the Gung Ho (GEs)
entrepreneurs. We assume that type is persistent and that, as suggested by the evidence
in section 4, individuals know their type. GEs have access to two distinct production
technologies that turn inputs Kt into revenues Yt . Kt measures the rupee value of total
inputs used in production. The Low technology has revenues equal to:

                                           YL (Kt ) = AL Kt
                                                          ­

We posit that this technology exhibits decreasing returns to scale with ­ < 1.39 Denote the
optimal scale of this technology as KL ú . The GEs also have access to a High technology.

39In the estimation, we do not make this restriction and allow for any positive value of ­.
                               MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                          26

This technology requires a minimum investment K , but comes with a higher marginal
product past the minimum scale. We further assume that this technology has constant,
rather than decreasing, returns to scale.40 The High technology's revenues are given by:

                                      YH (Kt ) = AH (Kt  K).

While the goal of this modeling exercise is to capture the dynamics for the GE en-
trepreneurs, implicit here is the assumption that the REs only have access to the Low
technology.


Borrowing Constraint. We consider two regimes, · oe {1, 2}. (As explained below, the
regime that is operative for a given household depends on both time and treatment status.)
In regime · = 1, households do not have access to credit and must finance business
investment from their wealth. This can be thought of as a borrowing limit of zero: ¯  b1 = 0.
   In the second regime, households have the ability to borrow. Motivated by the finding
of crowd-in for the GEs, in this regime they can borrow from microfinance and from infor-
mal lenders. This "social network" borrowing comes from input suppliers, shop keepers,
moneylenders, friends, and relatives. We assume that all project returns are deterministic
and that lenders have a claim to project proceeds (including savings), so we abstract away
from both distressed and strategic default. This credit line, however, is not infinite, and
all households are restricted to choose 0 Æ Bt Æ b¯          ¯
                                                   2 , where b2 is the total amount that can
be borrowed in regime 2. The (gross) interest rate on this borrowing is R. All loans must
be repaid at the end of each period.


Wealth Dynamics. We assume that individuals are heterogeneous in starting wealth W0 .
We also assume that all productive decisions are separable across time. Individuals enter
each period t with wealth Wt1 and decide how much to invest. Any wealth not invested
in the productive business can be saved within the period for a gross return fl. In our
context, many households save "under the mattress" or in a bank account where fl << R.
The entrepreneur also chooses whether to operate the high technology inside the business,
denoted by the indicator Dt H.

   Given the production frontier and the borrowing costs, the GE has total end of period
financial profits from running the business equal to:
                                            1          2
                fi (Kt ) = Dt
                            H
                              YH (Kt ) + 1  Dt
                                             H
                                               YL (Kt )  RBt + (1  " )Kt


40The High technology may have a greater span of control, allowing for the use of hired labor and avoiding
decreasing returns due to fixed household labor, may correspond to a di erent production technology (e.g.,
mechanical sewing machine vs. sewing by hand), or may correspond to a business facing a less localized
market.
                            MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                  27

where " is the depreciation rate for total capital. Given that the GE also saves an amount
S , the total cash on hand at the end of the period is:

                                            fi (Kt ) + flSt

where St = Wt1 + B  Kt .

Consumption. Finally, at the end of each period households choose how much to consume,
ct , out of their cash on hand. Any cash on hand that is not consumed is passed on to the
subsequent period: Wt = fi (Kt ) + flSt  ct .
    At the end of the period, profits are realized, capital net of depreciation (" ) is liqui-
dated, any loans are repaid, and the household chooses how to divide the profits between
consumption ct and future wealth, Wt .

Full Utility Maximization Problem. The utility maximization problem in its recursive form
is:



                   V (W |, · , g ) =       max         u(c) + -- E (V (W Õ )|, · , g )
                                       c,W Õ ,K,B,DH
                                          1            2
           W Õ + c = DH YH (K ) + 1  DH YL (K ) + (1  " )K + flS  RB
                 0 Æ B Æ¯
                        b·
               WÕ Ø 0
                K Æ W +B
                S = W +BK

5.2. Production Function Estimation. We estimate four production parameters of
the model (AL , ­, AH , K ). For this exercise we use data only on the overlapping sample
households who opened businesses prior to Spandana's entry (the GEs) from only the first
wave of survey data (EL1). While this sample is small, it gives us a relatively homogeneous
group of GEs for which to estimate the production function. Moreover, these businesses
are young; this is useful because early on the business is likely to not yet be in a long-run
steady state, allowing for the estimation of a larger support of the production function.
   Estimating the production function requires heterogeneity in baseline wealth. Ideally,
we would have an empirical estimate of W0 for each household and feed that directly into
the model. However, we do not have such a measure, both because baseline surveys were
not collected for the majority of households in the original Banerjee et al. (2015) study
and because it is challenging to elicit the value of wealth, particularly non-financial wealth
such as land. To make progress without a direct measure of baseline wealth, we make the
assumption that the treatment e ects in capital satisfy a monotonicity assumption ­ that
                                MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                           28

is, individuals at any given percentile of the treatment capital distribution are directly
comparable to those in the control capital distribution.
   Figure 5 illustrates where identification of the production function parameters comes
from by plotting the CDFs for the treatment and control groups separately for total capital
(Panel A) and revenues (Panel B). Panel A captures the first stage treatment-versus-
control comparison by quantile ­ how total capital changes across the distribution with
access to microcredit. Using total capital as the first stage allows for arbitrary crowd-in
or crowd-out of outside credit. Panel B shows the reduced form ­ how business revenues
change across the distribution with access to microcredit. The CDFs hint at the idea that
the treatment e ects might be heterogeneous in starting wealth. Panel A suggests that
the log impact on total capital is largest for values of log capital between roughly 5 and
9, which the e ects on revenues are apparent for values of log capital between roughly 5
and 10. The fact that the e ects decay less quickly in revenues than in capital is direct,
albeit suggestive, evidence, of increasing returns. Moreover, for the lower quantiles, it
appears that access to microfinance does not a ect capital decisions (or revenues) at all.
This is consistent with the amount of microfinance not being large enough to move some
households out of the low production technology.
   In the estimation we assume that the capital choice of each business satisfies a mono-
tonicity assumption; namely the household's rank in the capital distribution within the
treatment group is the same as the rank the household would have attained within the
control group. Under this assumption, comparing capital levels in treatment versus con-
trol at any quantile gives us the treatment e ect on capital for that quantile. Given the
exogenous shock in capital, at each quantile we can then construct predicted revenues for
each individual in the sample according to
                                                  1        2
                    Yt (Kt ) = Dt
                                H
                                  YH (Kt ; AL , ­) + 1  Dt
                                                         H
                                                           YL (Kt ; AH , K) .

The predicted revenues at each value of {AL , ­, AH , K} can then be compared to the true
revenues in the data. This clearly also requires an exclusion restriction-like assumption ­
that microfinance only impacts revenues through changes in total capital and through the
parametric form we specify above.
   Given the relatively small sample, we bin the data within treatment group by quantile of
capital.41 Note that we only assume monotonicity in capital, not in revenues. Moreover,
given that some firms produce 0 revenues, we allow stochastic business closure within
period to match the empirical rates in the data. For each bin in the capital distribution,
assuming the average capital level for that bin, we can calculate the predicted revenues
under each value of the parameter vector and compare it to the average empirical revenues
in the same bin. In practice, we select the parameters {AL , ­, AH , K} that minimize

41Specifically, we create 15 quantile bins.
                                MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                            29

the GMM objective function, using revenues as our moment condition. For details, see
Appendix C.
   The estimated parameters of the production technologies are the following with boot-
strapped42 95% confidence intervals in brackets.43


       AL = 45 [15, 90], ­ = 0.4 [0.2, 0.6], AH = 45 [15, 90], K = 7900 [100, 14400]

   The estimated fixed cost, Rs. 7,900 corresponds to roughly the median of the estimated
baseline wealth distribution. In Figure 6, we plot the log gross revenues of the technologies
as function of log capital. Note that while the revenue functions cross at K = 9414
(95% confidence interval [403,14765]), this is not the point at which a household would
optimally switch into the high technology, because operating the low technology at this
scale is dominated by the option of operating it at its optimal scale and investing any
remaining wealth into the savings technology. Figure 7 shows the "gross profits" for
the three possible technologies available to a household: the low technology, the high
technology, and the savings technology. For the low and high technologies, the gross
profits are equal to revenues plus proceeds of selling back undepreciated capital. The
gross profits of the savings technology are equal to the 45-degree line, because it is simply
a storage technology with a gross return of 1. The point at which the gross profits of the
low technology intersect those of the savings technology represents the optimal scale of the
low technology (approximately Rs. 650); above this point it is optimal to save additional
wealth until the point at which the savings technology function is intersected from below by
that of the high technology. This intersection, which occurs at approximately Rs. 13,500,
represents the minimum scale at which it is e cient to operate the high technology. (Note
that these gross profit functions do not account for borrowing costs; that is, they represent
the decision of a household using only their own wealth. For a household who needs to
borrow at the gross interest rate of 1.25, the minimum e cient scale of the high technology
is Rs. 18,500.)
   Note that the production frontier we estimate here is consistent with papers such as
McKenzie and Woodru (2006), which find no evidence of fixed costs of entry into small-
scale entrepreneurship. In our context, it is very easy to get started selling vegetables
or prepared foods from outside one's home. However, getting to a more substantial scale




42For the bootstrapping procedure, we draw with replacement from the full dataset of Pre-Spandana,
young businesses.
43When, in addition, the curvature parameter on the high technology is estimated, we obtain an estimate
of unity, ie constant returns to scale. However, this is computationally intensive, so in the main estimation
we constrain the high technology to exhibit CRTS).
                                MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                            30

with higher marginal returns involves making lumpy investments (e.g., renting a formal
storefront with a minimum scale, acquiring an asset, hiring an employee, etc.).44

5.3. Calibrating and Solving for the Policy Functions. Next, we solve the dynamic
program given the production parameters from step 1. We assume that the instantaneous
                                                            1 1 
utility function takes the standard CRRA form u (c) = 1       c    . The other parameters
from the model (return/depreciation/borrowing parameters fl, R, ¯   b1 , ¯
                                                                         b2 , " ; and preference
parameters , -- ) are either calibrated or estimated separately from our survey data.
    As noted above, the gross return on savings (the "under-the-mattress" technology),
fl, is set to one. The borrowing rate R is set equal to the microfinance interest rate
(R = 1.25) and the borrowing cap b    ¯
                                      2 is set to Rs. 12,000.
                                                             45
                                                                This reflects the first stage
on total credit (Table 3, column 3). The depreciation rate is calibrated to " = 0.4.
This is based on the average split between working and fixed capital in the data, and
the assumption that labor and variable working capital inputs depreciate fully and fixed
capital (assets) does not depreciate at all. We calibrate the preference parameters as
follows: -- = 0.85,  = 0.8557. We obtain the estimate of  using the method proposed
by Andreoni and Sprenger (2012).46 Below, we provide a sensitivity analysis to these
preference parameter choices.

5.4. Forward Simulation and Simulated Treatment E ects. Given the policy func-
tions, we can simulate the model forward for all GE households in the data. The time
frame of the intervention spans seven years (2006-2012, inclusive). Given a baseline year
of 2006, we simulate the model for 6 years and compare the implied average treatment
e ects at the end of the final year.

State Variable. The forward simulation requires initial values of the state variable ­ wealth
(W0 ) ­ for each household, an object that we do not observe in the data. However, given
that we have the policy function mapping wealth to investment, and we observe investment
in the data, we can infer the former from the latter by inverting the policy function to
recover baseline wealth. If investment decisions for the GEs were one-to-one in wealth,
this would be straightforward. However, our estimated production function (which is the
upper envelope of the Low and High technologies) exhibits a region where increasing the
scale of the business is dominated by savings (e.g., but selecting the optimal scale of the
44The nonconvexity could also arise from other factors that are not strictly fixed costs, such as adopting
new management practices that require learning-by-doing before they yield high returns.
45Recall that b¯1 = 0.
46Our implementation of the Andreoni and Sprenger (2012) method involved having participants make
decisions between payouts at several di erent points in time: 2 days, 32 days and 62 days. (There was
no 0 day wait to avoid confounding trust with patience.) As is common in these types of exercises
(Frederick et al., 2002), the implied annual discount rates from annualizing elicited monthly discount rates
are implausibly high. Because of this issue, we use -- = 0.85. Choosing a relatively low discount factor (ie,
high discount rate) is consistent with the fact that some individuals take loans at a 25% interest rate to
fund consumption.
                               MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                        31

low technology and saving any remaining wealth). This means that individuals investing
at the optimal scale of the low technology will represent a range of wealth levels. Moreover,
in the data, we do not observe stark clustering at the optimal low technology. This is to
be expected ­ in reality, individuals may experience idiosyncratic shocks to productivity,
to borrowing costs, or to their outside value of capital.
   To address these two issues, we do the following. We first start with a discretized grid of
possible values of baseline wealth.47 We next calculate the capital choice under the model
for each potential level of wealth. We then perturb this value with a mean zero, iid noise
shock with standard deviation < .48 This perturbation captures the fact that the empirical
capital choice might not exactly match the predicted value due to elements of noise that
we do not model directly (e.g., measurement error, exogenous productivity shocks, and
optimization frictions). This will also generate dispersion around the optimal scale of the
low technology and eliminate bunching. We draw 100 times from the noise distribution
for each value of wealth in the grid. In order to assign a level of baseline wealth for each
household we observe in the data, we match the empirical capital choice back to the closest
value of capital predicted under the model and perturbed by the iid shock. This means
that households in the data are potentially matched to di erent starting wealth values
across the 100 draws from the shock distribution. We simulate the model forward for each
of these 100 noise draws and average across draws. When simulating the model forward
for treatment and control neighborhoods, we use counterfactuals based on the baseline
wealth distribution in the control group alone.

Borrowing Regimes Across Time. As mentioned above, we consider two di erent borrow-
ing regimes · . It is important to note that, consistent with our empirical setting, each
regime change is a surprise to all households. In years 1 and 2, the control areas are in
the no borrowing regime (· = 1), while the treatment areas are in the borrowing regime
(· = 2). In years 3 and 4, the control areas also have access to borrowing, so all household
samples are in regime · = 2. Finally, in years 5 and 6, microfinance is no longer available
anywhere, so · = 1 for the full sample. During any regime · , households believe that this
regime will continue to be the status quo forever, which is reasonable in this context given
the rapid entry of microfinance and the unanticipated nature of the AP Crisis.

Simulated Treatment E ects. We next compare the treatment e ects from the simulations
with those from that actual EL3 data. The model replicates the qualitative patterns ob-
served in the EL3 data quite well. The di erence between the mean level of capital in
the treatment group versus that in the control group, in the simulated period 6 data,
gives us the simulated year 6 treatment e ect on capital. In levels, the implied treatment
47Specifically, we discretize wealth in bins of Rs. 300.
48In our core simulate-forward exercise we assume that < =500. We explore the sensitivity of the results
to changes in < in Appendix table 15.
                               MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                        32

e ect is Rs. 8,053 at the estimated and calibrated parameters described above; in the
data it is Rs. 7,342. In Panel A of Appendix table 15, we show sensitivity of this esti-
mated treatment e ect to di erent assumptions about the preference parameters (-- ,  ).
Specifically, we consider -- oe {0.85, 0.90, 0.95} and  oe {0.86, 1.00, 1.25, 1.50}, to cover the
range of values typically used in the macro literature. We find that for all of the param-
eter combinations, the EL3 di erences between treatment and control are large, ranging
from 4,008 to 8,053. This demonstrates that the model can predict capital di erences
between treatment and control at EL3 of the same order of magnitude as we find in the
data--quantities not targeted or used in the estimation. We also show that our estimated
treatment e ects are also robust to the assumptions used to recover the baseline wealth
distribution. Specifically, when we change the variance of the iid noise distribution, the
treatment e ects remain large (see Panel B, Appendix table 15).
   In keeping with our examination of e ects throughout the distribution, we next compute
the implied distribution of quantile treatment e ects from the simulated data. Figure 8
shows the implied treatment e ects on expected49 year 6 capital across the distribution,
ordered by the level of expected year 6 capital in control. The empirical counterpart to
this figure is Figure 3, Panel C. A comparison of the two reveals striking similarities: both
show the treatment e ects concentrated in roughly the upper third of the distribution,
with modestly positive e ects lower in the distribution; the e ects at the very top are also
modest. Note that, at the lower quantiles, we observe a positive predicted treatment e ect
because in some draws of the capital shock, even a low wealth individual could be pushed
out of the poverty trap region by the extra capital access resulting from treatment.
   To understand through the lens of the model why the largest e ects are seen at the
top (but not very top) of the distribution, Figure 9 plots the model-implied wealth tran-
sition diagrams for the credit and no-credit regimes. The upward-sloping lines show these
transitions: taking a given level of starting wealth and reflecting the optimal technology,
borrowing and consumption/savings decisions, what will next period's wealth be? In the
no-credit regime, households with wealth roughly below the long-short dashed line will be
unable to raise enough cash on hand (wealth plus borrowing) to invest in the high-returns
technology. As a result, facing low marginal returns and impatience (-- = 0.85), these
households never accumulate enough wealth to access the high technology and instead
converge to the optimal scale of the Low technology. Only households whose wealth is
above this value are able to operate the High technology.
   In the credit regime, in contrast, all households whose wealth is roughly above the long-
long dashed line will be able to access the high technology. The reason that intermediate-
wealth households can now do so is, of course, that they can borrow. Once households
are able to access the high technology, its constant marginal returns implies that their

49The expectation is taken with respect to the draws from the noise distribution; see Section 5.4.
                           MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                 33

wealth will continue to grow over time. Finally, the richest households were not in the
poverty trap zone, even in the absence of credit; they borrow to expand since the constant
marginal return is above the interest rate.
  The values of the long-short and long-long dashed lines correspond to the 75th and 50th
percentiles of the estimated baseline wealth distribution, respectively. Households starting
out in the third quartile of wealth are those who benefit most from access to microcredit.



Poverty trap vs. scale up? Our simple model emphasizes the fact that in the presence
of fixed costs, talented but low-wealth households may be caught in a poverty trap, and
that microcredit can allow (some of) them to escape this trap. However, both in the
model and in practice, increased access to credit can have another e ect as well: allowing
households who were already out of the poverty trap zone to scale up their high-return
businesses. With constant marginal returns, households operating the high technology
will benefit from the extra liquidity and hence larger business scale. This raises the
question of whether the bulk of the e ects we observe are coming from intermediate-
wealth households escaping the poverty trap and moving to the high technology, or from
higher-wealth households scaling up their already high-return activities.
   To shed light on this, we split households into four groups. First, households whose
wealth is so low that, without borrowing, they cannot operate the low technology at its
e cient scale (group 1). These households, even by borrowing the full Rs. 12,000 that
is possible when microcredit is available, cannot reach the minimum e cient scale of the
high technology under borrowing (Rs. 18,500). They will borrow only to reach the optimal
scale of the low technology, which is approximately Rs. 650. Since the e cient scale of the
low technology is so small, these households will have very small treatment e ects. Second,
households who can reach the optimal scale of the low technology without borrowing, but
even by borrowing the full Rs. 12,000 cannot reach the minimum e cient scale of the high
technology under borrowing (group 2). Group 2 households will not borrow at all (and so
will have a zero treatment e ect). Next are households who, without borrowing, could not
reach Rs. 13,500 of capital but, with borrowing, can reach Rs. 18,500 (group 3). Group
3 comprises the households who are pushed out the of the poverty trap: they borrow the
full Rs. 12,000 and move into the high technology. Finally, there are households who
were already able to reach at least Rs. 13,500 of capital. They will optimally borrow the
full Rs. 12,000 and scale up their business accordingly, taking advantage of the constant
marginal returns (group 4). These households are not pushed out of the poverty trap by
credit; they were already out of the poverty trap zone. Group 4 households simply benefit
from running their business at a larger scale.
   To decompose what share of the total treatment e ects are coming from each of these
groups, we sort households on the basis of their initial wealth into the four groups using
                            MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                   34

the mapping between wealth and capital in the no-credit regime. We then calculate group-
specific treatment e ects by taking the di erence in period 6 capital between treatment
(who were exposed to microcredit for 4 periods before it was withdrawn) and control (who
were exposed to microcredit for just 2 periods before it was withdrawn) and scaling these
e ects by the share of our sample who fall into each group. Recall that Group 1 has very
small treatment e ects and group 2 has a zero treatment e ect, so the relevant question
is the share of the overall e ect coming from group 3 (who escape the poverty trap) vs.
group 4 (who scale up their businesses).
   We find that the households in our sample are roughly evenly distributed between groups
2, 3 and 4: 33% are in group 2, 37% in group 3 and 30% are in group 4. (Group 1 is a
negligible share.) Of the e ect on total capital, 73% is driven by escape from the poverty
trap (group 3) and 27% is driven by accelerated growth in group 4. For revenues, 68% is
driven by the poverty trap e ect and 32% by the scale-up e ect. (The increase in revenues
is a bit more skewed to the already productive businesses because, unlike those escaping
the poverty trap, they have already paid the fixed cost.) The e ect of microcredit working
through allowing households to escape from a poverty trap is a quantitatively significant
phenomenon, accounting for roughly two thirds of the increase in revenues, and three
quarters of the increase in business investment.




                             6. Conclusion and Discussion

   We use the long-run, persistent e ects of a randomized microfinance evaluation to shed
light on the old, but elusive, question of whether fixed costs can give rise to poverty traps.
The universal withdrawal of microfinance from the entire study area in 2010 (two years
before we surveyed respondents for the third endline), overlaid on a setting with random-
ized variation in microcredit access, create a setting uniquely well-suited to addressing this
question. We show that the e ects of access to formal credit through microfinance are
highly heterogeneous. Essentially all of the benefits of credit access accrue by increasing
entrepreneurship on the intensive margin: for those individuals with an existing business
before the entry of microfinance (who we call gung-ho entrepreneurs or GEs), we find eco-
nomically meaningful, positive e ects on household businesses and consumption. Within
this group, the bulk of e ects come from households who escape from the fixed-cost-driven
poverty trap and move into a more productive technology (with the remainder coming
from already-productive businesses scaling up to exploit constant returns). The rest of
the sample­those who start new businesses, or who never start a business at all­exhibit
essentially zero impact of credit access. Notably, for this group the e ect is a fairly precise
zero throughout the distribution: while these reluctant entrepreneurs and consumption
                              MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                      35

borrowers do not experience benefits from microcredit access, neither do they appear to
experience harm.
   Using the randomized variation to estimate production parameters for the gung-ho
entrepreneurs, we find that the data are consistent with the co-existence of multiple pro-
duction technologies, one of which only becomes optimal at su ciently high levels of
capital. We model this as a fixed cost: individuals with su cient capital can pay the fixed
cost to operate a technology with higher marginal returns; while those with less capital
must make due with a technology that does not have an upfront cost, but has lower TFP
and decreasing returns. Embedding these production parameters into a dynamic model of
consumption and investment reveals that the estimated parameters give rise to a poverty
trap: low-wealth GE households remain poor because saving up for the better technology
is not possible when they can only access the decreasing return technology. Moreover,
the size of the credit infusion that we observe for the treatment group in our data (which
comprises both microcredit and the crowd-in of informal credit) is su cient to allow a
significant share of intermediate-wealth GEs to escape this poverty trap. This explains
why the treatment e ects persist--and even grow--after microcredit is removed from both
treatment and control areas.
   One important ingredient in understanding the disparate impacts of microfinance is the
informal credit market. We are among the first to use experimental variation to study
this interaction between access to formal and informal finance.50 We find evidence for
the "crowdout" hypothesis among the reluctant entrepreneurs: access to formal finance
reduces these households' takeup of informal credit. This crowdout e ect may explain why
impacts of microfinance are minimal among certain sub-populations: while microfinance
may reduce borrowing costs, overall demand for credit may change very little for some
groups. In contrast, microfinance crowds in other sources of borrowing among the GEs
and is key to replicating the magnitudes of the long run impacts in the model simulations.
It is therefore essential for policymakers to understand these interactions when designing
financial inclusion policies and when targeting financial products to specific groups.
   Of course, some firms will be able to escape the poverty trap without the interven-
tion, due to wealth, luck, talent or a combination of all three. However, our results show
that short-term access to credit allows a significantly higher proportion of talented en-
trepreneurs to scale up their businesses. In sum, it appears that there are indeed sizable
benefits from microfinance for some people, but it takes time for these benefits to accu-
mulate. And it is important to look for the impacts in the right place. The disappointing
e ect of microfinance overall may be related to lenders' lack or willingness (or ability) to
identify the right beneficiaries.
50Karlan and Zinman (2018) find evidence of crowd-in across di erent (formal) microlenders in Mexico.
However, to our knowledge we are among the first to examine the relationship between microcredit and
informal credit access.
                          MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                               36

                                     References

Ahgion, P. and P. Bolton (1997): "A Theory of Trickle-Down Growth and Develop-
  ment," Review of Economic Studies, 64, 151­172.
Andreoni, J. and C. Sprenger (2012): "Estimating time preferences from convex
  budgets," American Economic Review, 102, 3333­56.
Angelucci, M., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2015): "Microcredit Impacts: Evi-
  dence from a Randomized Microcredit Program Placement Experiment by Compar-
  tamos Banco," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 151­82.
Attanasio, O., B. Augsburg, R. De Haas, E. Fitzsimons, and H. Harmgart
  (2015): "The Impacts of Microfinance: Evidence from Joint-Liability Lending in Mon-
  golia," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 90­122.
Augsburg, B., R. De Haas, H. Harmgart, and C. Meghir (2015): "The Impacts
  of Microcredit: Evidence from Bosnia and Herzegovina," American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, 7, 183­203.
Balboni, C., O. Bandiera, R. Burgess, M. Ghatak, and A. Heil (2018): "Why
  do People Stay Poor?" Tech. rep.
Bandiera, O., R. Burgess, N. Das, S. Gulesci, I. Rasul, and M. Sulaiman
  (2017): "Labor markets and poverty in village economies," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 132, 811­870.
Banerjee, A., E. Breza, E. Duflo, C. Kinnan, and K. Prathap (2014): "Micro-
  finance as commitment savings: Evidence from the AP crisis aftermath," Tech. rep.,
  Working Paper.
Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, R. Glennerster, and C. Kinnan (2015): "The Miracle of
  Microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation," American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, 7, 22­53.
Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, and R. Hornbeck (2018a): "How much do existing bor-
  rowers value Microfinance? Evidence from an experiment on bundling Microcredit and
  insurance," Economica, 85, 671­700.
Banerjee, A. V., E. Breza, A. G. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, M. O. Jackson,
  and C. Kinnan (2018b): "Changes in social network structure in response to exposure
  to formal credit markets," w.
Banerjee, A. V. and E. Duflo (2005): "Growth theory through the lens of develop-
  ment economics," Handbook of economic growth, 1, 473­552.
------ (2014): "Do firms want to borrow more? Testing credit constraints using a directed
  lending program," Review of Economic Studies, 81, 572­607.
Banerjee, A. V. and A. F. Newman (1993): "Occupational Choice and the Process
  of Development," Journal of Political Economy, 101, 274­298.
                          MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                             37

Beaman, L., D. Karlan, B. Thuysbaert, and C. Udry (2015): "Selection into
  Credit Markets: Evidence from Agriculture in Mali," Tech. rep.
Breza, E. and C. Kinnan (2018): "Measuring the equilibrium impacts of credit: Ev-
  idence from the Indian microfinance crisis," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Buera, F. J., J. P. Kaboski, and Y. Shin (2011): "Finance and development: A tale
  of two sectors," American economic review, 101, 1964­2002.
------ (2017): "The Macroeconomics of Microfinance," .
Chernozhukov, V., M. Demirer, E. Duflo, and I. Fernandez-Val (2018):
  "Generic machine learning inference on heterogenous treatment e ects in randomized
  experiments," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Crépon, B., F. Devoto, E. Duflo, and W. Parienté (2015): "Estimating the
  Impact of Microcredit on Those Who Take It Up: Evidence from a Randomized Exper-
  iment in Morocco," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 123­50.
Dasgupta, P. and D. Ray (1986): "Inequality as determinant of malnutrition and
  unemployment: theory," The Economic Journal, 96, 1011­1034.
Diao, X., J. Kweka, and M. McMillan (2016): "Economic transformation in Africa
  from the bottom up: Evidence from Tanzania," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Fink, G., B. K. Jack, and F. Masiye (2018): "Seasonal Liquidity, Rural Labor Markets
  and Agricultural Production," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Frederick, S., G. Loewenstein, and T. O'donoghue (2002): "Time discounting
  and time preference: A critical review," Journal of economic literature, 40, 351­401.
Hussam, R., N. Rigol, and B. Roth (2018): "Targeting High Ability Entrepreneurs
  Using Community Information: Mechanism Design In The Field," Tech. rep.
Kaboski, J., M. Lipscomb, V. Midrigan, and C. Pelnik (2019): "How Important are
  Nonconvexities for Savings and Development? Experimental Evidence from Uganda,"
  Tech. rep.
Kaboski, J. and R. Townsend (2011): "A structural evaluation of a large-scale quasi-
  experimental microfinance initiative," Econometrica, 79, 1357­1406.
Karaivanov, A. and T. Yindok (2015): "Involuntary Entrepreneurship: Evidence
  from Thai Urban Data," SFU Working Paper.
Karlan, D. and J. Zinman (2009): "Expanding credit access: Using randomized supply
  decisions to estimate the impacts," The Review of Financial Studies, 23, 433­464.
------ (2018): "Long-run price elasticities of demand for credit: evidence from a coun-
  trywide field experiment in Mexico," The Review of Economic Studies, 86, 1704­1746.
LA PORTA, R. and A. SHLEIFER (2008): "The Uno cial Economy and Economic
  Development," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
                         MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                            38

Lee, D. S. (2009): "Training, wages, and sample selection: Estimating sharp bounds on
  treatment e ects," The Review of Economic Studies, 76, 1071­1102.
Lewis, B., N. Agrawal, C. Gadi, D. Goyal, J. Kulkarni, A. Tawakley,
  S. Viswanathan, A. Wadhwani, A. Augereau, V. Bhalla, et al. (2001): "India:
  The growth imperative," The McKinsey Global Institute, 3.
Lloyd-Ellis, H. and D. Bernhardt (2000): "Enterprise, inequality and economic
  development," The Review of Economic Studies, 67, 147­168.
Maitra, P., S. Mitra, D. Mookherjee, A. Motta, and S. Visaria (2017): "Fi-
  nancing smallholder agriculture: An experiment with agent-intermediated microloans
  in India," Journal of Development Economics, 127, 306­337.
McKenzie, D. and C. Woodruff (2006): "Do entry costs provide an empirical basis
  for poverty traps? Evidence from Mexican microenterprises," Economic development
  and cultural change, 55, 3­42.
Meager, R. (2019): "Understanding the average impact of microcredit expansions: A
  Bayesian hierarchical analysis of seven randomized experiments," American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics, 11, 57­91.
Tarozzi, A., J. Desai, and K. Johnson (2015): "The Impacts of Microcredit: Evidence
  from Ethiopia," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 54­89.
                               MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                          39

                                               Figures

                                            Panel A: GEs




                                           Panel B: non-GEs




                             Figure 1. Treatment e ects over time
     Note: The left panel shows control means and the right panel shows treatment e ects with 95%
 confidence intervals. The control means of assets and profits are in 1000s of rupees, while the treatment
  e ects are in standard deviations; the # business variable is in units of businesses (both control mean
and treatment e ect), and the business expenditure and revenue outcomes are in log rupees (both control
                                       mean and treatment e ect).
                                                                      MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                                                             40




                                                 Endline sample frame
                                                       selection
                                                        Jul. '07
                                                                                                                   Endline 2                                                Endline 3
                                                 Census          Endline 1*                                       Nov. '09-Jun.                                            Aug. '12-Feb.
           Baseline                            Feb.-Jul. '07   Aug. '07-Apr. '08                                       '10                                                      '13



Jan. '05   Jul. '05   Jan. '06    Jul. '06   Jan. '07   Jul. '07      Jan. '08   Jul. '08   Jan. '09   Jul. '09   Jan. '10    Jul. '10   Jan. '11 Jul. '11   Jan. '12 Jul. '12    Jan. '13   Jul. '13

                                 Spandana moves into
                                    treatment areas                Spandana begins to move into              AP Emergency Ordinance         Malegam      RBI guidelines      AP High Court upholds AP
                                   Apr. '06-Apr. '07                      control areas                              issued                  Report         issued                   MFI Act
                                                                            May '08                              Oct. 15, 2010              Jan. '11      May 2011                   Feb. '13


                                                         *Note: No treatment area was surveyed for endline 1 until at least one year
                                                         had elapsed from the start of Spandana lending in that area.



                                        Figure 2. Timeline of Survey Activities and Microfinance Crisis
               MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                       41




(a) Gung-ho Entrepreneurs              (b) Non gung-ho households




(c) Gung-ho Entrepreneurs              (d) Non gung-ho households




(e) Gung-ho Entrepreneurs              (f) Non gung-ho households

              Figure 3. Quantile treatment e ects
                                                 MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                                                         42



                                                                   Overlapping Sample

                                              MFI enters AT                                                           Endline

                                                                                                                                         Treatment
Matched                                                                                                                                  effect for post-
pair A                                                                                                                                   MFI businesses


                                            MFI would have
                                             entered AC

                                                                                                  MFI enters BT

Matched                                                                                                                                  Treatment
pair B                                                                                                                                   effect for pre-
                                                                                                                                         MFI businesses

                                                                        Businesses MFI would have
                                                                          open      entered BC


                                                             t1              t2            Time    t3                        t4

                                      Figure 4. Overlapping sample identification
      1




                                                                                  1
      .8




                                                                                  .8
          .6




                                                                                      .6
   Density




                                                                               Density
 .4




                                                                             .4
      .2




                                                                                  .2
      0




                                                                                  0




               0                5                       10              15                 0            5                           10             15
                          log(total capital (K + WC+ wages) + 1)                                            log(Biz Revenues + 1)

                                  Control             Treatment                                             Control            Treatment



                           (a) Total Capital                                                            (b) Revenues

                   Figure 5. Distributions (CDFs) of Total Capital and Revenues by Treat-
                   ment Status (EL1, overlapping sample only)
                                                        MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                       43


                                                                    Estimated production functions
                                           14


                                           12


                                           10

                             Log Revenue
                                           8


                                           6


                                           4
                                                                                                 Low Technology
                                                                                                 High Technology
                                           2


                                           0
                                                0        2           4        6         8        10          12    14
                                                                           Log Total Capital


                                                         Figure 6. Production functions




                                                                     Estimated gross profit functions
                    12
                                                Low Technology
                                                High Technology
                                                Savings Technology
                    11



                    10
Log Gross Profits




                     9



                     8



                     7



                     6



                     5
                         5                          6           7             8             9           10         11   12
                                                                             Log Total Capital


                                                        Figure 7. Gross profit functions
                                  MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                       44

                                              Predicted QTE for capital
                18000




                12000
          QTE




                6000




                    0




                -6000
                        0   0.1   0.2   0.3      0.4     0.5      0.6     0.7   0.8   0.9     1
                                                       Quantile


            Figure 8. Model-implied quantile treatment e ects for EL3 capital
 Note: This figure plots the implied treatment e ect on expected capital in year 6; see text for details.
 The lower quantile exhibit a positive predicted treatment e ect because in some draws of the capital
shock, even a low wealth individual could be pushed out of the poverty trap region by the extra capital
                                    access resulting from treatment.
                                          MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                          45


                            10 4                             Wealth transitions
                   2
                                   Credit Regime
                  1.8              No Credit Regime
                                   45 degree line
                                   Median baseline
                  1.6              75th %ile



                  1.4
Wealth tomorrow




                  1.2


                   1


                  0.8


                  0.6


                  0.4


                  0.2


                   0
                        0                             5000                        10000   15000
                                                               Wealth today


                    Figure 9. Wealth transitions with and without credit access
                       MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                              46

                                       Tables

Table 1. Endline 3 summary household and business statistics (control group)

                                                         Obs    Mean    Std. Dev

        Household composition
        # members                                       2785 6.894       2.978
        # adults (Ø 16 years old)                       2785 4.221       1.975
        # children (< 16 years old)                     2785 1.638       1.368
        Male head                                       2784 0.765       0.424
        Head's age                                      2784 44.379      9.990
        Head with no education                          2784 0.334       0.472


        Access to credit (endline 2)
        Loan from Spandana                               2946   0.112    0.316
        Loan from other MFI                              2946   0.268    0.443
        Loan from a bank                                 2946   0.073    0.260
        Informal loan                                    2946   0.603    0.489
        Loan from Self-Help Group or other savings group 2946   0.092    0.290
        Any type of loan                                 2946   0.905    0.293


        Amount borrowed at endline 2 from (Rs.):
        Spandana                                        2946    1898      6769
        Other MFI                                       2946     4773    10731
        Bank                                            2946    5951     39247
        Informal loan                                   2946    32252    76606
        Self-Help Group or other savings group          2946    1003      5223
        Total                                           2946    88244   144194


        Businesses
        Has a business                                  2785 0.307        0.461
        Gung-ho entrepreneur (GE)                       2786 0.304        0.460
        # of businesses                                 2785 0.371        0.613
        # of businesses managed by women                2785 0.173        0.417
        Share businesses managed by women                854 0.466        0.475
        Sales (Rs.)                                     802 25240        80867
        Expenses (Rs.)                                   849 16300       70729
        Investment (Rs.)                                 854  3496       30499
        More than 1 worker in any business              850 0.335         0.472
        More than 2 workers in any business              850 0.115        0.320
        # worker in largest business                     850 1.660        1.884
        Total work hours (hrs/week)                      854 46.310      47.898


        Consumption (per household per month)
        Consumption (Rs.)                               2781    13077    9907
        Non-durables cons (Rs.)                         2781    11960    8455
        Durables cons (Rs.)                             2785     1115    3362
        Asset index                                     2785    2.705    0.831
                              MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                              47

                              Table 2. Exposure to microfinance

                                   (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)
                              Borrowed from Borrowed from Outstanding Borrowed from
                              MFI in last 3 MFI in last 3 MFI loan in MFI between
                              years (EL1 1) years (EL2 2) 10/10 (EL3) 2004 and 2010

Panel A: Cumulative exposure to microcredit
Treatment                   0.109***         0.032              -0.009        0.044*
                             (0.022)        (0.022)            (0.018)        (0.024)

Control Mean                      0.256          0.420          0.202          0.498
Control Std. Dev.                 0.436          0.494          0.402          0.500
Observations                      6804           6128           5745           5467

Panel B: Cumulative exposure to microcredit by entrepreneurial status
Gung-ho entrepreneur (GE)   0.163***       0.112***     0.035**       0.110***
                             (0.023)        (0.022)      (0.016)       (0.022)
Treatment                   0.109***         0.029        -0.012        0.036
                             (0.021)        (0.023)      (0.019)       (0.026)
Treatment  GE                 -0.002         0.005         0.009        0.020
                             (0.030)        (0.030)      (0.025)       (0.032)

Treatment + Treat  GE             0.107          0.034          -0.003         0.057
P(Treat + Treat  GE "= 0)         0.001          0.312           0.899         0.091
Control Mean (Non-GEs)            0.206          0.385           0.190         0.463
Control Std. Dev. (Non-GEs)       0.404          0.487           0.392         0.499
Observations                      6804           6128            5745          5467


                                   (1)           (2)              (3)        (4)           (5)
                                Any MFI        Number of      Total MFI Any Spandana Total Spandana
                                  loan         MFI loans     loan amount    loan         amount

Panel C: Microcredit exposure as of endline 2
Treatment                      0.008           0.026          946.417**      0.061***       1132.643***
                              (0.020)         (0.038)         (474.365)       (0.014)        (257.510)

Control Mean                      0.332          0.530         6670.434        0.112          1897.522
Control Std. Dev.                 0.471          0.937        13627.432        0.316          6768.526
Observations                      6143           6143            6143          6143             6143

Panel D: Microcredit exposure as of endline    2 by entrepreneurial status
Gung-ho entrepreneur (GE)    0.093***          0.173***    2557.957***       0.052***        798.113**
                              (0.020)           (0.049)     (671.712)         (0.018)         (388.901)
Treatment                      0.003             0.000       677.234         0.050***        800.099***
                              (0.021)           (0.038)     (508.180)         (0.014)         (267.354)
Treatment  GE                  0.013             0.075       754.962           0.034         1036.985**
                              (0.031)           (0.073)     (929.289)         (0.024)         (504.799)

Treat + Treat  GE                 0.016          0.075        1432.197         0.083          1837.084
P(Treat + Treat  GE "= 0)         0.617          0.299           0.102         0.001           0.000
Control Mean (Non-GEs)            0.302          0.472         5812.723        0.096          1629.648
Control Std. Dev. (Non-GEs)       0.459          0.878        12661.459        0.294          6782.720
Observations                      6143           6143            6143          6143             6143
 Notes: Standard errors, clustered at the area level, reported in parentheses. * significant at the 10%
 level, ** significant at the 5% level, *** significant at the 1% level. All regressions control for stratum
 FEs. In Panels A and B, the column 1 outcome is an indicator for ever borrowing in the 3 years before
 endline 1 (in 2007/2008). The column 2 outcome is any borrowing from microfinance in the 3 years
 before endline 2. Column 3 reports the e ects of the initial treatment on having a loan outstanding
 in October 2010, reported in endline 3. In column 4, the outcome is an indicator for whether the
 household ever reported borrowing at any time in any survey round. In Panels C and D, all outcomes
 are measured as of endline 2. The col 1 outcome is whether a household had an active loan EL 2. The
 outcome in cols 2 and 3 are the number and value of MFI loans outstanding; outcomes in cols 4 and
 5 are the number and value of Spandana loans outstanding.
                              MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                             48

                             Table 3. Total borrowing (endline 3)

                                           (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)             (5)
                                        All loans       All loans       Loans for           Network       Net degree
                                                       (informal)     bus. (informal)       Degree        (financial)

Panel A: Treatment e ects
Treatment                  1600.639                     2668.157        4731.785***         -0.369***      -0.307***
                          (5104.127)                   (3545.218)        (1500.096)          (0.134)        (0.090)

Control Mean                           79283.288 57151.686      15062.722                     5.948            4.372
Control Std. Dev.                      1.56e+05   1.13e+05      43892.196                     3.722            2.603
Observations                             5744       5744           5744                       5492             5492
Panel B: Treatment e ects             by entrepreneurial status
Gung-ho entrepreneur (GE)             11801.721* 3647.067      3798.873**                     0.195          0.145
                                      (6119.067) (5833.084)    (1766.060)                    (0.163)        (0.106)
Treatment                              -2808.930  -1683.957      1453.121                   -0.492***      -0.382***
                                      (5662.034) (4226.917)    (1853.462)                    (0.136)        (0.094)
Treatment  GE                          14174.488 14085.007*   10598.425**                     0.394*         0.238
                                      (9651.940) (7387.176)    (4289.273)                    (0.228)        (0.144)

Treatment + Treat  GE                  11365.558       12401.050          12051.547           -0.098           -0.144
P(Treat + Treat  GE "= 0)                0.194           0.046              0.001             0.671            0.316
Control Mean (Non-GEs)                 74493.933       55097.667          13677.772            5.903           4.328
Control Std. Dev. (Non-GEs)            1.56e+05        1.15e+05           41486.339           3.655             2.522
Observations                             5744            5744               5744               5492             5492
  Notes: Standard errors, clustered at the area level, reported in parentheses. * significant at the 10%
  level, ** significant at the 5% level, *** significant at the 1% level. Loans for business are loans which
  the household reported they devoted to a business purpose. Informal borrowing is loans from family,
  friends, neighbors, and business associates such as suppliers and customers. Network degree is based
  on questions regarding who the respondent would approach/be approached by for di erent types of
  assistance or ocial situations. Financial network degree examines only questions regarding financial
  transactions. See text for details.
                                MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                                   49

                              Table 4. Business outcomes (endline 3)

                                 (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)
                                                     Started a
                                                    business in      Total
                                Has a     Number of   last 12       Assets        Log        Log       Profit
                               business    business   months        (stock)     expenses   revenue     (level)

Panel A: Treatment e ects
Treatment                 0.038*           0.056*       0.006     1565.222***   0.273*     0.311**   576.774***
                          (0.020)          (0.031)     (0.005)     (426.789)    (0.140)    (0.157)    (179.375)

Control Mean                    0.307       0.371      0.032        6680.551     2.293      2.637     2066.436
Control Std. Dev.               0.461       0.613      0.176       20448.064     3.776      4.180     6039.441
Observations                    5744        5744       5744           5744       5724       5589        5580

Panel B: Treatment e ects by entrepreneurial status
Gung-ho entrepreneur (GE) 0.422*** 0.525***     0.025***          8906.264*** 3.361*** 3.892*** 3493.457***
                           (0.020)   (0.026)     (0.008)            (973.087)  (0.174)  (0.180)  (350.655)
Treatment                   0.024     0.031       0.009              816.198    0.101    0.126    263.906
                           (0.018)   (0.024)     (0.006)            (526.966)  (0.114)  (0.128)  (168.567)
Treatment  GE               0.040   0.076**       -0.011            2325.597  0.503** 0.593** 1004.523**
                           (0.028)   (0.035)     (0.013)           (1483.448)  (0.221)  (0.231)  (501.565)

Treatment + Treat  GE           0.064       0.107      -0.002       3141.795     0.605      0.719     1268.429
P(Treat + Treat  GE "= 0)       0.008       0.008      0.849          0.011      0.003      0.001       0.004
Control Mean (Non-GEs)          0.177       0.208      0.025        3974.639     1.258      1.452      988.890
Control Std. Dev. (Non-GEs)     0.382       0.483      0.155       17568.209     2.982      3.318     4065.047
Observations                    5744        5744        5744          5744       5724       5589        5580



   Notes: Standard errors, clustered at the area level, reported in parentheses. Assets, expenses, revenues
   and profits are monthly and winsorized at the 0.5 and 99.5 percentiles. Log is log (x + 1). * significant
   at the 10% level, ** significant at the 5% level, *** significant at the 1% level. All regressions control
   for stratum FEs.
                                MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                           50

                        Table 5. Labor market outcomes (endline 3)

                                  (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)
                              More than 1 More than 2
                               worker in   worker in  Workers in     Total        Total    Total hrs Closed a
                                 any         any        largest      wages       weekly     in self   business
                               business    business    business      paid       labor hrs employment in last yr

Panel A: Treatment e ects
Treatment                       0.030**     0.016**     0.208**    373.747***    2.170      2.752**    0.008**
                                (0.015)     (0.006)     (0.087)     (133.018)   (1.661)     (1.159)    (0.004)

Control Mean                     0.102       0.035       0.507       348.367     87.490     15.400      0.027
Control Std. Dev.                0.303       0.184       1.292      4700.427     56.528     30.304      0.161
Observations                     5738        5738        5738         5736        5744       5744       5744

Panel B: Treatment e ects by entrepreneurial status
Gung-ho entrepreneur (GE)   0.174***    0.055***       0.765***     488.639*    4.798**    23.537***   0.019**
                             (0.018)     (0.009)        (0.071)    (266.816)    (2.107)     (1.587)    (0.008)
Treatment                     0.017       0.009         0.174**    275.264**     0.150       1.259      0.006
                             (0.012)     (0.006)        (0.076)    (118.604)    (2.021)     (0.859)    (0.004)
Treatment  GE                 0.040      0.023*          0.102       311.864     6.501*     4.569**     0.006
                             (0.024)     (0.013)        (0.143)    (368.366)    (3.321)     (1.962)    (0.012)

Treatment + Treat  GE            0.057       0.032       0.277       587.127     6.651      5.827       0.012
P(Treat + Treat  GE "= 0)        0.025       0.010       0.060        0.093       0.017      0.004      0.228
Control Mean (Non-GEs)           0.049       0.019       0.279       197.888     86.111      8.175      0.021
Control Std. Dev. (Non-GEs)      0.215       0.135       0.865      2496.403     55.490     22.456      0.144
Observations                     5738        5738        5738         5736        5744       5744       5744



   Notes: Standard errors, clustered at the area level, reported in parentheses. Durables variables (cols
   3-5) winsorized at the 95th percentile. * significant at the 10% level, ** significant at the 5% level,
   *** significant at the 1% level. All regressions control for stratum FEs.
                                         Table 6. Reduced form: consumption (endline 3)

                                            (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
                                         Per capita Temptation
                                        consumption    goods                Non-business   Business    Festivals   Education    Health
                                         (monthly)   (monthly) All durables   durables     durables    (annual)     (annual)   (annual)

          Panel A: Treatment e ects
          Treatment                       -11.583      -19.609   559.362*      351.696     23.900***    388.891     86.911      -45.121
                                         (58.735)     (32.860)   (283.691)    (239.737)     (8.242)    (304.751)   (88.338)    (99.606)

          Control Mean                   2791.712     619.036    9264.343     8482.853      88.575     8932.731    1724.557    1775.509
          Control Std. Dev.              1964.732     971.999    15748.713    14264.700     351.011    10950.345   3105.393    4107.905
          Observations                     5738        5739        5744         5744         5744        5737        5738        5738

          Panel B: Treatment e ects by entrepreneurial status
          Gung-ho entrepreneur (GE)   106.282       11.260       20.574        -513.234    92.895***    512.767    307.695**    91.821
                                      (77.229)    (29.245)     (658.347)      (563.800)     (16.248)   (551.631)   (153.525)   (177.110)
          Treatment                    -48.970     -21.350      -54.105        -175.322       6.847     351.483     111.138     -77.592
                                      (61.965)    (37.511)     (385.449)      (323.643)      (9.196)   (372.316)   (108.004)   (122.781)
          Treatment  GE               120.166       5.530     1991.273**     1716.980**     54.254**    114.824     -82.426     104.366
                                     (107.356)    (48.037)     (850.072)      (725.416)     (26.063)   (663.376)   (211.525)   (239.184)

          Treatment + Treat  GE           71.196      -15.821     1937.168    1541.658      61.101      466.308     28.712      26.775
          P(Treat + Treat  GE "= 0)       0.491        0.721        0.004        0.007       0.007       0.394      0.869        0.891
          Control Mean (Non-GEs)         2759.209     614.207     9266.641     8635.084     60.866     8781.591    1631.834    1736.854
          Control Std. Dev. (Non-GEs)    1886.292     986.241    15716.467    14350.628     293.414    9151.870    2663.565    4262.700
          Observations                     5738        5739         5744         5744        5744        5737        5738        5738
                                                                                                                                                    MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS




Notes: Standard errors, clustered at the area level, reported in parentheses. * significant at the 10% level, ** significant at the 5% level, ***
significant at the 1% level. All regressions control for stratum FEs.
                                                                                                                                                    51
                              MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                            52

             Table 7. Lending balance in October 2010 (pre-ordinance)

                                                  (1)         (2)          (3)
                                                MFI Loan Installments Large windfall

               Treatment                            -0.012        0.039      0.004
                                                   (0.019)      (0.024)     (0.005)
               Gung-ho entrepreneur (GE)           0.035**       0.002       0.004
                                                   (0.016)      (0.029)     (0.006)
               Treatment  GE                        0.009        -0.016      0.004
                                                   (0.025)      (0.037)     (0.010)

               Control Mean                         0.202       0.386        0.027
               Control Std. Dev.                    0.402       0.297        0.161
               Observations                         5745        1095         5745


Notes: Standard errors, clustered at the area level, reported in parentheses. * significant at the 10%
level, ** significant at the 5% level, *** significant at the 1% level.


              Table 8. Business results, overlapping sample (endline 1)

                               (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)
                           Workers in                                                    Index of
                             largest    Assets         Log          Log                  business
                            business    (stock)      expenses     revenue     Profit     variables

       Panel A: Entered entrepreneurship pre-2006
       Treatment          0.024    391.360    0.316                0.434    2220.869**   0.071*
                         (0.097)  (406.039)  (0.194)              (0.280)    (946.406)   (0.037)

       Control Mean          0.452      2614.149      7.339        7.716     2996.170     0.012
       Control Std. Dev.     1.828      4873.170      2.844        3.127    14984.800     0.567
       Observations          1305         1184        1273         1232        1232       1305

       Panel B: Entered entrepreneurship post-2006, pre-Spandana
       Treatment         0.212*    900.734    0.488      1.008*             2801.011**   0.148**
                         (0.123)  (829.002)  (0.456)     (0.567)            (1293.561)   (0.066)

       Control Mean          0.033      2100.623      6.758        7.093     1164.737     -0.106
       Control Std. Dev.     0.181      3961.748      2.853        2.959     6351.331      0.321
       Observations           133         119          130          128        128          133

       Panel C: Entered entrepreneurship post-2006, post-Spandana
       Treatment          -0.288   -1500.608  -0.566      -1.007             -1400.672    -0.183
                         (0.265)  (1159.788) (0.648)     (0.823)            (1286.628)   (0.112)

       Control Mean          0.242      2539.005      6.377        6.719     1785.719     -0.021
       Control Std. Dev.     1.110      4850.283      3.402        3.591     6797.191      0.490
       Observations           164         145          158          154        154          164


Notes: Standard errors, clustered at the area level, reported in parentheses. * significant at the 10%
level, ** significant at the 5% level, *** significant at the 1% level. All regressions control for stratum
FEs.
                            MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                            53

              Table 9. Total borrowing, overlapping sample (endline 1)

                                    (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)
                                 All loans       Loans for        All loans     Loans for bus.
                                                 business        (Informal)      (Informal)

     Treatment                    -14,584          -18,760         -3,831           -2,641
                                 (21,208)         (16,807)        (13,361)         (5,808)
     Treatment  GE                36,556          43,283*          16,156          12,579*
                                 (36,356)         (25,498)        (21,251)         (6,846)

     Observations                275           275           275           275
     FE                    Stratum  Post Stratum  Post Stratum  Post Stratum  Post
     Control Mean (Non-GE)      80617         34555         46710         11977
Notes: Standard errors, clustered at the area level, reported in parentheses. * significant at the 10%
level, ** significant at the 5% level, *** significant at the 1% level. GE means a business which entered
before the MFI entered (or would have entered) a treatment (control) area. Loans for business are
loans which the household reported they devoted to a business purpose. Informal borrowing is loans
from family, friends, neighbors, and business associates such as suppliers and customers.
                              MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                           54

                          Appendix A. Supplemental Tables

            Table 10. Reduced form: worries and happiness (endline 3)

                                          (1)      (2)     (3)       (4)        (5)
                                        Overall Financial         Financial
                                        worries worries Happiness security Beaten in
                                         index    index   scale     scale   last month

          Panel A: Treatment e ects
          Treatment                 -0.052*       -0.037   -0.082***    0.020       -0.002
                                    (0.030)      (0.031)    (0.027)    (0.053)     (0.004)

          Control Mean                  -0.000    -0.000     0.000      3.763      0.043
          Control Std. Dev.              0.588     0.658     1.000      1.270      0.204
          Observations                   5717      5717      5716       5721       5702

          Panel B: Treatment e ects by entrepreneurial status
          Gung-ho entrepreneur (GE)  0.039   0.045*     0.015           0.076     -0.016*
                                    (0.025) (0.024)    (0.034)         (0.060)    (0.009)
          Treatment                 -0.061*  -0.049   -0.088***         0.009      -0.000
                                    (0.032) (0.033)    (0.030)         (0.055)    (0.006)
          Treatment  GE              0.029    0.041     0.018           0.033      -0.005
                                    (0.036) (0.035)    (0.055)         (0.077)    (0.011)

          Treatment + Treat  GE         -0.033    -0.008     -0.069     0.042      -0.006
          P(Treat + Treat  GE "= 0)     0.416      0.830      0.160     0.603      0.478
          Control Mean (Non-GEs)        -0.014    -0.016     -0.005     3.745      0.049
          Control Std. Dev. (Non-GEs)    0.587     0.654      1.010     1.285      0.217
          Observations                   5717      5717       5716      5721        5702



Notes: Respondents were asked whether they were worried about potential stressors along 17 dimen-
sions. Six of the dimensions cover financial worries, such as worrying about not having enough money
for food, rent, healthcare, etc.; being worried about debt; and worried about finding work. The re-
maining 11 dimensions cover non-financial concerns relating to health risks (illness, accidents, deaths,
etc.) and various dimensions of conflict within and across households. For each of these dimensions,
the respondent rated how worried he or she was on a scale of 1-4, where 1 is not at all worried and 4 is
very worried. Haushofer and Shapiro (2013) show that responses to a set of questions similar to ours
(and on which our questionnaire is modeled) correlate with levels of salivary cortisol, a physiological
marker of stress. In addition to the "worries" questions, households were asked to rate themselves
on Likert scales for overall happiness and financial security, and were asked about the incidence of
domestic violence. All of the worries, happiness and financial security indexes are scaled to have units
of standard deviations. Larger outcomes for the index and scale variables indicate less worried and
happier households. Standard errors, clustered at the area level, reported in parentheses. * significant
at the 10% level, ** significant at the 5% level, *** significant at the 1% level. All regressions control
for stratum FEs.
                             MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                             55

                                      Table 11. Attrition

                  Attrition in treatment vs. control (relative to endline 1)
                  Found in endline 3, in treated             0.8315
                  Found in endline 3, in control             0.8602
                  p-value of di erence                        0.265

Notes: Standard errors, clustered at the area level, reported in parentheses. * significant at the 10%
level, ** significant at the 5% level, *** significant at the 1% level. All regressions control for stratum
FEs.
                                           Table 12. Main Results with Lee Bounds

                (1)        (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)        (6)          (7)          (8)         (9)         (10)         (11)
                 Informal loans      Businesses      Workers    Wages      Biz assets   Log inputs Log revenue    Profits     Biz index
               Any        Amt.      Any    Num.
Panel A: All Households
Treatment     -0.018    2311.846    0.033   0.049    0.186*    328.996** 1375.721***      0.236       0.272      509.051**    0.074***
             (0.013) (3055.914)    (0.018) (0.027)   (0.078)   (111.253)  (379.209)      (0.124)     (0.139)     (158.134)     (0.018)
Treatment
lower         -0.040 -1708.982     0.009     0.024    0.122     246.880    800.622        0.095       0.126        346.544      0.054
upper         0.000    16562.409   0.057     0.108    0.322     660.302    4059.850       0.512       0.571       1377.160      0.166
Observations 6863         6863     6863      6863     6857       6855        6863         6843        6708          6699        6863

Panel B: GE Households Only
Treatment     0.035 11532.067* 0.054* 0.092*          0.246     533.710    2796.175*     0.524*      0.628**     1152.770**   0.111***
             (0.023) (5450.123) (0.026) (0.039)      (0.152)   (327.819)   (1191.440)    (0.215)     (0.232)      (417.835)    (0.027)
Treatment
lower         0.019   8323.170   0.035   0.062        0.198     529.864    2203.546       0.357       0.391        948.023      0.090
upper         0.047  19155.102   0.063   0.122        0.411     457.400    4175.455       0.655       0.778       2079.608      0.149
Observations 2088       2088     2088    2088         2085       2083        2088         2078        2010          2006        2088

Panel C: Non-GE Households Only
Treatment    -0.041* -1892.724   0.019   0.024       0.151*     230.592     640.382       0.065       0.087       198.866     0.067**
             (0.017) (3838.662) (0.018) (0.025)      (0.074)   (118.377)   (516.518)     (0.116)     (0.129)     (171.452)    (0.021)
Treatment
lower         -0.066 -5994.197 -0.000    0.003        0.082     138.565     160.201       -0.071      -0.016      72.547        0.037
upper         -0.021 13434.927   0.051   0.083        0.257     420.839    3125.577        0.391      0.445       804.496       0.168
Observations 4775       4775     4775    4775         4772       4772        4775          4765        4698        4693         4775
                                                                                                                                          MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS
                                                                                                                                          56
                             MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                           57

                                Table 13. Windfall first stage

                                            Share of loan outstanding in Oct. 2010
                                                              (1)                      (2)

             Large windfall (broad def.)                  0.802***
                                                           (0.007)
             Large windfall (narrow def.)                                            0.848***
                                                                                      (0.007)

             Low WF Mean                                    0.081                     0.075
             Low WF Std. Dev.                               0.044                     0.038
             Observations                                   1095                      1095


Notes: Broad windfall measure is loans with maturities from 10 weeks before to 10 weeks after the
crisis; narrow windfall measure is loans with maturities from 8 weeks before to 8 weeks after the crisis.
All regressions control for an indicator for receiving either a small (loan duration less than 8 or 10
weeks as of the crisis) or large (loan duration more than 42 or 40 weeks as of the crisis) windfall.
Standard errors, clustered at the area level, reported in parentheses. * significant at the 10% level, **
significant at the 5% level, *** significant at the 1% level. All regressions control for stratum FEs.
                             MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                                  58

                                     Table 14. Windfall e ects

                               (1)        (2)      (3)           (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)
                                                Started a
                                               business in      Total
                              Has a Number of    last 12       Assets        Log        Log       Profit
                             business business   months        (stock)     expenses   revenue     (level)

Panel A: Windfall e ects (broad windfall measure)
Large windfall (broad def.)  -0.025  -0.024     -0.001         618.578      -0.322     -0.283    334.441
                            (0.048) (0.064)    (0.020)        (2294.784)   (0.428)    (0.471)   (728.523)

No WF Mean                    0.315      0.387      0.035      7044.668     2.307      2.659    2240.111
No WF Std. Dev.               0.465      0.632      0.183     20854.783     3.803      4.205    6623.068
Observations                  5744       5744       5744         5744       5724       5589       5580

Panel B: Windfall e ects by entrepreneurial status (broad     windfall measure)
Large windfall (broad def.)  0.029     0.034      -0.001        2684.679  -0.134       -0.034     196.712
                            (0.048)  (0.058)     (0.022)      (3308.989) (0.375)      (0.445)    (699.033)
Large windfall (B) X GE     -0.143*   -0.151      -0.001       -5503.608  -0.510       -0.799     252.115
                            (0.078)  (0.101)     (0.033)      (4797.283) (0.638)      (0.696)   (1357.417)

P(LWF + LWF  GE "= 0)         0.090      0.212      0.948       0.368       0.308      0.192      0.718

Panel C: Windfall e ects (narrow windfall measure)
Large windfall (narrow def.)  -0.015  -0.025    -0.009          322.944     -0.254     -0.204    448.723
                             (0.055) (0.074)   (0.024)        (2889.827)   (0.524)    (0.556)   (907.899)

No WF Mean                    0.315      0.387      0.035      7044.668     2.307      2.659    2240.111
No WF Std. Dev.               0.465      0.632      0.183     20854.783     3.803      4.205    6623.068
Observations                  5744       5744       5744         5744       5724       5589       5580

Panel D: Windfall e ects by entrepreneurial status (narrow windfall measure)
Large windfall (narrow def.)  0.030   0.022      -0.008    3706.244   -0.160           -0.146     -307.100
                             (0.056) (0.059)    (0.027)   (4453.758) (0.492)          (0.533)    (685.606)
Large windfall (N) X GE      -0.175*  -0.196      0.001    -9291.611  -0.768           -0.998    1016.813
                             (0.105) (0.119)    (0.026)   (5762.282) (0.806)          (0.913)   (1567.896)

P(LWF + LWF  GE "= 0)         0.095      0.127      0.783       0.104       0.212      0.153     0.649
No WF Mean (Non-GEs)          0.182      0.219      0.028      4083.416     1.238      1.434    1108.522
No WF Std. Dev. (Non-GEs)     0.386      0.509      0.164     17327.776     2.979      3.319    4721.134
Observations                  5744       5744       5744         5744       5724       5589       5580



 Notes: Broad windfall measure is loans with maturities from 10 weeks before to 10 weeks after the
 crisis; narrow windfall measure is loans with maturities from 8 weeks before to 8 weeks after the crisis.
 LWF is large windfall; B is broad and N is narrow. GE is gung-ho entrepreneur. All regressions control
 for an indicator for receiving either a small (loan duration less than 8 or 10 weeks as of the crisis) or
 large (loan duration more than 42 or 40 weeks as of the crisis) windfall. Assets, expenses, revenues
 and profits winsorized at the 0.5 and 99.5 percentiles. Standard errors, clustered at the area level,
 reported in parentheses. * significant at the 10% level, ** significant at the 5% level, *** significant
 at the 1% level. All regressions control for stratum FEs.
                               MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                        59

    Table 15. Sensitivity of Simulated Treamtent E ects to Preference
    Paramters and Method for Eliciting Baseline Wealth

                                Panel A: Preference Parameters
                                                            
                    !                0.86          1.00            1.25         1.50
                        0.85       8053.40       6955.73         5238.80      4007.89
                        0.90       7643.26       6836.85         4897.19      4008.76
                        0.95       7005.75       5808.94         4938.21      4020.33


                                 Panel B: Variance in iid Noise
                                                             "
                                      500          1500           3500          5000
               Predicted
              Treatment            8053.40       7608.05         7228.27      7662.29
                Effect: K
Notes: Table shows the EL3 treatment e ects from the simulated data varying the preferences param-
eters in Panel A and the iid noise parameter in Panel B. -- is the discount factor and  is the CRRA
curvature parameter. < is the variance of the iid noise applied to the predicted capital decisions under
the model.
                           MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                            60

                         Appendix B. Supplemental figures




     Figure 10. Experience vs. Selection: Treatment e ects on index of busi-
     ness outcomes
Note: The figure plots the treatment e ects for gung-ho entrepreneurs, by quintile of business age
                                    (1=oldest, 5=youngest).
                          MICROFINANCE AND POVERTY TRAPS                                     61




           Appendix C. Production function estimation details

We do the GMM estimation as follows:
 (1) Split the data into 15 quantiles (approx. 20 firms each): this trades o flexibility
     vs. sample size.
                                                 ¯ and a shock matrix for business survival
 (2) Define a grid for parameters A1 , A2 , ­1 , K
     (fl).
 (3) Calculate revenues under each technology, y     ^1 and y ^2 , for every value of the pa-
     rameters in the grid, for each observed value in KT and KC
                                                           ú          ú . With probability 1-fl

     both y1 and y2 are 0 for a given value of KT   ú or K ú .
                                                            C
 (4) Take the max of y   ^1 and  ^
                                 y 2 to get ^
                                            y , the revenue   given the optimal technology
     choice.
 (5) Calculate the di erence between treatment and control for every observed capital
     value by taking y^T  y ^C .
 (6) Aggregate the di erence calculated above into 15 bins and take the average of each
     bin.
 (7) Calculate the di erence between the quantiles of y   ^ for treatment and control ("td-
     i _pred").
 (8) Find the values in the grid that minimize the squared di erence between tdi _pred
     and tdi _data. (Where tdi _data is the observed di erence, from the data.)
