                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE TRANSFORMATION AND PERFORMANCE OF EMERGING MARKET ECONOMIES
       ACROSS THE GREAT DIVIDE OF THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS

                                        Michael D. Bordo
                                          Pierre Siklos

                                       Working Paper 26342
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26342


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




Paper presented for the XXIII Annual Conference of the Central Bank of Chile "Independence,
Credibility and Communication of Central Banking" Santiago, July 22-23 2019 The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26342.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Michael D. Bordo and Pierre Siklos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Transformation and Performance of Emerging Market Economies Across the Great Divide
of the Global Financial Crisis
Michael D. Bordo and Pierre Siklos
NBER Working Paper No. 26342
October 2019
JEL No. E52,E58,F0

                                         ABSTRACT

The process of central bank (CB) evolution by emerging market economies (EMEs), including
central bank independence (CBI) and transparency (CBT), converged towards that of the
advanced economies (AEs) before the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2007-2008. It was greatly
aided by the adoption of inflation targeting. In this paper we evaluate this convergence process
for a representative set of EMEs and AEs since the disruption of the GFC. We use several
measures of institutional development (changes in CBI, changes in CBT, changes in a new index
of institutional resilience and changes in a new measure of CB credibility). We then use panel
VARs based on both factor models and observed data to ascertain the impact of global shocks,
financial shocks, trade shocks and credibility shocks on the EMEs versus the AEs.

We find that although some EMEs did maintain the levels of CBI and CBT that they had before
the crisis, on average they experienced a decline in institutional resilience to shocks and in the
quality of their governance. Moreover it appears that CB credibility in EMEs was more fragile
than was the case for the AEs in the face of the global shocks (from the US) than was the case for
the AEs.


Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

Pierre Siklos
Wilfrid Laurier University
75 University Ave
Waterloo, ON, CANADA, N2L 3C5
psiklos@wlu.ca




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26342
The Transformation and Performance of Emerging Market Economies Across the Great Divide of the

Global Financial Crisis of 2007-20081


    1. Introduction


Before the Global Financial Crisis (GFC)2, a drive towards greater central bank autonomy (CBI) and

transparency (CBT), as part of the achievement of greater central bank credibility that began in the

advanced economies (AE), spread to the emerging market economies (EME). This process was greatly

enhanced by the adoption of inflation targeting (IT; Bordo and Siklos 2014). The adoption of IT and other

best practice CB technologies was viewed as a way for EME countries especially to "tie their hands" to

deliver lower and more stable inflation rates without undue fiscal and /or political influence.


The process of CB evolution was interrupted by the GFC, a largely advanced economy (trans-Atlantic)

event (Tooze 2018, McCauley 2018). The fallout from the GFC in the AE elevated the objective of

financial stability, which, unlike monetary policy, was less well-defined, and in the search for reliable

instruments to achieve it. Many of the EMEs were affected by the fallout from the GFC but most were

largely insulated from it. Many continued on the trajectory of convergence to best practice central

banking and maintenance of the hard ­won benefits in the fight against inflation.3


In this paper we compare the performance of a representative set of EMEs with a group of AEs before

and after the GFC. We first consider institutional developments (e.g., changes in CBI, changes in CBT,

changes in CB governance indicators). Because central banks do not operate in a vacuum we develop a



1
  For excellent research assistance we thank Humberto Martinez Beltran.
2
  There is no official chronology but the ones published by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
(https://www.stlouisfed.org/financial-crisis/full-timeline), and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
(https://www.newyorkfed.org/research/global_economy/policyresponses.html) provide useful and
comptehensive timelines. Some prefer to call the period from 2007 on the `Great Financial Crisis' (e.g., see
Carstens 2018) but we retain the, arguably, more popular GFC expression.
3
  See Jasova, Moessner and Takats (2018) which provides evidence on exchange rate pass through to inflation for
advanced and emerging economies since the GFC. They find that pass through for EMEs has declined since the GFC
and converged on that of the AEs. This is perceived as a reflection of improved CB credibility.
new index of institutional resilience that combines institutional information which describes central

banking operations as well as other political-economy style indicators. Next, we then extend an earlier

measure of CB credibility based on our previous work (Bordo and Siklos 2015, 2016, 2017). The

improved measure combines deviations of inflation from a CB's objective, monetary policy uncertainty,

and a global factor that can impact CB credibility.


Finally, with these building blocks, we then use econometric methods (panel VARs based on both factor

models and observed data) to ascertain the impact of global shocks, financial shocks, credibility shocks

and trade shocks on the EMEs versus the AEs. We link our findings to our resilience indicator since

resilience to economic shocks, both domestic and external, ought to reflect institutional resilience

consistent with attempts to pursue best practices in monetary policy.


Section 2 provides a brief historical overview of the evolution of CB credibility and its correlates (CBI and

CBT) in both AE and EME in the post Bretton Woods era. Section 3 outlines the data. Section 4 presents

our institutional measures. Section 5 contains our econometric estimates. Section 6 concludes with

some policy lessons.


       2. Historical Background


The Great Inflation 1965 to 1983 was a defining moment for the central banks of the AE in the post-

World War II era.4 The post-war Bretton Woods period was one of relative macro stability seen in low

inflation and inflation variability and high real growth and low real output variability for the advanced

countries (Bordo 1993, and Bordo and Siklos 2015). The collapse of Bretton Woods between 1971 and

1973 was followed by accelerating inflation and increased inflation volatility along with declining real

activity and rising unemployment (stagflation; Bordo and Orphanides 2013). This performance was




4
    For a discussion of the history of central banks see Bordo and Siklos 2018, and Siklos 2002.

                                                                                                            2
driven by the termination of the disciplining force of the Bretton Woods nominal anchor, the Keynesian

emphasis on full employment and the belief by central banks that the benefits of full employment

outweighed the costs of rising inflation. A key factor in this period across countries was the absence de

facto and, in some cases, de jure of CBI. The story differed across countries. In the UK, the Bank of

England was a de facto part of the Treasury.5 In the U.S., although the Federal Reserve was de jure

independent, and de facto had regained its independence from the Treasury in the 1951 Accord, under

the tutelage of Chairman William McChesney Martin it was "independent within the government" and it

increasingly coordinated monetary policy with the Treasury (Meltzer 2010). Through a process called

"even keel" the Fed indirectly monetized the fiscal deficits generated by the Johnson administration to

finance the Vietnam war and the Great Society and later by the Nixon administration (Humpage 2019,

Bordo 2018).6 The Fed's unwillingness to tighten monetary policy sufficiently to kill inflationary

expectations led to a ratcheting up in inflation in the 1970s (Bordo and Orphanides 2013).7 This was also

a period when CB credibility, defined as the deviation of realized inflation from the stated objective, was

at a low point (Bordo and Siklos 2015).


As is well known, the Volcker shock of 1979 in the U.S. and subsequent tight monetary policies and

similar strategies in the UK, Canada, and other countries led to the Great Moderation period from the

mid-1980s to before the GFC, and to the restoration of CB credibility (Bordo and Siklos 2015). In that

period both CBI and CBT increased dramatically (Bordo and Siklos 2014, Dincer, Eichengreen, and

Geraats 2019).


Along with the evolution described above of the CBs of the AEs, the EMEs followed a similar trajectory

but with generally worse economic performance. These countries had a long history of high and volatile



5
  A similar experience describes the Bank of Japan's relationship with the Finance Ministry until 1997.
6
  For the UK, see Bordo, Bush and Thomas (2019). For France see Monnet (2019)
7
  Another important factor was accommodation of the oil price shocks. See Blinder and Rudd (2013)

                                                                                                            3
inflation and of frequent currency crises (e.g., see Ha, Kose, and Ohnsorge 2019). The political economy

in the EMEs combined with less developed financial institutions and markets made it difficult to

establish an institutional framework for monetary and fiscal stability (for Latin America see Edwards

2012). Despite this, the Bretton Woods regime did serve as a nominal anchor for these countries and

macro performance was better than after its collapse (Edwards and Santaella 1983, Bordo and Schwartz

1998). The Great Inflation period for the EMEs was characterized by even worse macro performance

than the AEs and the instability was not fully alleviated until the 1990s when many countries began

adopting best practices in central banking and economic policy technology. 8 Bordo and Siklos (2014,

2017) present evidence that those countries that adopted IT converged more rapidly to the inflation

levels of the AE countries than EMEs that did not. Moreover, their performance on measures of CBI and

CBT also improved greatly relative to countries that did not adopt IT (e.g., see Siklos 2017).


The GFC changed the plot considerably. It was primarily an advanced country /transatlantic event

(Tooze 2018, McCauley 2018), triggered by the collapse of the U.S. housing market. Its causes included:

US government policies to encourage home ownership (Rajan 2011); lax financial regulation and

oversight (Calomiris 2017); financial innovation, especially in the unregulated shadow banking sector

(Tooze 2018), and loose monetary policy (Taylor 2007). Although the GFC began as an AE event, some

EMEs were also hard hit, especially those in Eastern Europe with financial ties to Western Europe. Other

EMEs were also impacted by the collapse of international trade and the spillovers from the AE credit

crunch. But there were a number of countries which had developed the resilience to largely withstand

the crisis (e.g., Chile; see Kose and Prasad 2010).


Since the GFC, CBs in the advanced countries have been heavily focused on financial stability and in

developing the tools of macroeconomic policy and `leaning against the wind policies' (LAW) to withstand



8
    Chile was one of the first EME to follow New Zealand's lead in adopting IT.

                                                                                                           4
future global imbalances. This strategic shift was manifest in the U.S. in the Dodd Frank bill of 2010 and in

the international financial system with Basel III in 2011 (https://www.bis.org/bcbs/basel3.htm). Many

EMEs have been developing similar policy strategies as in the advanced countries but their financial

architecture and exposure through international trade and capital flows have prevented them from

advancing to the level of the AEs so that their circumstances and vulnerabilities are different (BIS 2019).9


In this paper we examine evidence on the performance of a panel of EME central banks from Latin

America, Asia, and Europe to ascertain how the GFC affected the trajectories that they had been

following before the GFC in comparison to the experience of a panel of AEs. Our evidence suggests that

several EMEs, but not all, have developed the institutional resilience to keep them on track.


Our strategy consists in presenting a menu of evidence about institutional developments in monetary

policy and beyond, contrasting the record of AE and EME. In doing so, we propose a new indicator of

country-specific resilience for 29 economies that yields insights about the progress each country made

before the GFC and the record since. We then augment this longer-run type evidence with some

suggestive econometric evidence based on panel vector autoregressions. These provide evidence on the

impact of various economic shocks on EME versus AE that supplement and parallel our findings based

on the institutional evidence, as well as a series of narratives for a carefully selected group of economies

which we relegate to an Appendix. In Appendix I, we present brief case studies for six countries; 3 AEs (

US, Canada , Sweden) and 3 EMEs Chile, Colombia and Mexico) These studies examine in more detail

their monetary policy performance and credibility from the Great Moderation through the GFC.




9
  In LAW monetary policy is tightened under some conditions as a way of maintaining financial stability. However,
at least in theory, there is an ongoing debate about the wisdom of using policy rate changes to forestall financial
instability. See, for example, Svensson (2017) who warns against the risks of a LAW policy while Filardo and
Rungcharoenkitkul (2016) make the case for such a strategy.

                                                                                                                      5
     3. Data


Generally, the data for this study are from publicly available databases (e.g., national central banks,

OECD Main economic Indicators, International Monetary Fund, Bank for International Settlements,

Federal Reserve Economic Database (or FRED), and the World Bank. We have prepared a separate

appendix available on request with detailed data sources. Some forward-looking variables (e.g., inflation

and real GDP growth forecasts) are also publicly available (i.e., IMF's World Economic Outlook). Only

Consensus Economics forecasts are not available for distribution. Some institutional data are from

databases made available by other researchers. These include data on central bank independence

(Dincer and Eichengreen 2014), and central bank transparency (Dincer, Eichengreen, and Geraats 2019).

Other institutional data used include the World Bank's Governance indicators

(https://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/#home), the KOF Swiss Economic Institute Globalisation

indices (https://kof.ethz.ch/en/forecasts-and-indicators/indicators/kof-globalisation-index.html),

exchange rate and crisis data from Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), and Ilzetzki, Reinhart and Rogoff (2019;

http://www.carmenreinhart.com/), with other crisis data from Bordo and Meissner (2016), and the

Chinn-Ito index of financial openness (http://web.pdx.edu/~ito/Chinn-Ito_website.htm; Chinn and Ito

2006).10


As discussed below we also propose an indicator of institutional resilience that partially depends on two

other series, namely Baker, Bloom and Davis's (2016) economic policy uncertainty index (EPU;

http://www.policyuncertainty.com/index.html), and Caldara and Iacoviello's (2018) geopolitical risk




10
  The Chinn-Ito index has since been updated to 2017. The previous vintage of the index is used in the present
study.

                                                                                                                 6
index (GPR; https://www2.bc.edu/matteo-iacoviello/gpr.htm).11 More details about the proposed

indicator follow.


The sampling frequency of the raw data collected for this study ranges from monthly to annual with

most of the key time series usually obtained at the quarterly frequency. Typically, institutional variables

are available at the annual frequency while macroeconomic and financial data are generally available at

the monthly and quarterly frequencies. Where required we convert all data used in the subsequent

econometric estimation to the quarterly frequency. Conversion of monthly data is done via arithmetic

averaging while, in a few cases (e.g., some forecasts), semi-annual data are converted to the quarterly

frequency via interpolation.12 Most of the time series are in annualized growth rate form to ease

interpretation. Some series, such as interest rates are already in percent.13 We collected data for the

1980-2018 period though, because of missing or incomplete data, the actual sample used in some of the

econometric exercises typically begins during the 1990s before any transformations are applied.

However, for reasons explained below, panel VAR estimates shown are for samples that begin in 2000

(before any differencing or lags are applied). In the case of institutional variables, we also collected data

since the 1980s but, since many of the institutional developments discussed in the paper begin during

the 1990s we limit the analysis to data over the past two decades or so.




11
   Country-specific EPU indices are available for all countries except AR, CZ, HU, ID, IL, MY, NO, NZ, PE, PH, PL, YH,
TR, and ZA. For these cases the global version of EPU is used. Turning to GPR, data are available for AR, BR, CN, CO,
IL, IN, KR, MY, NO, PH, SE, TH, TR, and ZA. For the remaining economies the overall GPR indicator is used. See Table
1 for the country acronyms used.
12
   The basic idea is to fill the gap due to missing observations by fitting a hypothetical function that links
observations at both ends of the gap. Many algorithms to do so are available including the so-called Chow-Lin
method (Chow and Lin 1971) that is used here.
13
   Economists continue to debate the form in which macroeconomic and financial times series ought to be
analyzed. The fact that this is an ongoing area of research indicates that a consensus has not yet been reached.
Part of the difficulty is that some shocks are transmitted through the economy at a faster rate than others (e.g.,
monetary versus financial). We have generated series using other methods (e.g., Hamilton and Hodrick-Prescott)
but these are not used in the econometric estimates presented in section 5. See, inter alia, Hamilton (2018), and
Schüler (2019).

                                                                                                                    7
Our data set consists of 29 economies. They are shown in Table 1. By today's standards (i.e., in 2019) 12

are classified by the International Monetary Fund as advanced economies (AE) while the remaining 17

belong to the emerging market group of economies (EME).14 By 2019, 23 economies explicitly target

inflation, of which 9 are advanced economies while 14 are emerging market economies. The starting

date for the adoption of inflation targets varies considerably (see Appendix II) and so we also define a

group of so-called `established' inflation targeting countries in recognition of the longevity of the policy

regime in the chosen cases. They are: Australia, Canada, Great Britain, New Zealand, and Sweden. Three

of the economies in our data set are considered systemically important and advanced, that is, the US,

Japan, and the Eurozone. Conceivably one might add China to the list, the lone emerging market

economy in this category, but we elect not to for the present exercise in part because the last `global'

financial crisis originated in AE.15


Before proceeding we would be remiss if readers were not, once again, reminded of criticisms levelled

at some of the data used in this study. A common refrain among critics of institutional variables, already

noted in the case of measures of central bank independence, is the degree to which they capture de

facto as opposed to de jure performance of the institutions surveyed. Because the quality of the rule of

law varies considerably across countries while it is desirable to estimate a de facto measure it is often

only possible to obtain de jure indicators. Many, if not most, of the institutional data used below relies

on a mix of de jure and de facto elements.


Even if the identification of de facto versus de jure elements is feasible there is often disagreement

about how to define what constitutes de facto performance. This is the case, for example, with

exchange rate regime classification schemes. Hence, over the years, several have been published and

new ones proposed (e.g., see Frankel, Ma, and Xie 2019). Other complaints raised about indicators of


14
     Two countries (Czech Republic and Korea) were not considered AE at the beginning of the sample.
15
     See, however, Chen and Siklos (2019) for such an exercise.

                                                                                                               8
institutional performance include what some consider to be ad hoc thresholds when a classification

regime is proposed. An example is the decision whether to classify a monetary policy regime as

consistent with inflation targeting. The difficulty is compounded because the commitment of the central

bank and political authorities to meeting an inflation objective can vary, as well adherence to a floating

exchange rate regime, which is considered by some to represent a critical element of an IT policy

strategy (e.g, see Brdo and Siklos 2017, and references therein).


Other complaints include the reliance on surveys and different and possibly not comparable sources, not

to mention biases in the construction of certain indicators. An example is the World Bank Governance

indicators. They remain arguably the most widely used proxies for the quality of governance worldwide

and have come under criticism although possibly more so for some of the components of the indicators

than others (e.g., indicator of corruption). The criticisms are long standing ones (e.g., see Kurtz and

Shrank 2007), as are the responses to most of them (Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi 2007), but they

remain useful since the indicators continue to be updated.16


Almost all institutional indicators also share the concern that they are endogenous, that is, they are not

independent of current economic performance. While this is undoubtedly true it is also the case that

institutions change more slowly, in some cases far more slowly, than changes in macroeconomic

conditions. In a few cases, such as the EME that joined the European Union (EU), institutional pre-

conditions (e.g., central bank autonomy) preceded the threshold required to join the single currency

stated in terms of economic performance (i.e., inflation, exchange rates, interest rates, and debt). In any

case, it is an empirical question whether growth causes changes in governance (or any other

institutional change) or voce-versa. Generally, the evidence is quite clear, as noted above, that best


16
  Other indicators in this vein exist (e.g., The Polity IV project provides a score for governments that range from
the most to the least democratic (see https://www.systemicpeace.org/polity/polity4.htm). Another source is the
political risk group (https://www.prsgroup.com/)) but they are also subject to some of the same criticisms that
have been levelled at the World Bank data.

                                                                                                                      9
practices in economic policy making are necessary, if not sufficient, for better aggregate economic

performance.


Finally, it should be noted that our strategy is to combine many existing indicators and not rely on a

small selection of them. In doing so we follow an approach that has proved successful in other economic

applications. For example, it has long been known that forecast combinations often outperforms

individual forecasts (e.g., see Timmermann 2006). Similarly, we believe that combining different

institutional indicators can provide a more reliable of institutional resilience.


     4. Institutional Developments: Some Stylized Facts


     4.1 CBI, CBT, Inflation and Inflation Expectations


In this section, we document a number of measures of institutional performance in our panel of central

banks.


Figure 1 plots average changes in the Dincer and Eichengreen (2014) overall index of central bank

independence (CBI) for the available sample period, that is, 1998-2017.17 The AE in our sample are

shown to the right of the vertical dashed line while the EMEs are shown on the left. Only 3 EMEs

experience a noticeable increase in CBI and that is almost the same number as among the group of AE.

However, over the 1998-2017 period, CBI in the vast majority of economies in our sample is unchanged.

CBI alone is unlikely to explain much of the great divide in the title of the paper. Criticisms of de jure

style indicators of central bank independence are well known. However, it remains true that most

observers regard a form of statutory autonomy of the central bank as a critical ingredient in good



17
   Dincer and Eichengreen's data begins in 1998 and ends in 2010. For convenience we extended the data by
estimating a fixed effects panel model for the 29 economies using the overall indicator of the quality of the polity
in each economy as a proxy for how CBI might have changed over time. We also considered an index of state
fragility together with interactions effects (i.e., with the type of exchange rate regime, central bank transparency)
to extend the sample from 2011 to 2017. The regression results are available on request. The policy data are from
the Polity IV data set obtained from http://www.systemicpeace.org/inscrdata.html.

                                                                                                                   10
governance. Therefore, one should not under-estimate the importance of this kind of institutional

feature.18


Arguably, one of the most important institutional developments over the past two decades has been the

rise in overall central bank transparency (CBT). Figure 2A displays average changes in central bank

transparency over the 1998-2015 period.19 Once again the vertical dashed line separates the AE from

the EME economies in our dataset. Unlike CBI we observe progress in CBT in all economies although this

is unevenly distributed. Indeed, improvements are greater in several EME (e.g., Thailand, Hungary) than

in some of the best performers of among the AE (e.g., New Zealand, Czech Republic).20


Figures 2B and 2C provide two other perspectives on CBT since 1998. Figure 2B highlights the steady rise

in CBT in both AE and EME but there is little indication that the gap in CBT between AE and EME is

narrowing substantially. Figure 2C, however, shows that whereas CBT in small open AE economies

exceeded levels in large AE, the latter caught up and have slightly overtaken the former group of

economies since the GFC. Whether the financial crisis pushed central banks in some AE that were most

affected by the GFC to become even more transparent is open to debate but it is notable that the small

open economies all explicitly target inflation while only Great Britain is considered an inflation targeting

(IT) in the group of large economies.




18
   Indeed, the current Chair of the FOMC, Jerome Powell, has felt it necessary to remind the public of the
importance of CBI. "The Fed is insulated from short-term political pressures--what is often referred to as our
"independence." Congress chose to insulate the Fed this way because it had seen the damage that often arises
when policy bends to short-term political interests. Central banks in major democracies around the world have
similar independence." (Powell 2019).
19
   The data from Dincer, Eichengreen and Geraats (2019) ends in 2015 and we made no attempt to extend their
data set. The index is an update and improvement over the original Dincer and Eichengreen (2014) index of CBT.
The indicator of CBT ranges from a minimum of 0 to a maximum of 15. CBT is an aggregation of scores based on 5
sets of characteristics. They are: political transparency, economic transparency, procedural transparency, policy
transparency and operational transparency. See Dincer, Eichengreen and Geraats (2019, pp. 329-332).
20
   Improvements in central bank transparency in Hungary (and Poland) are no doubt due in large part to the
institutional pre-conditions required to join the European Union.

                                                                                                                11
Although we cannot be certain, of course, there is a risk that the steady rise in CBT, together with the

occasional increase in CBI, may come into conflict with an overall deterioration in institutional quality

threatening the resilience of central banks in the face of political pressure and, thereby, resilience in the

face of shocks. We return to this point below.


The preceding two indicators suffer from at least two drawbacks. First, as noted already, they tend to

rely on de jure indicators21 and they also ignore the wider pressures on monetary policy from overall

governance in the countries and economies concerned. Figures 3A and 3B, respectively, display average

levels of CBT in the AE and EME against an average of the World Bank's indicator of governance

indicators (WBGI).22 To generate the results shown in Figures 3A and 3B we estimated, for each group of

economies, the first principal component (using the principal factors method) of the overall governance

indexes to obtain the scores shown. Hence, we allow the data to determine the relative weight of the

constituents of governance quality. However, we do not assign weights to each country's contribution to

average governance quality.


Consider the AE shown in Figure 3A. The following economies show a trend deterioration in at least half

of the characteristics defined by the World Bank. They are: The Eurozone, the US, Hungary, Thailand,

South Africa, Australia, Canada, and Brazil. When the governance indicators are combined as described

above 7 of the 17 EMEs shown in Figure 3B experience an overall decline in governance quality. They




21
   This is a far more accurate description of the CBI index than the CBT indicator which is largely based on
information made public by central banks.
22
   The WBGI consist of 6 characteristics of governance. They are: voice and accountability, political stability,
government effectiveness, regulatory quality, rule of law, and control of corruption. We summed the scores of the
6 characteristics and took the mean as our overall indicator of governance. A rise in the indicator signals improved
governance.

                                                                                                                  12
are: Argentina, Brazil, Hungary, Mexico, Philippines, Thailand, and South Africa.23 In the case of the AE

the Eurozone, the UK and the US contribute to reducing the AE's level of governance quality.


Turning to the data aggregated for the AE versus the EME, following a drop in the quality of governance

from 1998 to 2004 the indicator remains relatively stable although a small additional drop is observed

following the GFC. This stands in contrast with the continued rise in CBT over time although there is a

levelling off after the GFC. Turning to the EME there is a steady drop in the overall quality of governance

beginning in 2005 that continues until the end of the sample while the steady rise in CBT shows no signs

of abating by 2015.24


A few other institutional indicators are worthy of mention although we relegate to the appendix the

details. First, despite the GFC, financial globalization continues to rise. This is not a phenomenon

restricted to the AE but is global in nature. In contrast, the message is far more mixed when it comes to

trade globalization with signs of retreat in several EMEs (e.g., Indonesia, Turkey, China and Malaysia)

and even in a few AE (e.g., Canada, Norway, and New Zealand).25 The Chinn-Ito indicator, over the 1998-

2016 period, provides a similar interpretation at least as regards capital account openness with progress

in several AE and EME although the message is again mixed for the EMEs with several countries

becoming less open to capital flows (e.g., Argentina, Indonesia, Thailand, and Malaysia).26 Finally,

average changes in monthly indicators of the degree of exchange rate flexibility over the 1998-2019

period obtained from Ilzetzki, Reinhart and Rogoff's (2019) exchange rate regime classification also


23
   This inference is based on a simple regression of the time series of various components of governance on a time
trend. Hungary has the distinction of a decline in all categories of governance. The Eurozone indicator is proxied
here by the average governance indicators for Germany, France, and Italy.
24
   The WBGI data are available until 2017 and the downward trend in governance in EME continues. Since the CBT
data end in 2015 the governance indicators for 2016 and 2017 are not shown.
25
   The indexes are based on an aggregation, via principal components analysis, of several indicators of trade and
financial openness (both de jure and de facto; e.g., export and imports to GDP, tariffs, capital account openness).
See Gygli, Haelg, Potrakke, and Sturm (2019). Our calculations are based on an average of index values over the
1996-2017 period.
26
   The Chinn-Ito index codifies the restrictions reported in the International Monetary Fund's Annual Report on
Exchange Arrangements and Restrictions.

                                                                                                                 13
provide a mixed message with roughly half of the economies in our sample showing no regime changes

while 5 EME economies' regimes are less flexible (e.g., Thailand, Colombia) while 3 demonstrate greater

flexibility (Chile, Brazil, Turkey). Among the AE the tendency is in the direction of greater flexibility, but

half are unchanged since 1998.


Next, we turn to some evidence on inflation and inflation expectations in AE versus EME since the late

1990s. Figure 4 plots the `distance' between inflation in each economy over the 2000-2018 period vis-à-

vis US inflation. One must take some care in drawing too strong conclusions from these calculations

since it is not immediately evident that US inflation is always the benchmark for best practice in

monetary policy.27 Moreover, the estimates of distance are not conditioned on other variables that

might affect cross-country inflation differentials. Finally, if one believes that, in the process of catching

up to AE, EME inflation rates should be higher the distance measure is silent about whether estimates

are higher than might be desirable.28


It is generally the case that distance remains highest between US inflation and inflation in EMEs though

there are a few exceptions among AE including Japan, Norway and Israel. A concern for policy makers is

how to think about best practice when it comes to monetary policy regimes and inflation when AE suffer

from inflation rates persistently below their stated targets while several EME suffer from the opposite

challenge. We return to this issue below.


Figure 5 plots the gap between observed CPI inflation and an average of expected inflation rates in

selected groups of economies. Expected inflation is the mean of one year ahead inflation rates for


27
   Among the 29 economies in our sample, Japan (0.1%), Sweden (1.2%), and the Eurozone (1.7%) achieved
substantially lower inflation rates over the period considered. Canada, China, Great Britain, Israel, Norway and
New Zealand achieved very similar average CPI inflation rates, again over the same period.
28
   Relevant to this discussion is the so-called Balassa-Samuelson effect (B-S) which relies on productivity
differences to partially explain inflation differentials. Due to the requirements of the Maastricht Treaty many
applications focus on the EME of Central and Eastern Europe (CEE). Égert (2002) is an example of a study finding
that while the B-S is present it is not sufficiently strong to create excessively high inflation differentials between
CEE countries and advanced Europe.

                                                                                                                         14
Consensus forecasts and forecasts from the IMF's World Economic Outlook (WEO).29 A large gap signals

the possibility that expectations have become unanchored. Of course, the precise source of the un-

anchoring remains to be determined. The left-hand side plot compares the evidence for all 29

economies (ALL) against established IT economies (ITEST; defined previously), all AE that explicitly target

inflation (ITAE; see Table 1), and AE that are not considered IT economies (NITAE). The right-hand side

plot distinguishes between EME that target inflation (ITEME) and ones that do not (NITEME) as well as

the `global' record (ALL).


During the early 1990s even the ITEST economies were in the early days of operating under such a

regime and the gap between observed and one-year ahead inflation is larger than for all remaining IT

central banks, many of which had not yet formally adopted the regime. Similarly, the gap for the NITAE

economies also appears smaller during this period. By the mid-2000s there is little to distinguish the

record of all economies, regardless of whether they formally target inflation or not. However, there is

also apparently greater volatility in the gap, at least among the NITAE while volatility in the same

measure for the ITEST is largely unchanged.


In contrast, differences in the gap are more noticeable for the EME economies in our dataset. They

remain more volatile for the NITEME group of economies relative to ones that target inflation (ITEME).

Nevertheless, what is striking is the shrinking of the gap for the ITEME beginning in the mid-2000s, that

is, once the economies in the dataset had formally adopted the regime. Gaps not only hover around

zero after approximately 2005 but they are also much lower than in the 1993-2004 period. While this




29
  The former forecasts are monthly, the latter are semi-annual. See above for a discussion of conversion to the
quarterly frequency. In addition, both forecasts are fixed event forecasts, that is, calendar-year forecasts. These
were converted to fixed horizon forecasts (i.e., one year ahead) using a simple transformation that is commonly
used although it is, admittedly, somewhat ad hoc. See Siklos (2013) for more details.

                                                                                                                      15
does not prove that IT is the cause of the improvement since, as we shall see, global factors, to which we

now turn, are also likely to have played a role, it is hard to think of other explanations.


Global factors are shown in Figure 6 for observed and expected inflation.30 To obtain an estimate of

global inflation we estimate the first principal component for AE only (via maximum likelihood) since this

is arguably one benchmark that can be used to evaluate inflation performance of EMEs. A sharp decline

in global inflation expectations is noticeable in the early 2000s and there is, subsequently, relative

stability although our estimates are persistently just below the 2% goal of central banks in the AE

following the GFC. There is greater volatility in the global inflation factor based on observed CPI inflation

especially since the GFC. Notice that the gap between observed and expected global inflation is positive

in the immediate aftermath of the GFC and turns negative after 2014 (i.e., observed inflation is below

expected inflation). More generally, expectations change more slowly than observed inflation and, if 2%

is deemed an inflation rate that central banks around the world ought to aim for, then global expected

inflation persistently under-performs since the GFC according to this metric.


Finally, to further illustrate differences in inflationary developments in AE versus EME we present some

evidence relying on two case studies, namely Sweden and South Africa. Both are inflation targeting

countries. Shaded areas indicate the inflation target band. The mid-point of the target, that is, the

inflation target is also shown by a dashed line. Observed and average inflation expectations are both

plotted.


Inflation rates in these countries illustrate one of the features of the inflation record applicable to

several EME and AE that we wish to highlight. In particular, while central banks in EME struggle with




30
  We have a shorter sample for expected inflation because Consensus data were not available before the late
1990s for most EMEs. WEO data are available for a longer sample. We estimate the separate contribution of
Consensus and WEO forecasts in generating a global estimated for expected inflation and not the first principal
component of average inflation forecasts. Factor loadings are available on request.

                                                                                                                  16
inflation rates at the top of the target the opposite is often true for AE.31 This phenomenon is

particularly noticeable after the GFC but is also a feature of the years leading up to the end of the Great

Moderation around 2006. The impact of the GFC on observed inflation relative to expected inflation is

also striking with the latter seemingly not overly sensitive to changes in observed inflation. However,

post-GFC, we observe inflation expectations remaining persistently above the target in South Africa

while the opposite is true in Sweden's case. The Fed in the US, not considered an IT central bank, faces a

comparable experience as shown in Figure 7B. Inflation is below a notional 2% medium-term objective

for most years since 2008. Only at the end of the sample (i.e., 2016-18) does inflation exceed 2%.32


         4.2 Resilience


The tension between rising central bank independence and transparency and weak political institutions

may well threaten the ability of an economy to remain resilient to a series of economic shocks. There

exists a rich literature linking economic performance (e.g., economic growth) to the quality of

governance and the latter is often thought to be a function of the strength of democratic institutions

(inter alia, Acemoglu, Naidu, Restrepo, and Robinson (2019), Eichengreen and Leblang (2008), Rivera-

Batiz (2002), and references therein).


We exploit the fact that a rich and growing number of datasets have become available over the years to

explore how developments in central banking combine with other institutional developments to provide

resilience to economic shocks. Stated differently, we collect variables that provide indications of the

overall quality of its institutions. No matter how autonomous or transparent a central bank is it is not an

island. The monetary authority cannot deliver best practices without the support of other strong


31
   The South African Reserve Bank (SARB) has admitted to allowing inflation to drift to the upper limit of the band.
See, for example, Reid, du Plessis and Siklos (2018), and references therein. The phenomenon wherein an IT
central bank targets inflation from below has been studied by Ehrmann (2015).
32
   The sample ends with 2018Q3. CPI inflation has since dipped below 2%, the Fed's medium -term objective, in
2019 (not shown but see https://www.bls.gov/charts/consumer-price-index/consumer-price-index-by-category-
line-chart.htm).

                                                                                                                  17
institutions. The higher the overall quality of domestic institutions the greater the resilience to economic

shocks of the domestic and external varieties. Of course, even if theory suggests a positive relationship

between institutional quality and resilience there is still no consensus on the composition of the former

concept. Our aim, however, is merely to suggest that it is likely reasonably measured by a combination

of the institutional characteristics discussed in earlier sections.33


Our approach is straightforward. We aggregate 10 institutional indicators where each one is normalized

first to generate values that range between 0 and 1.34 We then aggregate the scores by summing the

normalized scores to obtain our resilience indicator.35 Out of the 10 institutional characteristics 7 are

defined such that an increase in their value raises resilience; the remaining three serve to reduce

resilience. The elements that improve resilience when the relevant indicator increases are: CBI, CBT, the

flexibility of the exchange rate regime (greater exchange rate flexibility improves resilience), governance

quality as measured by the entire collection of World Bank indicators previously examined, capital

account openness, financial and trade globalization. Three factors contribute to reduce resilience when

their indicators increase. They are: greater economic policy uncertainty, higher geopolitical risks, and

the incidence of financial crises.36 As a result, the resilience index ranges from a minimum of -3 to a



33
   We leave it to subsequent research to determine whether there are any statistical links between the proposed
indicator of resilience and economic performance (e.g., inflation or growth) though we suspect, based on other
evidence to be provided below, that greater institutional resilience is likely to contribute to ensuring that a
monetary policy regime adheres to best practices. We previously discussed criticisms of widely used measures of
institutional performance.
34
   Each indicator for each country or economy is normalized as follows: (X t  min(X t )) / (max(X t  min(X t )) where X
is the value of an indicator, min is its minimum value in the sample and max the maximum value in the sample.
35
   Hence, each component of the indicator has equal weight. In practice this is unlikely to be the case. However,
absent a theory or empirical guidance about how to aggregate the individual institutional characteristics, we leave
it for future research to consider the impact of different weighting schemes.
36
   The incidence of financial crises is the sum of the average annual number of banking, currency, domestic and
external sovereign debt crises based on the Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and Bordo and Meissner (2016)
chronologies of financial crises. The maximum value this indicator can take is, therefore, 4. The original data end in
2013. The following financial crises were added to extend the sample to 2018 although other data limitations
mean that the resilience indicator is fully calculated only until 2015. They are: Russia (currency, 2014); 2011-15
(Eurozone, domestic sovereign debt); Argentina (currency and external sovereign debt, 2017-18); a table in the
appendix provides additional details.

                                                                                                                    18
maximum of +7. We did not apply any weights to the individual components of the indicator as there is

no theoretical guidance to suggest a plausible weighting scheme.


Figure 8 provides three different views of our resilience indicator. The top portion of the figure shows

the range of estimates for AE; the middle portion for the EME in our data set while the bottom offers a

direct comparison of resilience between AE and EME. Perhaps unsurprisingly there is considerable

variation in resilience between the two country groups although mean levels of resilience in AE always

exceed ones obtained for EME. Nevertheless, while resilience declined temporarily in AE in the

aftermath of the GFC the opposite took place in EME. Unfortunately, the temporary rise in resilience

after 2008 in EME did not last although the gap between the best and worst performers has narrowed

since the GFC relative to the period between 1998 and 2008. In the case of the AE the impact of the GFC

is most clearly seen in the rising gap between the best (i.e., "MAX") and worst performers (i.e., "MIN")

that lasts until 2013 when the gap narrows substantially. It is somewhat comforting that resilience in

EME is higher at the end of the sample relative to the period before the GFC. However, as shown in the

bottom of Figure 8, there is no evidence of a narrowing of the mean values of the resilience indicator

after 2008. If anything, there is a slight widening of differences in resilience between the AE and EME

and, while we cannot assign any statistical significance to the results, one would hope that institutional

resilience in EME can catch-up to levels reached in AE as is the case with some key indicators of central

bank institutional quality (e.g., CBI, CBT, the adoption of IT).


We also examined the resilience indicators for each country in the sample (not shown; see the

appendix). The scores for AE are consistently higher than in EME. However, scores appear more volatile

in EME with more frequent reversals in resilience. For example, resilience in Argentina generally trends

down since the late 1990s. similarly, other than some improvements in the early and late 2000s,

resilience in Russia remains no higher at the end of the sample than at the beginning. Approximately the

same interpretation applies to the resilience scores for Turkey. Nevertheless, there are also a few bright

                                                                                                           19
spots among the EME, including Colombia, Indonesia and Mexico where improvements in resilience in

the early 2000s have persisted.37


In sum, the resilience of institutions, including the central banks in EMEs, has not caught up with their

counterparts in the AEs. This suggests that these countries remain more vulnerable to shocks.38


        4.3 Credibility


Next, we return to a central feature used to identify the success of monetary policy, namely credibility.

As noted earlier, there is no unique definition of credibility. However, all versions have, at their core, the

notion that best practice implies that central banks ought to be able to control inflation in the medium-

term (e.g., over a 2 to 5 year horizon), that policy surprises should be used as a tool of last resort or only

when necessary, and, in order to anchor expectations, that the gap between observed and expected

inflation ought to be as close to zero as practical. Since, as former and current prominent central

bankers have frequently observed, we do not yet have a complete understanding of the formation of

expectations. Perhaps the best that can be expected is that the aforementioned gap ought to be small.39

Moreover, one might add, in view of growing evidence that macroeconomic uncertainty in general also

has negative economic consequences (e.g., Bloom 2009, Jurado, Ludvigson and Ng 2015), that it is




37
   However, since the sample ends in 2015, recent changes that might have taken place globally (e.g., in
governance, central bank independence, economic policy uncertainty) will not be reflected in the data. t
38
   In her panel presentation at the same Conference Kristin Forbes uses our data but omits the last three elements,
that is, EPU, GPR, and the incidence of financial crises. The reason is that the remaining seven components are
more exclusively focused on domestic institutional quality while the last three contain a global or external
element. The mild upward trend shown at the bottom of Figure 8 is more pronounced in Forbes' version but the
increasing gap between AE and EME resilience post-GFC remains. Interestingly, however, EME resilience dips
temporarily in 2008 while there is hardly any change in AE resilience.
39
   One could add a lack of persistence in deviations between observed and expected inflation but there is already a
voluminous literature that rejects this view. Indeed, AR(1) regressions of the gap referred to in Figure 5 suggests
considerable persistence. Notably, the period since the GFC only affects persistence in the Eurozone and New
Zealand. Both experience a significant drop in persistence since 2008Q4 (results not shown).

                                                                                                                20
plausible that this can translate into less monetary policy credibility. Finally, there is also a body of

evidence that global factors also play a role in explaining inflation dynamics (e.g., Forbes 2019).


We build and improve on our earlier estimates of monetary policy credibility (Bordo and Siklos 2015,

2017) by combining three elements of credibility, two of which are new. We, therefore, write:


                             (tf 1  *
                                    t ), if  t    t 1   t  
                                            *     e    *


                             (tf 1  *
                                    t ) , if  t    t 1   t  
                                       2     *     e    *


                             AE  1; EME  2                                      (1)
                             MPU  (f1
                                   t 1   t 1 )  (y t 1  y t 1 )
                                         f2 2      f1     f2 2


                             GLOBAL  t 1  G
                                          t 1




The first two lines in equation (1) define the credibility `penalty' central banks suffer when they miss

their targets. Since IT is typically defined somewhat more loosely in many EMEs via a more liberal

tolerance band around an inflation target, our measure of credibility also takes this into account.

Specifically, the tolerance level around the target is set at 1% for AE and 2% for EME. This is indicated by

the values taken by  as shown in the third line of equation (1). Once inflation expectations exceed the

tolerance band (shown by the inequality in the first two lines of equation (1) the penalty becomes a

quadratic in line with most definitions of central bank loss functions. We treat positive and negative

misses symmetrically so that credibility is defined in terms of the absolute value of the level of misses

when these are inside the tolerance range. Finally, we consider three different proxies for the gap

between expected inflation and the target. One proxy is the average one year ahead inflation

expectations; a second proxy consists in using last year's observed inflation; finally, for a third proxy, we

also use a two-year moving average of inflation.40




40
  So far, the definition follows our earlier work although previously we were more conservative in some of our
estimates for EMEs where the tolerance range was set at 1% for some estimates and we try three different proxies
for the gap between inflation and the target instead of just two.

                                                                                                             21
Next, we turn to estimates of the inflation target ( t* ). In our earlier work we proxied each economy's IT

using a moving average of past inflation (e.g., 5 years). In the present study we allow for the possibility

that since the announced target is not meant to be met every period a distinction can be made between

de jure and de facto inflation targets. The latter is, to some extent, unobserved.41 We proxy the de facto

inflation target as the mean from 3 different filters applied to observed inflation. They are: a 5-year

moving average of inflation, the inflation obtained by a band pass filter for frequencies ranging from 2 to

8 quarters and estimates from a one-sided Hodrick-Prescott filter.42 These are applied to the full

available span of the data.


The next two elements of our estimates of credibility represent the impact of monetary policy

uncertainty and the global factor. These are given by the last two lines of equation (1). Given the wide

range of economies considered we were only able to rely on two sets of comparable estimates of

expected inflation, that is, Consensus Economics and WEO forecasts. To proxy monetary policy

uncertainty (MPU) we sum the squared differences between the two forecasts of inflation and real GDP

growth. This effectively amounts to capturing a form of disagreement between forecasters. It is

plausible to assume that greater monetary policy uncertainty translates into larger differences in the

outlook for the economy. There are, of course, other proxies for forecast disagreement (e.g., see Siklos

2013, 2019, and references therein) and forecast uncertainty. However, absent a greater variety of

available comparable forecasts across 29 economies we cannot generate a useful estimate of, say, the

kurtosis or some other indicator of forecast uncertainty. Our information set is sufficiently limited that




41
   Stated differently, the de facto target is expected to be a series that fluctuates around the announced inflation
objective. For IT economies, replacing the moving average estimates with the mid-point of the announced IT, once
the regime is adopted, did not impact the conclusions. In general, an inflation target, even if one is announced, is
expected to be met over the medium-term.
42
   We use a smoothing parameter of 1600 for the HP filter.

                                                                                                                  22
we are not able to generate reliable estimates of the distribution of inflation forecasts or forecast

disagreement.


The global factor in credibility (last line in equation (1) is captured by deviations of observed inflation

from an estimate of global inflation. We chose to use the levels of the respective series because higher

inflation relative to some global estimate likely translates into currency depreciation, among other

economic consequences.43 However, it is also questionable whether deviations from global inflation are

seen as penalizing central bank credibility in the same manner as misses in domestic inflation vis-à-vis an

inflation target. Part of the reason is that global inflation is not as readily observed as domestic headline

inflation. Moreover, it is difficult to know how much weight a central bank might attach to the global

component especially since, as noted earlier, pass-through effects vary considerably across the

economies in our sample.

                                      
We proxy the global inflation target,  , using the two estimates shown in Figure 6 and described

earlier. Other proxies, such as a moving average of observed or expected inflation, or the mid-point of IT

target bands in countries that target inflation do not appreciably impact the results (results not shown).

                                                              
Note that in estimating the deviation from global inflation,  -1 is lagged one period to allow for a

delay in collecting the data.44


Once the individual components of credibility are estimated they are summed up to obtain the

estimates of credibility. We calculate both raw estimates as well as normalized estimates. Therefore, our

proxy for credibility is defined as:




43
   The addition of this element is partially inspired by Clarida (2018) who argues, to the extent global inflation has
declined (see Figure 6), this might yield substantial benefits and may reflect a form of international monetary
policy coordination. Nevertheless, alongside any benefits there are challenges that depend on the differences
between domestic observed and targeted inflation and the same differential for the foreign benchmark inflation
rate.
44
   Using the contemporaneous measures of inflation and global inflation has little impact on the results.

                                                                                                                     23
                         (f  * ), if *
                                           it    i,t 1  it  
                                                   e       *

                CREDit   fi,t1 *it 2                             MPUit  GLOBALit (2)
                        ( i,t 1
                                 it ) , if   *
                                             it     e
                                                    i,t 1
                                                           *
                                                           it  


where CRED is the estimate of monetary policy credibility for economy i at time t and all other terms

were previously defined. Positive values for each component are seen as contributing to reduce

credibility since the gap between observed and expected inflation widens, there is more monetary

policy uncertainty, and domestic inflation is higher than a measure of global inflation. Estimates of CRED

are unweighted since it is not obvious, in theory, how much relative importance ought to be attached to

any one of the three components.


We also estimate and focus on a normalized estimate of CRED since this transforms the raw estimates

into ones that range from 0 (perfect credibility) to 1 (no credibility) based on the historical credibility of

an individual's economy's monetary policy. It is useful to compare the two different estimates. As an

illustration, consider Figure 9 which plots CRED in both raw and normalized forms for Argentina and

Chile. Normalized estimates are shown in the top of Figure 9 while raw estimates are plotted at the

bottom. Estimates for Chile are on the left-hand scale while CRED for Argentina are scaled on the right.

Both convey essentially the same message. However, raw CRED estimates indicate that credibility losses

in Argentina, when they occur, are as much as 20 times larger than in Chile as seen by comparing the

two scales in the plot at the bottom of Figure 9.


Credibility falls sharply during the GFC but is volatile. Credibility recovers quickly but begins to decline

once again toward the end of the sample. Indeed, Argentina suffers large losses as the currency board

collapses in early 2002 and large losses reappear once again after 2014 when sovereign debt problems

and rising inflation return. However, the credibility loss is less noticeable in Argentina during the GFC

than in Chile. Hence, normalizing the scales does not change the fact that the credibility of the central

bank of Chile is more often than not higher than for Argentina's central bank.


                                                                                                               24
As explained earlier our preferred estimates of credibility (equation (2)) are normalized to range

between [0,1]. Several estimates for different country groupings are shown in Figures 10A through 10F.

Figure 10A provides the most general picture since it pits mean credibility for the AE versus the EME. For

the available sample the GFC stands out, not surprisingly, as signaling a large but temporary loss of

credibility. Note, however, that the loss of credibility is comparatively greater for AE. Similarly, EME

central banks regain credibility faster than their AE counterparts once the crisis peaks. Credibility in both

groups of economies does not recover until 2011. The tables are turned around the time of the Asian

Financial Crisis of 1997-1998 with EME central banks losing credibility for longer than in AE.

Nevertheless, the latter were not immune to what are likely the spillovers from the Asian financial crisis

on AE.45 Central banks in EME also suffered credibility losses in the early to mid-1990s while credibility in

the AE group improved perhaps due to the increasing number of countries that adopted the IT monetary

policy strategy.


The remaining figures (Figure 10B through 10F) show credibility estimates for other economies or

regions of the globe. Figure 10B, for example, shows two different estimates of credibility for four `large'

economies that depend on whether lagged observed inflation (CREDN4) or the one-year ahead mean

inflation forecast is used (CREDN2). While the two sets of estimates are comparable there are the

occasional differences. At least three of the four were at the centre of the GFC while Japan has long

been mired in a low growth ­ low inflation or deflation environment. Clearly, the GFC stands out for the

US, GB and the EZ, as well as Japan. However, Japan experiences more bouts of credibility losses than

any of the other three economies shown. Indeed, based on our indicators, it appears that the latest

attempts by the BoJ to raise inflation46 have led to substantial increases in credibility losses. Figure 10C




45
 Note that Japan and Korea are among the AE group of economies.
46
 Since 2012 the BoJ has raised the inflation target, introduced additional quantitative and qualitative easing
measures. See, for example, Iwasaki and Sudo (2017).

                                                                                                                 25
focuses on the so-called BRICS, essentially the largest EME in our dataset. There are two aspects to note

for these economies. First, unlike their AE counterparts, there tend to be more frequent credibility

losses. Brazil, India, China and South Africa stand out. Second, differences between the two credibility

proxies are more apparent for some of these EMEs, most notably India where credibility losses tend to

be larger when the forward-looking inflation data are used.


Next, we examine in Figure 10D credibility in AE countries that adopted IT earliest, namely, AU, CA, NZ,

SE, and NO. While the GFC led to a reduction of credibility everywhere, the size of the loss is historically

smaller in AU and NO than in SE, NZ, and CA. Indeed, NZ and SE were hit twice, once in 2008-9 and again

in 2011. In NZ's case the earthquake in Canterbury and the increase in the Goods and Services tax in

2010 likely provide the explanation.


Figure 10E plots our credibility measures for Asian economies while Figure 10F shows the results for the

LATAM countries in the dataset. In the former group of economies, the Asian Financial Crisis stands out

in at least three of the 5 countries shown (i.e., Indonesia (ID), Korea (KR), and Malaysia (MY)). Even in

the Philippines (PH) 1998 stands out and is not far from levels reached in 2008-9. Data for Thailand (TH)

reveals that the financial crisis of 1997-1998 leads to a loss of credibility as large as in 2009-2010 (not

shown). A similar story is repeated for many of the LATAM economies with more than one episode of

large losses of credibility. Chile stands out because, while credibility levels do not match the ones in the

AE with IT only the GFC really stands out in the data shown since the late 1990s.


To conclude EME central banks, with the exception of the BRICS economies, did not suffer the same

credibility losses during the GFC as did central banks in AE. Moreover, a credibility gap remains as the

EME central banks, on average, are less credible than their AE counterparts. Once lost, credibility can be

regained reasonably quickly. However, the recovery period appears to be a function of the size of the

crisis central banks must confront.


                                                                                                              26
    5. The Impact of Selected Shocks


          5.1 Econometric Model


Institutions impact economic performance slowly and their effects are not always straightforward to

identify. Hence, serious differences of opinion exist concerning the effect of central bank independence

and governance, to name but two examples. Even if there is agreement on best practices in institutional

arrangements economic shocks can thwart best laid plans. Therefore, we augment our institutional

resilience results by examining how AE and EME fared through the lens of a more conventional

econometric approach that considers the impact of unexpected changes in key macroeconomic

variables. To be sure, just as there are different views about the impact of institutional factors similarly

there are differences of opinion about how to identify certain types of economic shocks, not to mention

the model that is most appropriate under the circumstances. In what follows then we adopt an eclectic

approach that permits readers to make their own judgment about our findings while conducting

extensive sensitivity tests.


We focus on three shocks as these highlight the potential sources of the great divide in the title of the

paper. They are: financial, trade, and credibility shocks. We choose a technique where cross-border

effects are centre stage since this seems like the most fruitful way to understand differences between

AE and EME in how they respond to a variety of economic shocks. As noted in earlier sections many of

the reforms in monetary policy adopted by EME originated in AE. Second, by virtue of their size, shocks

emanating from AE are likely to be an important device to understand how resilient EME are to such

shocks.


Consider first the case of an individual economy j. We assume that economic shocks can be sub-divided

into five factors. Although factors, as such, are not observed (we return to this issue below) they have

the advantage that this approach can deal with the `curse of dimensionality' when one is seeking to


                                                                                                            27
model dynamic relationships. This approach permits us to greatly enrich the number and types of

variables included in our estimated model.


Estimated factors are as follows: a real economic factor, a financial factor, a trade factor, a monetary

factor, and a global factor. The global factor is either a shock from the US or a combined shock from

three systemically important advanced economies, namely the US, the Eurozone and Japan. Each factor

is labelled i. Each economy is identified by j. If X denotes the vector of variables used to estimate each

one of these factors i we can write


                     Xijt  ijtFijt  it                                                       (3)


where X are vectors of observable time series from which factors F are estimated,  are the factor

loadings, and i= R, F, T, M, G denote respectively the Real, Financial, Trade, Monetary, and Global

factors. We extract the first principal component which then serves as the proxy for each factor for R, T,

G but not M.47 For the monetary factor we use the policy rate since this remains the principal instrument

of monetary policy throughout in most of the economies in our dataset. Of course, this is not the case

for the major economies since the beginning of the GFC (i.e., US, GB, and EZ) as well as Japan. For these

four economies we replace the observed policy rate with a shadow rate once the policy rate reaches the

zero lower bound (ZLB).48 Separately, we also add our estimates of central bank credibility (CRED)

thereby adding one more element to i. After all, resilience to economic shocks is also likely to be directly

impacted by the credibility of the monetary authority as discussed above.



47
   Owing to the short sample we elected not to include more than one principal component although the first
component explains the majority of the variation in the series included (results not shown). A disadvantage of this
approach is that we are unable to identify whether the estimated shocks are primarily driven, say, by supply or
demand factors. This is left for future research.
48
   We use Krippner's dataset (https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research-and-publications/research-
programme/additional-research/measures-of-the-stance-of-united-states-monetary-policy/comparison-of-
international-monetary-policy-measures) since these are constructed in a similar manner for all four economies.
Other methodologies to estimate have, of course, also been proposed. See, for example, Howorth, Lombardi, and
Siklos (2019), and references therein. It is worth noting that the ZLB period begins before the GFC in Japan's case.

                                                                                                                  28
Since it is unlikely over the sample period considered that the factors loadings are constant, we allow

these to vary with time in a manner described below. All series in X are assumed to be stationary.49 After

extensive testing we use the annualized (log) first difference for many series, the first difference, or the

levels for others in the results to be reported in the following section. Other filters were considered (see

above), including a one-sided HP filter, a band pass filter, and Hamilton's (2018) filter but some

experimentation led us to conclude that our main results would remain unchanged.50


In estimating (3) we collect series that are typically thought to be representative of each one of the

factors listed. Table 2 presents a listing of series that are available for all economies in the study. We

proceed in this manner in part because it is a more intuitive way to generate factor loadings as well as

ones that are consistent with economic theory.51


Many in the literature have proxied a global component by assuming that shocks emanating from the

U.S. fulfills this role (e.g., Feldkircher and Huber 2016). We follow this approach. However, others have

also created large cross-country datasets to derive a common factor that is interpreted as the global

factor (e.g., Kose, Otrok, and Prasad 2012). Therefore, we also identify the global component for R, T, F,

and M, again via factor model estimation. This time we specify a panel consisting of the data from the

US, the Eurozone and Japan as our second proxy for the source of global shocks. Since the main findings

of our study are unchanged, we do not discuss this case further.




49
   We conduct a series of panel unit root test. The series, as described below, were found to be stationary (results
not shown).
50
   See Chen and Siklos (2019), and references therein, for a more extensive discussion of the specification and
impact of various filters for a data set that consists of four systemically important economies (i.e., including China).
51
   A criticism of our approach is that factor models often rely on a larger number of variables than are being used.
Nevertheless, as discussed above (also see the appendix) once a dataset moves beyond the AE the number of
available and comparable time series over a reasonable span of time becomes difficult to compile. Moreover, the
total number of series used in our study does not differ much from, for example, Stock and Watson (2018), or
Hatzius, Hooper, Mishkin, Schoenholtz, and Watson (2010). More importantly perhaps, many studies of this kind,
regardless of the number of variables that enter the factor model, end up finding that only a small handful of
variables dominate all others in terms of their explanatory power in the factor model.

                                                                                                                     29
The modified factor model specification with the addition of the global factor can then be written as

follows:


                    Xijt  ijtFitG   iktFikt
                                         D
                                             ijkt                                         (4)


where i is as previously defined, k= US, ,  are, respectively, the factor loadings for the global (i.e., FG;

the US), and domestic factors (FD; real, financial, trade, and monetary), and  is the residual term. As

before the factor loadings are time-varying in a manner described later. Equation (4), therefore, makes

clear that there is a global component for each of the factors named earlier.


To exploit the cross-sectional dimension, we then estimate the dynamic relationship between the

factors in a panel setting. This gives rise to the following (quasi) time-varying panel factor or factor-

augmented vector autoregression model (PFVAR) written as52


                             ijt  ijt (L)Pijt 1  jt (L)Fjt   jt                   (5)


                                 
where  = [ ,  ,  ,  ] and FG is exogenous. The latter, as we shall see, can include a set of

observable variables or factors. As mentioned previously, the factors are time-varying which, in effect,

             
implies that  is also a time-varying element. Recall that the elements of P consist of the (domestic)

Real, Trade (T), financial (F), and monetary (M) factors.


One issue that arises from estimation of any VAR is the ordering of the variables. While ordering the real

factor first is unlikely to be controversial, as almost all empirical work of this variety suggest that real

economic factors are the `most' endogenous in a recursive or Cholesky decomposition, the rest of the

ordering is less clear cut with the possible exception of the monetary (M) factor which is traditionally

seen as the `least' endogenous since it is affected by all the other shocks while these same shocks only


52
  "Quasi" time varying because the factors scores are time-varying not because the coefficients in the PVAR are
time-varying. See below.

                                                                                                                  30
impact M with a lag. This is also standard in almost all estimated macro-econometric models.

Accordingly, we estimate versions of the panel VARs where the real factor is placed first, followed by the

financial and trade factors, with credibility and monetary factors last. In a separate exercise, we place

credibility first and switch the order of the trade and financial factors.


Alternatively, one might also consider identifying more precisely the structural shocks either by

imposing long-run or short-run restrictions, or even sign restrictions. Such extensions are feasible (e.g.,

see Canova and Ciccarelli (2013), and references therein) but create additional challenges with the net

benefits unclear. In the present context the most important drawback is that the economic

development of the various countries in our dataset is quite diverse. This makes it difficult to impose

common structural restrictions across the four economies considered. The same challenge arises when

sign restrictions are considered. There is a real risk that such identification schemes can distort the

results.


Finally, we discuss how the time-varying factor scores are obtained. First, we estimate factor models for

the full available sample. Next, we estimate the same factor models for samples that range from 5 to 6

years in length in a rolling manner. The sample is rolled ahead two years at a time. This produces a

series of overlapping samples.53 The estimated factor scores are averaged when samples overlap to

produce a unique factor estimate that is time-varying.


Specifications such as equation (5) are based on unobservable factors. To gauge the sensitivity of our

                                                                                                                      
results, we also consider a version of (5) relying on observable time series. Define  = [ ,  ,  ,  ]

where  is real GDP growth,  is the rate of change in the real exchange rate,  is credit growth, and 




53
  The samples are 5 years long for the real and trade factors and 6 years for the financial factor. The slightly longer
span for the financial factors is inspired by the finding that the phase length of the financial cycle is longer than for
business cycle (e.g., see Borio 2012). Ideally, we would have liked to estimate the financial factor for an even
longer sample (e.g., 7 to 10 years) but data limitations prevented us from doing so.

                                                                                                                      31
                                                                                                                   
represents monetary policy. Again, we also consider a version augmented with credibility where  =

                        
[ ,  ,  ,  ,  ] .54 Hence, the specification based on observable time series is written


                       d
                      Pjt   j (L)Pjt
                                  d
                                     1   j (L)Pjt   jt
                                               US
                                                                                                (6)


where all terms were defined previously. Note that   ,   are time invariant. We continue to assume

that the global factor consists of US shocks alone.


We now turn to the data and estimation results.


         5.2 Shocks to AE and EME


The panel VARs are estimated via GMM instrumented using 1 or 2 lags of the endogenous variables (i.e.,

as in Holz-Eakin, Newey, and Rosen (1988); also see Abrigo and Love (2005)). The VARs rely on 1 lag.

Panel-specific fixed effects are removed via a Helmert transformation to reduce dimensionality.55 All

panel VARs are estimated for a balanced sample that can vary depending on how the factor scores are

estimated and the economies considered. When all economies are considered, the sample is 2001Q4-

2018Q3 before lags. For the AE, where 11 cross-sections are included, this yields 649 observations or 68

observations per cross-section. For the EME, there are 16 cross-sections yielding 1088 observations.56

Confidence intervals are also estimated via Monte Carlo and 68% significance levels are used (i.e.,

equivalent to ± 1 s.e.), which is fairly typical in the relevant literature, although none of the highlighted

results are greatly affected when, say, an 80% confidence interval is used. In all the panel VARs, the

ordering is as follows: real or real GDP growth, financial conditions or the change in the ratio of private



54
   For completeness, another version where CRED is placed first and the ordering of  and  is reversed is also
estimated. Technically, CRED is not observed but it seems important nevertheless to examine the role and impact
of credibility when the shocks are to observable variables.
55
   It is a transformation used in instrumental variable estimation even if the label itself is not always used. See, for
example, Arellano and Bover (1995).
56
   The Philippines are omitted because we could not obtain a long enough sample for enough of the series in the
factor model version of the panel VAR.

                                                                                                                      32
non-bank financial assets to GDP, the trade factor or real effective exchange rate growth, central bank

credibility57 and the monetary factor which is represented by the policy rate in both versions of the

model. US shocks are deemed exogenous. Where the results are affected by the ordering of some of the

variables this is noted below.


Results are shown in Figures 11 and 12. The first set of figures (i.e., Figure 11) rely on observable time

series; the second set of Figures (i.e., Figure 12) are the estimates based on factor models. Figures 11A

and 12A plot the impulse responses (IR) to shocks in the endogenous variables while Figures 11B and

12B show the dynamic multipliers of exogenous shocks from the US (i.e., global shocks) on the

remaining AE and EME. As argued above, our discussion focuses on the differential impact of central

bank credibility, monetary policy, trade and financial conditions in AE versus EME.


We first examine the results for the AE. These are shown in Figures 11A through 11D. A positive credit

shock fuels a rise in real GDP growth. Similarly, real exchange rate appreciations58 improves central bank

credibility and raise policy rates. A positive policy rate shock reduces central bank credibility and the real

exchange rate. Policy rate shocks also have a negative impact on real GDP growth. Finally, a reduction in

central bank credibility59 reduces credit growth but has a positive impact on real GDP growth. Since our

indicator of credibility aggregates three components, either a rise inflation forecast errors, monetary

policy uncertainty or global inflation divergences (which can also impact competitiveness) can combine

to reduce credibility and may well prompt central banks in AE to raise the policy rate. All of these can

explain the kinds of impulse responses reported in Figure 11A.


Dynamic multipliers in Figure 11B reveal that US shocks, in the form of a higher policy rate (fed funds)

have spillover effects by raising credit growth and improving central bank credibility and real GDP



57
   CREDN4 is the label describing the normalized estimates of central bank credibility described earlier.
58
   The real exchange is defined here such that a rise signals an improvement in competitiveness.
59
   Recall that CRED is defined in a such a way so that a rise implies a fall in central bank credibility.

                                                                                                             33
growth in AE. This occurs at first although it is eventually reversed beginning five quarters in the future.

A rise in US competitiveness is seen as reducing real GDP growth in other AE, the policy rate temporarily,

and central bank credibility. The latter result might be explained by the reduction in competitiveness

when US competitiveness improves. This can be interpreted as having negative consequences on some,

or all, of the elements that make-up our indicator of credibility. Indeed, higher US real GDP growth

improves central bank credibility in AE in part because domestic competitiveness also improves. Finally,

it is worth noting that central bank credibility stands out as a variable that explains up to 16% of

variation in real GDP growth, 18% of real exchange rate fluctuations as well as about 15% of variation in

policy rates.60 However, credibility shocks explain virtually none of the changes in credit growth (1% of

the variation) while real exchange rate movements are not very sensitive to policy rate shocks (8% of the

variation).


Turning to the same model now estimated using factor scores for the real, trade, and financial variables,

Impulse Responses (IR) are shown in Figure 11C. Although the interpretation of many of the IR are

compatible with the version that relies on observables there are a few differences. First, a tighter

monetary policy factor (i.e., higher mf1) has no impact on central bank credibility. However, a reduction

in credibility (i.e., a higher credn4) leads to reduced real economic activity (i.e., rf1 declines). This

contradicts the result shown in Figure 11A. However, it is worth adding that the real factor contains

forward-looking elements whereas the observed proxy for real economic performance does not. Hence,

it is possible that a credibility shock (i.e., a reduced credibility) creates expectations of negative

economic outcomes that translate into lower real economic activity. Finally, a trade shock (i.e., a rise in


60
  We also examined the variance decompositions and performed Granger causality tests (results not shown). Not
surprisingly, all models suggest that own shocks matter most. This is a common finding in the literature and
captures the strong persistence property found in macroeconomic and financial time series. Granger causality tests
confirm the chosen ordering in the sense that whereas the policy rate Granger-causes the other variables in the
system it is only Granger-caused by central bank credibility. Nevertheless, when the ordering is changed as
discussed earlier only the size, not the sign, of the IR from the real exchange rate and credit growth to central bank
credibility are affected. All other IR are unchanged.

                                                                                                                   34
tf1 which translates into greater competitiveness) leads to temporarily tighter monetary policy and

financial conditions.


The dynamic multipliers shown in Figure 11D suggest that global shocks (i.e., shocks from the U.S.)

impact all the variables in the model. However, two are worth highlighting. First, tighter US monetary

policy tightens monetary conditions in the remaining AE and improves their central banks' credibility.

Second, a positive US real shock (i.e., a rise in us_rf1) improves competitiveness and real economic

conditions in the other AE.61 This is the case of a rising tide lifting all boats.


We now turn to the results for EME shown in Figures 12A through 12D when the variables are

observable. Three results are worth highlighting. First policy rate increases improve central bank

credibility but this is more than offset in later quarters. The same shock reduces real GDP growth. The

former result is consistent with the ones shown in Figure 11A for AE. Unlike the experience in AE, credit

growth has no impact on real GDP growth. Otherwise, the results are broadly similar with the ones

reported for AE.62


Variance decompositions (not shown) reveal that credibility shocks explain around 25% of variation in

credit growth and 11% of the policy rate in EME after 10 quarters. The same shock explains only 2% of

real GDP growth and 6% of real exchange rate changes. Policy rate changes explain a large portion of the

real exchange rate variable (38%). Other than the impact of credibility shocks on the policy rate, which

are comparable for AE and EME, central bank credibility in EME explains far less real GDP growth




61
  When the ordering of some of the variables is changed the link between credibility, trade, and financial
conditions becomes insignificant. Other IRs are unaffected. The only noteworthy results from the variance
decompositions (not shown) when factors are used is the finding that almost 20% of the variation in monetary
conditions is explained by changes in financial conditions. Hence, the nexus between financial markets and
monetary policy is significant and cannot be ignored in AE. As we shall see below, the same result is not obtained
for the EME.
62
  Changing the ordering of the variables renders insignificant the links between credit growth and credibility and
real GDP growth and central bank credibility. Otherwise the other conclusions are unchanged.

                                                                                                                 35
developments and real exchange rate changes than in their counterparts in AE. By contrast policy rate

shocks have a much bigger influence in real exchange rate developments in EME than in AE.


Turning to spillovers from US shocks shown in Figure 12B we find that, although a tightening of US

monetary policy also leads to higher policy rates in EME and higher credit growth, central bank

credibility in these economies also deteriorates slightly but only for one quarter. There is no impact on

EME real GDP growth of a U.S. tightening of monetary policy. However, unlike for AE, rising US real GDP

growth improves trade competitiveness and leads to a small decline, after 5 quarters, in policy rates in

EME and not an increase as in AE.


Finally, Figures 12C and 12D plot the IR for the factor-based model applied to the EME. Tighter financial

conditions lower real economic outcomes and have no effect on central bank credibility. An improved

trade factor, which is akin to an improvement in trade competitiveness, improves central bank

credibility. Finally, a loss of central bank credibility produces a tightening of monetary policy, looser

financial conditions and poorer real economic outcomes.63 Only the impulse responses between credit

growth (see Figure 12A) and credibility or real GDP growth differ from the factor model results shown in

Figure 12C. Other than the finding that a competitiveness shock does not lead to tighter monetary

conditions in the EME, both the impulse responses and dynamic multipliers behave similarly in EME and

AE.


Variance decompositions (not shown) suggest that around 9% of credibility shocks explain monetary

conditions which is considerably higher than in the case of AE but monetary shocks explain less of the

variation in financial, real and trade factors than in AE (around 6 to 10%).64 Moreover, greater US




63
  Changing the ordering of some of the variables (see above) in the model has no impact on the IR.
64
  Granger causality testing (not shown) also finds that, unlike AE, monetary policy shocks in EME are more
responsive to the other variables in the model. Finally, dynamic multipliers (Figure 12D) suggest that US monetary
policy shocks deliver a central bank credibility dividend in EME but at the expense of looser financial conditions.

                                                                                                                 36
competitiveness also leads to looser financial conditions in EME, as well as improved central bank

credibility and improvements in the trade factor.


Given the large number of results it may be useful to contrast the impact of a single shock-- a tightening

of domestic monetary policy, for each country including the U.S. (which itself serves as the global shock),

between AE and EME. A summary of the results is provided in Table 3. The domestic response to a

tightening shock is the same on both AE and EME and irrespective of whether observable or factor

modelling used. In principle, this ought to make it easier for policy makers to agree on the response to

conventional monetary policy actions. Turning to the spillover effects from the U.S., our stand-in for a

global shock, these amplify the domestic response in AE based on observable data with one exception.

The U.S. tightening shock offsets what would otherwise be a deterioration in trade competitiveness. The

same result holds for EME. Equally important, spillovers from a U.S. tightening shock are benign for

credit growth, real GDP growth and central bank credibility. Turning to factor model-based estimates

global shocks are, in the main, beneficial for AE and EME.


The only sour note for EME is that the negative real impact of a tightening of monetary policy is

amplified when global shocks are added. The beneficial impact on trade competitiveness from the

global shock is interesting in view of recent discussions about whether exchange rate appreciations can

be blunted because so much of trade is invoiced in US dollars (e.g., see BIS 2019). Finally, even if the sign

of the responses is often similar when AE and EME are compared, this need not imply that the total

impact of a monetary policy shock will be the same in both groups of economies.


How then do the econometric findings relate to the institutional developments previously discussed?

First, the fact that the response to many shocks are common to AE and EME suggests that the parallel

changes in some critical elements of institutional change (e.g., central bank transparency, monetary

policy regime strategy) are broadly reflected in how the two types of economies respond to selected


                                                                                                           37
economic shocks. In contrast, the finding that EME are far more sensitive to monetary policy shocks (i.e.,

based on variance decompositions) while credit growth is also more responsive to central bank

credibility shocks in AE than in EME may also provide part of the explanation for the divergence in

resilience between the two groups of economies in recent years. Clearly, this conclusion is preliminary

and will require at the very least more data before it is conclusive.


    6. Conclusions and Policy Lessons

In this paper we present some empirical evidence based on a panel of 29 countries (with the euro area

treated as a country) on the performance of central banks in both advanced (AE) and emerging (EME)

countries. Our focus is on the post Bretton Woods era. We document the progress made by the AE

countries since the end of the Great Inflation in the early 1980s. Most of these countries achieved

credibility for low inflation by adopting the major institutional changes of central bank independence

(CBI), central bank transparency (CBT), and the adoption of inflation targeting. The apogee of this

evolution was the Great Moderation from circa 1985 to 2006.


The EMEs started with a less favorable track record. For them the 1980s into the 1990s was

characterized by macroeconomic and financial instability exhibited in frequent currency, banking and

twin crises (Bordo, Eichengreen et al 2001). Many of these countries had fiscally dominant regimes and

problems establishing constitutional representative democracies, rule of law and sound governance of

fiscal, monetary and financial institutions. They also had limited financial development and financial

repression.


Beginning in the 1980s, a number of EMEs (e.g., Chile and Korea) began to learn from their crisis

experience and began following the lead of the AEs in developing sound fiscal, monetary and financial

institutions. By the 1990s several EMEs began to tame their inflation problems and their inflation rates




                                                                                                          38
converged to those of the AE. Those adopting IT were at the vanguard of this process (Bordo and Siklos

2014).


The GFC of 2007-2008 was a major global shock which had serious consequences for the AEs. Their

central banks began to attach greater importance to financial stability while still following flexible IT

policies. Many of the EMEs fared well but some with exchange rates pegged to the AEs were hard hit

(e.g., Hungary). Also, many were hit by the collapse of global trade and commodity markets in 2009-

2011 and by the spillover effects of the credit crunches in the AE, especially those with original sin (i.e.,

foreign currency denominated debt, see Bordo, Meissner, and Stuckler (2012)).


Given this background we document what has happened since the GFC to central banking institutions

and inflation performance in the EMEs relative to the AEs. We show that that some of the patterns

observed before the GFC continued but some were significantly different. Our study shows that,

although some EMEs did maintain the levels of CBI and CBT that they had before the GFC, they

experienced a decline in our measure of institutional resilience to shocks as well as a reduction in the

quality of their governance. They also exhibited a reduction in our measures of CB credibility. Indeed, it

appears that CB credibility in EMEs is more fragile than in the AEs. Although the EMEs, as a group,

avoided the worst of the direct effects of the credit shocks of the GFC a number are still struggling.


This we believe reflects both the impact of the global shock that was the GFC but also deep structural

flaws that made them vulnerable such as less developed financial institutions and markets and exposure

to original sin. For example, it is noteworthy that credibility shocks reverberate through the economies

of the EME to a greater degree than in the AE. Stated differently, credibility shocks appear to have more

temporary effects in AE than in EME. Moreover, U.S. shocks, when viewed as representative of global

shocks that hit all economies, range from being benign to beneficial for EME and more so than for the

remaining AE in our dataset.


                                                                                                            39
Two main policy lessons follow from our study.


First, that the EMEs should "carry on" to paraphrase a British World War II slogan and to continue

improving their financial institutions, financial markets, and governance so that they can grow up to the

AEs as some earlier EMEs (e.g., Israel and Korea) have done. This is likely the best strategy to improve

institutional resilience.


Second, the problem of the post-GFC era is not just of the EMEs making. AE central banks following best

practice have been unable to hit their IT from below (Ehrmann 2015). This impinges on their credibility

just as the EMEs not being able to hit their IT from above. In particular, one difficulty faced by the EME

but not the AE, at least over the past decade, is that explicit inflation targets and the permissible range

of inflation rates, has changed on several occasions thereby giving the impression of a moving target. In

contrast, among AE, there is a consensus that 1-3% is the range of CPI inflation rates they ought to be

targeting (Siklos 2017).


The reasons for this are complex and not fully understood. Some argue that the slow recoveries

observed in the AEs after the GFC was because of the GFC ­ that all serious recessions with financial

crises have slow recoveries (Reinhart and Rogoff 2009).65 Some argue it is because of the Zero Lower

Bound and the use of quantitative easing and forward guidance by the Federal Reserve and other major

CBs, and the fact that the Federal Reserve and the other CBs did not follow an expansionary monetary

policy but a credit (carry trade) policy because of the payment of interest on excess reserves (Lombardi,

Siklos, and St. Amand 2018, and references therein). Others focus on the supply side and see the deep

fundamentals of globalization and TFP as keeping wages and prices down. Still others argue that CBs

should raise their inflation targets to give them more cutting room for the next recession (Blanchard,



65
  Not all serious recessions accompanied by financial crises have slow recoveries. Research for the U.S. suggests
that, following Friedman's plucking model, recessions with financial crises recover faster (Bordo and Haubrich
2017).

                                                                                                                    40
Dell'Ariccua, and Mauri 2010, Ball 2014). Although the fact that the CBs have up to now been unable to

reach their two per cent targets casts doubts on this case. The implication of these issues is that it is

difficult to urge the CBs of EMEs to follow the AEs best practice if our understanding of the concept it is

in a state of flux.


The ongoing debate in the Federal Reserve over the monetary strategy it should follow illustrates this

conundrum. The issues under consideration include: continuing to follow a form of IT, shifting to an

average IT type strategy or price level targeting; nominal GDP targeting; keeping the central bank's

balance sheet large along with forward guidance or returning back to a "bills only" doctrine; and central

bank digital currency and negative policy rates (Bordo and Levin 2019). Until these issues are resolved it

will be difficult for the CBs of the EMEs to develop their catching up to the AEs.




                                                                                                            41
Table 1 Economies in the Data Set

                  Countries Name
                  and ISO
                  Codes
                  ar         Argentina
                  au         Australia
                  br         Brazil
                  ca         Canada
                  cl         Chile
                  cn         China
                  co         Colombia
                  cz         Czech Republic
                  ez         Euro Area
                  gb         United Kingdom
                  hu         Hungary
                  id         Indonesia
                  il         Israel
                  in         India
                  jp         Japan
                  kr         Korea
                  mx         Mexico
                  my         Malaysia
                  no         Norway
                  nz         New Zealand
                  pe         Peru
                  ph         Phillipines
                  pl         Poland
                  ru         Russia
                  se         Sweden
                  th         Thailand
                  tr         Turkey
                  us         United States of America
                  za         South Africa


Note: Highlighted names belong to the Advanced Economies (AE) group while the remainder
are Emerging market Economies (EME). The selections are based on the 2019 World Economic
Outlook.



                                                                                       42
Table 2 Factor Estimation

 CRED             REAL             TRADE            FINANCIAL       MONETARY         GLOBAL


 CRED is the      Real GDP         Real             Equity prices   Policy rate      US
 credibility                       exchange
 indicator                         rate


                  Inflation        Current          Private non-                     or
                                   account/GDP      bank
                                                    financial
                                                    assets to
                                                    GDP1

                  Real GDP         Forex            Housing                          S3 = US, EZ,
                  growth           reserves         prices                           JP
                  forecast
                  Inflation                         Yield curve
                  forecast                          (i.e., short
                                                    less ling
                                                    rate)


                                                    Interest rate
                                                    differential
                                                    (domestic
                                                    less US
                                                    short-term
                                                    interest
                                                    rate)

Note: the text also provides some details about the form in which the series enter the various
factor models. Real GDP, the current account/GDP, interest rate differential, the yield curve,
and the policy rate are in levels; (1) enter in first difference form. The remaining series are in
annualized growth rate form (i.e., 100 times (log(X(t)-log(X(t-4))).




                                                                                                     43
Table 3 Comparing the Response to A Tightening Shock: AE Versus EME

 Advanced Economies                             Emerging Market Economies
                                    OBSERVABLES PANEL VAR
   Impulse Responses      Dynamic Multipliers     Impulse Responses   Dynamic Multipliers
 Tightening              Amplified              Tightening           Amplified
 Credit Growth rises     Amplified              Credit Growth rises  No change
 Trade                   Improves               Trade                Improves
 competitiveness                                competitiveness
 worsens                                        worsens
 Real GDP growth         Amplified              Real GDP growth      No change
 declines                                       declines
 CB Credibility          Amplified              CB Credibility       No change
 worsens                                        worsens
                                FACTOR MODEL BASED PANEL VAR
   Impulse Responses      Dynamic Multipliers     Impulse Responses   Dynamic Multipliers
 Tightening              Amplfied               Tightening           Amplified
 Financial conditions:   Looser                 Looser               Amplified
 No change
 Trade                    Improves               Improves                  Amplified
 competitiveness: no
 change
 Real economic factor Improves                   Real economic factor Amplified
 declines                                        declines
 CB credibility: no       Improves               CB credibility: no        Improves
 change                                          change
Note: The interpretations refer to the accumulated impact of shocks after 10 quarters. When a
term is underlined this means that the dynamic multipliers (i.e., a tightening monetary policy
shocks from the U.S.) offsets the domestic shock. When a term is in italics the impact (domestic
or U.S. based) differs between AE and EME. Interpretations are based on the results reported in
Figures 11 and 12.




                                                                                              44
Figure 1 Changes in Central Bank Independence, 1998-2017

                                          Change in CBI
    .05
    .04
    .03
    .02
    .01
    .00
   -.01
   -.02
   -.03
           tr




           kr
            cl
          br


           ar




           pl




            il
          mx




          ez
          za




          ca
          my




           cz
          nz
          se
           id


           in


          us



           jp
          gb




          au
          ru



          th
          pe


          co




          no
          cn
          hu




          ph

Note: See Table 1 for the ISO codes. The vertical dashed line divides the AE from the EME in the
sample. See Table 1 for the list. The overall measure of central bank independence from Dincer
and Eichengreen (2014) up to 2010 is used updated to 2017 as explained in the main body of
the text. A positive value means an improvement in central bank independence.




                                                                                              45
Figure 2 Two Views of Central Bank Transparency, 1998-2015
   (A) Changes in Central Bank Transparency

                                  Change in CB Transparency
    .6

    .5

    .4

    .3

    .2

    .1

    .0
          tr
         br


          ar




          kr
          pl




           il
           cl


         mx




         ez
         za




         my




         nz
         ca




          cz
          id


          in


         us



          jp




         se
         gb




         au
         ru



         th
         pe




         no
         co



         hu




         ph
         cn




   (B) Levels of Central Bank Transparency Over Time

   14

   12

   10

     8

     6

     4

     2

     0
         1998     2000     2002     2004   2006    2008      2010    2012    2014

                All economies       Advanced economies        Emerging market economies




                                                                                          46
   (C) Levels of Central Bank Transparency



    14

    12

    10

     8

     6

     4

     2

     0
         1998   2000     2002      2004      2006    2008     2010     2012     2014

                             Small open economies         Large economies

Note: Constructed from data in Dincer, Eichengreen, and Geraats (2019). Table 1 contains the
ISO codes and the list of AE versus EME. Also, see Figure 1. CBT ranges from a minimum of 0 to
a maximum of 15 as shown by the dashed line in part (B). Positive values signal more CBT or an
improvement in CBT.




                                                                                            47
Figure 3 Central Bank Transparency and Governance, 1998-2015
   (A) Advanced economies


     3


     2


     1


     0


    -1


    -2
         1998      2000      2002       2004     2006   2008     2010      2012     2014

                                    SCORE_GOV1_AE         SCORE_TIR1_AE

   (B) Emerging Market Economies

           1.5
           1.0
           0.5
           0.0
           -0.5
           -1.0
           -1.5
           -2.0
           -2.5
                  1998    2000   2002     2004   2006   2008   2010     2012   2014

                                     SCORE_GOV1_EME       SCORE_TIR1_EME




Note: GOV1 is the sum of the 6 components of governance: voice and accountability, rule of
law, regulatory quality, government effectiveness, control of corruption and political stability.
EME are emerging market economies, large economies are US, JP, EZ, GB, small open
economies are CA, NO, SE, NZ, KR, IL, AU.


                                                                                                    48
Figure 4 Inflation Distance from US Inflation

                                                DISTANCE
       1.8

       1.6

       1.4

       1.2

       1.0

       0.8

       0.6

       0.4




              tr
              ar




              kr
               il
             br

               cl




             mx




              pl
             ez




             za
             my
             ca



              cz




             nz
              id

              in
              jp




             se
             au




             gb




             us
             ru

             th
             pe
             co




             no
             cn




             hu




             ph
Note: Distance is dij  2*(1  ij ) where ij is the simple correlation between US inflation and
inflation on the other economies considered. The sample is: 200Q1-2018Q3.




                                                                                           49
Figure 5 Gaps Between Inflation and Inflation Expectations, 1993-2018


     6

     5

     4

     3

     2

     1

     0

    -1

    -2
            93


                    95


                            97


                                    99


                                            01


                                                    03


                                                            05


                                                                    07


                                                                             09


                                                                                     11


                                                                                             13


                                                                                                     15


                                                                                                             17
         19


                 19


                         19


                                 19


                                         20


                                                 20


                                                         20


                                                                 20


                                                                          20


                                                                                  20


                                                                                          20


                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                          20
                                             GAP_ALL                     GAP_ITAE
                                             GAP_ITEST                   GAP_NITAE




    12

    10

     8

     6

     4

     2

     0

    -2

    -4
            93


                    95


                            97


                                    99


                                            01


                                                    03


                                                            05


                                                                    07


                                                                             09


                                                                                     11


                                                                                             13


                                                                                                     15


                                                                                                             17
         19


                 19


                         19


                                 19


                                         20


                                                 20


                                                         20


                                                                 20


                                                                          20


                                                                                  20


                                                                                          20


                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                          20




                                                         GAP_ALL
                                                         GAP_ITEME
                                                         GAP_NITEME




Note: GAP is the difference between inflation (time t) and one-year ahead expected inflation (at
time t). sources and methods of calculations are described in the main body of the text. ALL
refers to the 29 economies in the dataset; IT refers to inflation targeting economies; NIT to non-
inflation targeting economies; AE and EME are defined in Table 1.




                                                                                                                  50
Figure 6 Estimates of Global Inflation

     6

     5

     4

     3

     2

     1

     0

    -1
      1991
      1992
      1993
      1994
      1995
      1996
      1997
      1998
      1999
      2000
      2001
      2002
      2003
      2004
      2005
      2006
      2007
      2008
      2009
      2010
      2011
      2012
      2013
      2014
      2015
      2016
      2017
      2018
                                          GLOBAL_INF_TARGET_ALT
                                          GLOBAL_INF_TARGET_V2

Note: Estimates of global inflation are used to proxy G in determining central bank credibility
(CRED). V2 is obtained as the first principal component from average one year ahead expected
inflation for AE. TARGET_ALT is obtained as the first principal component for AE for observed
CPI inflation. Estimation of the first PC is via maximum likelihood. See also Table 1 for the list of
AE.




                                                                                                   51
Figure 7 Case Studies of Inflation and Expected Inflation: South Africa and Sweden
   (A) South Africa
        14

        12

        10

         8

         6

         4

         2

         0
            00
            01
            02
            03
            04
            05
            06
            07
            08
            09
            10
            11
            12
            13
            14
            15
            16
            17
            18
         20
         20
         20
         20
         20
         20
         20
         20
         20
         20
         20
         20
         20
         20
         20
         20
         20
         20
         20
                                      za_inf      ZA_MEAN_FCAST

   (B) Sweden
         5

         4

         3

         2

         1

         0

        -1

        -2
                01

                02

                03

                04

                05

                06

                07

                08

                09

                10

                11

                12

                13

                14

                15

                16

                17

                18
             20

             20

             20

             20

             20

             20

             20

             20

             20

             20

             20

             20

             20

             20

             20

             20

             20

             20




                                      se_inf      SE_MEAN_FCAST

Note: inflation (inf) is the annualized quarterly CPI inflation rate. See the yexy for details.
MEAN_FCAST is the average one year ahead expected inflation constructed from Consensus
Economics and World Economic Outlook forecasts. See the text for other details.


                                                                                                  52
Figure 8 Three Views of Institutional Resilience
                   6

                   5

                   4

                   3

                   2

                   1

                   0

                  -1
                       1998       2000   2002      2004     2006    2008    2010    2012    2014

                           RESILIENCE_MEAN_AE_V2          RESILIENCE_MAX_AE_V2       RESILIENCE_MIN_AE_V2

                       5


                       4


                       3


                       2


                       1


                       0
                           1998   2000    2002     2004     2006    2008    2010    2012   2014

                       RESILIENCE_MEAN_EME_V2             RESILIENCE_MAX_EME_V2       RESILIENCE_MIN_EME_V2

                       7

                       6

                       5

                       4

                       3

                       2

                       1

                       0
                           1998   2000    2002     2004      2006    2008    2010   2012    2014

                                                      RESILIENCE_MEAN_EME_V2
                                                      RESILIENCE_MEAN_AE


Note: Resilience is defined in the main body of the text and consists of the aggregation of 10
institutional characteristics. The mean, maximum (most resilient) and minimum (least resilient)
are shown for AE and EME. See Table 1 for the ISO codes and classifications.



                                                                                                              53
Figure 9 Illustrating Estimates of Central Bank Credibility: Chile Versus Argentina
   (A) Normalized Scores
    1.0


    0.8


    0.6


    0.4


    0.2


    0.0
      1998    2000    2002    2004     2006    2008    2010     2012     2014     2016     2018

                                     CREDN4_CL          CREDN4_AR

   (B) Raw Scores
 50                                                                                             1,000


 40                                                                                             800


 30                                                                                             600


 20                                                                                             400


 10                                                                                             200


  0                                                                                             0


-10                                                                                             -200
      1998    2000   2002    2004     2006    2008    2010    2012     2014     2016     2018

                                    CRED4_AR          CRED4_CL

Note: CRED4 is the credibility estimate in equation (2) estimated on a normalized scale (part
(A)) and in raw form (as n equation (2); part (B)). N indicates normalized estimates. CRED4 is the
version of credibility that uses inflation lagged one period relative to the first principle
component of observed inflation in AE.AR is Argentina; CL is Chile. The set of AE and EME are
listed in Table 1. The global inflation target is TARGET_ALT (see Figure 6), while t 1 proxies ft1
in equation (1).

                                                                                                       54
Figure 10 Credibility Estimates
   (A) EME versus AE


                       .5


                       .4


                       .3


                       .2


                       .1


                       .0
                            1990
                            1991
                            1992
                            1993
                            1994
                            1995
                            1996
                            1997
                            1998
                            1999
                            2000
                            2001
                            2002
                            2003
                            2004
                            2005
                            2006
                            2007
                            2008
                            2009
                            2010
                            2011
                            2012
                            2013
                            2014
                            2015
                            2016
                            2017
                            2018
                                            CREDN4_MEAN_AE              CREDN4_MEAN_EME



Note: Equation (2) normalized so that CREDN4 ranges between [0,1]. CRED4 is the version of credibility that uses inflation lagged
one period relative to the first principle component of observed inflation in AE. Mean estimates for AE and EME are shown. Also,
see Table 1.




                                                                                                                                    55
                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                               0.2
                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                       1.0
                                                                                                                                                0.0
                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                            0.4
                                                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                                                                                        0.8
                                                                                                                                                                              1.0
                                                                                                                                         1991
                     1997                                                                                                                1992
                     1998                                                                                                                1993
                                                                                                                                         1994
                     1999
                                                                                                                                         1995
                     2000
                                                                                                                                         1996
                                                                                                                                                                                    (B) Large AE




                     2001                                                                                                                1997
                     2002                                                                                                                1998
                     2003                                                                                                                1999
                                                                                                                                         2000
                     2004
                                                                                                                                         2001
                     2005                                                                                                                2002
                     2006                                                                                                                2003




      CREDN2_JP
                                                                                                                             CREDN2_US
                     2007                                                                                                                2004
                                                                                                                                         2005
                     2008
                                                                                                                                         2006
                     2009
                                                                                                                                         2007
                     2010                                                                                                                2008
                                                                                                                                         2009




      CREDN4_JP
                     2011
                                                                                                                             CREDN4_US




                     2012                                                                                                                2010
                                                                                                                                         2011
                     2013
                                                                                                                                         2012
                     2014                                                                                                                2013
                     2015                                                                                                                2014
                     2016                                                                                                                2015
                                                                                                                                         2016
                     2017
                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                               0.2
                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                       1.0
                                                                                                                                                0.0
                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                            0.4
                                                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                                                                                        0.8
                                                                                                                                                                              1.0




                  20


                                                                                                                                         1993
                       2




                                                                                                                                         1994
                                                                                                                                         1995
                           2




                                                                                                                                         1996
                               2




                                                                                                                                         1997
                                                                                                                                         1998
                                   2




                                                                                                                                         1999
                                       2




                                                                                                                                         2000
                                           2




                                                                                                                                         2001
                                                                                                                                         2002
                                               2




                                                                                                                                         2003
                                                   2




                                                                                                                                         2004
     CREDN2_EZ
                                                                                                                             CREDN2_GB




                                                                                                                                         2005
                                                       2




                                                                                                                                         2006
                                                           2




                                                                                                                                         2007
                                                               2




                                                                                                                                         2008
                                                                                                                                         2009
                                                                   2

     CREDN4_EZ
                                                                                                                             CREDN4_GB




                                                                                                                                         2010
                                                                       2




                                                                                                                                         2011
                                                                           2




                                                                                                                                         2012
                                                                                                                                         2013
                                                                               2




                                                                                                                                         2014
56
                                                                                   2




                                                                                                                                         2015
                    00 001 002 003 004 005 006 007 008 009 010 011 012 013 014 015 016




                                                                                                                                         2016
                        0.0
                              0.2
                                    0.4
                                          0.6
                                                0.8
                                                      1.0
                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                             0.4
                                                                                                   0.6
                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                               1.0
                                                                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                                                                               0.2
                                                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                                                                       1.0
                                                                                                                                                                             (C) BRICS




                 1996                                                     1994
                                                                                                                                  1998
                                                                          1995
                 1997                                                                                                             1999
                                                                          1996
                 1998                                                                                                             2000
                                                                          1997
                 1999
                                                                          1998                                                    2001
                 2000
                                                                          1999                                                    2002
                 2001
                                                                          2000                                                    2003
                 2002
                                                                          2001
                 2003                                                                                                             2004
                                                                          2002
                 2004                                                                                                             2005
                                                                          2003
                 2005                                                     2004                                                    2006




                                                             CREDN2_I N




     CREDN2_ZA
                                                                                                                     CRED N2_BR




                 2006                                                     2005                                                    2007
                 2007                                                     2006                                                    2008
                 2008                                                     2007                                                    2009
                 2009                                                     2008
                                                                                                                                  2010
                 2010                                                     2009
                                                                                                                                  2011
                 2011                                                     2010




                                                             CREDN4_I N
                                                                                                                                  2012




     CREDN4_ZA
                                                                                                                     CRED N4_BR




                 2012                                                     2011
                 2013                                                     2012                                                    2013

                 2014                                                     2013                                                    2014
                                                                          2014                                                    2015
                 2015
                                                                          2015
                 2016                                                                                                             2016
                                                                          2016
                 2017                                                                                                             2017
                                                                          2017




                                                                          20
                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                             0.4
                                                                                                   0.6
                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                               1.0
                                                                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                                                                               0.2
                                                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                                                                       1.0




                                                                            06
                                                                                                                                  1997
                                                                          20
                                                                            07                                                    1998
                                                                                                                                  1999
                                                                          20
                                                                            08                                                    2000
                                                                                                                                  2001
                                                                          20
                                                                            09
                                                                                                                                  2002

                                                                          20                                                      2003
                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                  2004
                                                                          20                                                      2005
                                                                            11
                                                                                                                                  2006
                                                            CREDN2_RU
                                                                                                                     CREDN2_CN




                                                                          20                                                      2007
                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                  2008
                                                                          20                                                      2009
                                                                            13
                                                                                                                                  2010
                                                                          20
                                                                            14                                                    2011
                                                            CREDN4_RU
                                                                                                                     CREDN4_CN




                                                                                                                                  2012
                                                                          20                                                      2013
                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                  2014
                                                                          20
                                                                            16                                                    2015
                                                                                                                                  2016
                                                                          20
                                                                            17                                                    2017
57
                        0.0
                              0.2
                                    0.4
                                          0.6
                                                0.8
                                                      1.0
                                                                               0.0
                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                       0.8
                                                                                                             1.0
                                                                                                                                      0.0
                                                                                                                                            0.2
                                                                                                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                                                        0.6
                                                                                                                                                              0.8
                                                                                                                                                                    1.0




                 2001                                                                                                          1992
                                                                        1998                                                   1993
                 2002
                                                                        1999                                                   1994
                 2003                                                                                                          1995
                                                                        2000
                                                                                                                               1996
                 2004                                                   2001                                                   1997
                                                                                                                                                                          (D) IT in Selected AE




                 2005                                                   2002                                                   1998
                                                                        2003                                                   1999
                 2006                                                                                                          2000
                                                                        2004
                                                                                                                               2001
                 2007                                                   2005                                                   2002
                 2008                                                   2006                                                   2003




     CREDN2_NO
                                                                                                                   CREDN2_AU




                                                            CREDN2_NZ
                                                                        2007                                                   2004
                 2009
                                                                                                                               2005
                                                                        2008
                 2010                                                                                                          2006
                                                                        2009                                                   2007
                 2011                                                   2010                                                   2008
                 2012                                                   2011                                                   2009
                                                                                                                               2010




                                                            CREDN4_NZ




     CREDN4_NO
                                                                                                                   CREDN4_AU




                                                                        2012
                 2013                                                                                                          2011
                                                                        2013                                                   2012
                 2014
                                                                        2014                                                   2013
                 2015                                                   2015                                                   2014
                                                                                                                               2015
                 2016                                                   2016
                                                                                                                               2016
                 2017                                                   2017
                                                                               0.0
                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                       0.8
                                                                                                             1.0
                                                                                                                                      0.0
                                                                                                                                            0.2
                                                                                                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                                                        0.6
                                                                                                                                                              0.8
                                                                                                                                                                    1.0




                                                                        2001                                                   1992
                                                                        2002                                                   1993
                                                                                                                               1994
                                                                        2003
                                                                                                                               1995
                                                                        2004                                                   1996
                                                                                                                               1997
                                                                        2005                                                   1998
                                                                                                                               1999
                                                                        2006
                                                                                                                               2000
                                                                        2007                                                   2001
                                                                                                                               2002
                                                                        2008
                                                                                                                               2003
                                                                                                                   CREDN2_CA




                                                            CREDN2_SE




                                                                        2009                                                   2004
                                                                                                                               2005
                                                                        2010                                                   2006
                                                                                                                               2007
                                                                        2011
                                                                                                                               2008
                                                                        2012                                                   2009
                                                            CREDN4_SE




                                                                                                                               2010
                                                                                                                   CREDN4_CA




                                                                        2013                                                   2011
                                                                        2014                                                   2012
                                                                                                                               2013
                                                                        2015                                                   2014
                                                                                                                               2015
                                                                        2016
                                                                                                                               2016
                                                                        2017
58
(E) Asia
           1.0                                                                        1.0


           0.8                                                                        0.8


           0.6                                                                        0.6


           0.4                                                                        0.4


           0.2                                                                        0.2


           0.0                                                                        0.0
              92   94   96   98   00   02   04   06     08   10     12    14    16          05   06   07   08   09      10   11   12   13     14   15   16   17


                                   CREDN2 _ KR        CREDN4 _KR                                                CREDN2 _TH        CREDN4 _TH



           1.0                                                                        1.0


           0.8                                                                        0.8


           0.6                                                                        0.6


           0.4                                                                        0.4


           0.2                                                                        0.2


           0.0                                                                        0.0




                                                                                             1997
                                                                                             1998
                                                                                             1999
                                                                                             2000
                                                                                             2001
                                                                                             2002
                                                                                             2003
                                                                                             2004
                                                                                             2005
                                                                                             2006
                                                                                             2007
                                                                                             2008
                                                                                             2009
                                                                                             2010
                                                                                             2011
                                                                                             2012
                                                                                             2013
                                                                                             2014
                                                                                             2015
                                                                                             2016
                                                                                             2017
                   94   96   98   00   02   04   06     08    10     12    14    16


                                   CREDN2 _ID         CREDN4 _ ID
                                                                                                                     CREDN2_PH    CREDN4_PH


           1.0


           0.8


           0.6


           0.4


           0.2


           0.0
              92   94   96   98   00   02   04   06    08    10     12    14    16


                                  CREDN2 _ MY         CREDN4 _ MY




                                                                                                                                                                  59
                                                                                                                                                                0.0
                                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                                            0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                        0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                              1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                1995                                                   1998
                                                                                                                                                         1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1996                                                   1999
                                                                                                                                                         1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1997
                                                                                                                                                         2000                                                                                                          2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1998
                                                                                                                                                         2001                                                                                                          2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (F) LATAM Countries




                                                                                                                                                         2002                                                   2000
                                                                                                                                                         2003                                                   2001                                                   2003

                                                                                                                                                         2004                                                   2002                                                   2004

                                                                                                                                                         2005                                                   2003                                                   2005




     body of the text for more details.
                                                                                                                                                         2006                                                   2004                                                   2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2005




                                                                                                                                                                                                    CREDN2_CO




                                                                                                                                            CREDN2_P E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CREDN2_AR




                                                                                                                                                         2007                                                                                                          2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2006
                                                                                                                                                         2008                                                                                                          2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2007
                                                                                                                                                         2009                                                                                                          2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2008
                                                                                                                                                         2010                                                                                                          2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2009
                                                                                                                                                         2011                                                   2010                                                   2011




                                                                                                                                            CREDN4_P E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2012

                                                                                                                                                                                                    CREDN4_CO
                                                                                                                                                         2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CREDN4_AR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                2011
                                                                                                                                                         2013                                                   2012                                                   2013
                                                                                                                                                         2014                                                   2013                                                   2014
                                                                                                                                                         2015                                                   2014                                                   2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2015
                                                                                                                                                         2016                                                                                                          2016
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2016
                                                                                                                                                         2017                                                                                                          2017
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                1993                                                   1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1995
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1996                                                   2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1997                                                   2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1998                                                   2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2001                                                   2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2002                                                   2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2003                                                   2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                    CREDN2_MX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CREDN2_CL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2006                                                   2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2007                                                   2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2008                                                   2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CREDN4_CL




                                                                                                                                                                                                    CREDN4_MX




                                                                                                                                                                                                                2011                                                   2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2012                                                   2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2013                                                   2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2016                                                   2016
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2017                                                   2017
     Note: See part A of this Figure. CREDN2 is the normalized version that uses the mean one-year ahead inflation forecast. See the main



60
Figure 11A Impulse Responses: AE Based on Observables




Note: See equations (4) to (6). Variables are defined in Table 2. The ordering of the Panel VAR is from the last row (first) to the first
row (last). 1 lag used in the estimation. See the main body of the text for more details.


                                                                                                                                            61
Figure 11B Dynamic Multipliers: AE Based on Observable Series




Note: Same panel VAR as in Figure 11A. US shocks are treated as exogenous.


                                                                             62
Figure 11C Impulse Responses: AE Based on Factor Model Estimates




Note: RF is the real factor, TF is the trade factor, FF is the financial factor. Factors are obtained from the 1 st principal component of
the series shown in Table 2. 1 lag used in estimation. See the main body of the text for more details and the note to Figure 11A.



                                                                                                                                             63
Figure 11D Dynamic Multipliers: AE Based on Factor Model Estimates




                                                                     64
Figure 12A Impulse Responses: EME Based on Observables




Note: see the notes to Figure 11.


                                                         65
Figure 12B Dynamic Multipliers: EME based on Observables




                                                           66
Figure 12C Impulse Responses: EME Based on Factor Model Estimates




                                                                    67
Figure 12D Dynamic Multipliers: EME Based on Factor Model Estimates




                                                                      68
                                      References

Abrigo, M., and I. Love (2005), "Estimation of Panel Vector Autoregression in Stata: A
Package of Programs", manuscript, February.

Acemoglu, D., S. Naidu, P. Restrepo, and J. Robinson (2019), "Democracy Does Cause
Growth", Journal of Political Economy 127 (February): 47-100.

Arellano, M., and Bover, O. (1995), "Another Look at the Instrumental Variables
Estimation of Error Component Models", Journal of Econometrics, 68, 29-51.

Baker, S., N. Bloom and S. Davis. 2016. "Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty",
Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (November): 1593-1636.

Ball, L. (2014), The Case for a Long-Run inflation Target of Four Percent", IMF
working paper 14/92, June.

Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell'Ariccia and Paolo Mauro, "Rethinking
Macroeconomic Policy," IMF Staff Position Note SPN/10/03, 2010.

Bloom, N. (2009), "The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks", Econometrica 77 (May): 623-
685.

Bordo, M.D, O. Bush and R.Thomas (2019) " The Fiscal Origins of the Great Inflation
in the U.K. " ( Bank of England mimeo)

Bordo, M. D., & Haubrich, J. G. (2017). Deep recessions, fast recoveries, and financial
crises: Evidence from the American record. Economic Inquiry, 55(1), 527-541.

Bordo, M., & Levin, A. (2019). Improving the Monetary Regime: The Case for US
Digital Cash. Cato Journal, 39(2), 383-405.

Bordo, M. D., & Meissner, C. M. (2016). Fiscal and Financial Crises. In Handbook of
Macroeconomics (Vol. 2, pp. 355-412). Elsevier.

Bordo, M. D., Meissner, C. M., & Stuckler, D. (2010). Foreign currency debt, financial
crises and economic growth: A long-run view. Journal of international Money and
Finance, 29(4), 642-665.




                                                                                      69
Bordo, M. D., & Siklos, P. L. (2014). "Central bank credibility, reputation and inflation
targeting in historical perspective" (No. w20693). National Bureau of Economic
Research. Prepared for FLAR Conference, Cartagena, Colombia 2014

Bordo, M. D. and P. L. Siklos (2016) "Central Bank Credibility: An Historical
Qualitative Exploration" in Bordo, M. D., Eitrheim, Ø., Flandreau, M., & Qvigstad, J. F.
(Eds.). (2016). Central Banks at a Crossroads: What Can We Learn from History?.
Cambridge University Press.

Bordo, M. D., and P. L. Siklos (2017), "Central Bank Credibility before and after the
Crisis", Open Economies Review, Springer, vol. 28(1), pages 19-45, February.

Bordo, M. D., & Siklos, P. L. (2018). "Central Banks: Evolution and Innovation in
Historical Perspective." In R. Edvinsson, T. Jacobson, & D. Waldenström (Eds.),
Sveriges Riksbank and the History of Central Banking (Studies in Macroeconomic
History, pp. 26-89). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/9781108140430.002

Borio, C. (2012), "The Financial Cycle and Macroeconomics: What Have We Learnt?",
BIS working paper no. 395, December.

Caldara, D. and M. Iacoviello (2018), "Measuring Geopolitical Risk,'' working paper,
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Board, January 2018.

Canova, F., and M. Ciccarelli (2013), "Panel Vector Autoregressive Models: A Survey",
ECB working paper No. 1507, January.

Calomiris, C. W. (2017). Reforming Financial Regulation after Dodd-Frank. Manhattan
Institute for Policy Research, New York.

Chen, H., and P. Siklos. 2019. "Ocean's Apart? The Spread of Domestic and Global
Shocks Among Systemically Important Economies and China's Role", Hong Kong
Institute for Monetary Research working paper, forthcoming.

Chinn, Menzie D. and Hiro Ito (2006), "What Matters for Financial Development?
Capital Controls, Institutions, and Interactions," Journal of Development
Economics, Volume 81, Issue 1, Pages 163-192 (October).




                                                                                        70
Chow, G. C., & Lin, A. L. (1971). Best linear unbiased interpolation, distribution, and
extrapolation of time series by related series. Princeton University.


Clarida, R. (2018), "The Global Factor in Neutral Policy Rates: Some Implications for
Exchange Rates, Monetary Policy, and Policy Coordination", BIS working paper No.
732, July.

Dincer, N. N., & Eichengreen, B. (2014). Central Bank Transparency and
Independence: Updates and New Measures. International Journal of Central
Banking.

Dincer, N., Eichengreen, B., & Geraats, P. (2019). "Transparency of Monetary Policy
in the Postcrisis World" in The Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Central
Banking, edited by D. Mayes, P.L. Siklos and J.-E. Sturm (New York: Oxford University
Press).

Égert, B. (2002). "Estimating the Impact of the Balassa-Samuelson Effect on Inflation
and the real Exchange Rate", Economic Systems 26 (April): 1-16.

Ehrmann, M. (2015), "Targeting Inflation from Below: How Do Inflation Expectations
Behave?", International Journal of Central Banking (September): 213-49.

Eichengreen, B., and D. Leblang (2008), "Democracy and Globalization", Economics
and Politics 20 (November): 289-334.

Feldkircher, M., and F. Huber (2016), "The International Transmission of US Shocks ­
Evidence From Bayesian Global Vector Autoregressions", European Economic Review
81: 167-88.

Filardo, A., and P. Rungcharoenkitkul (2016), "Quantitative Case for Leaning Against the
Wind," BIS Working Paper No. 594, Bank for International Settlements.

Forbes, K. J. (2019), "Inflation Dynamics: Dead, Dormant, and Determined Abroad?",
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (forthcoming).

Frankel, J., X. Ma, and D. Xie (2019), "The Impact of Exchange Rate Regimes on Economic
Growth with Continuous Classification of De Facto Regimes", working paper, Harvard
University, April.

Gygli, Savina, Florian Haelg, Niklas Potrafke and Jan-Egbert Sturm. 2019. The KOF
Globalisation Index ­ Revisited, Review of International Organizations,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11558-019-09344-2.
                                                                                           71
Ha, J, M A Kose, and F Ohnsorge (2019), Inflation in Emerging and Developing
Economies: Evolution, Drivers and Policies, World Bank.

Hamilton, J. 2018. `Why You Should Never Use the Hodrick-Prescott Filter", Review of
Economics and Statistics 100 (December): 831-843.

Hatzius, J., P., Hooper, F. Mishkin, K. Schoenholtz, and M. Watson (2010), "Financial
Conditions Indexes: A Fresh Look After the Crisis", Proceedings from the Monetary
Policy Forum 2010, also NBEZR working paper 16150, July.

Holt-Eakin, D., W. Newey, and H. Rosen (1988), "Estimating Vector Autoregressions
with Panel Data", Econometrica 56(6): 1371-1395.

Howorth, S., D. Lombardi, and P.L. Siklos (2019) "Together or Apart? Monetary Policy
Divergences in the G4" (with), Open Economies Review 30 (April): 191-217.

Ilzetzki, E., Reinhart, C. M., & Rogoff, K. S. (2019). Exchange Arrangements Entering
the Twenty-First Century: Which Anchor will Hold?. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 134(2), 599-646.

Iwasaki, Y., & Sudo, N. (2017). Myths and Observations on Unconventional Monetary
Policy: Takeaways from Post-Bubble Japan (No. 17-E-11). Bank of Japan.

Jurado, K., S. Ludvigson, and S. Ng (2015), Measuring Uncertainty", American
Economic Review 105 (March): 1177-1215.

Kaufmann, D., A. Kraay, and M. Mastruzzi (2007), "The Worldwide Governance
Indicators Project: Answering the Critics", World Bank Policy Research working paper
4149, March.

Kose, A., C. Otrok, and E. Prasad (2012), "Global Business Cycles: Convergence or
Decoupling", International Economic Review 53 (May): 511- 538.

Kose, A, and E Prasad (2010), Emerging Markets: Resilience and Growth amid Global
Turmoil, Washington, DC: Brookings.

Kurtz, M., and A. Shrank (2007), "Growth and Governance: Models, Measures, and
Mechanisms", Journal of Politics 69 (May): 538-554.

Lombardi, D., P. Siklos, and S. St. Amand (2018), "A Survey of the International
Evidence and Lessons Learned About Unconventional Monetary Policies: Is A `New
Normal' in Our Future?", Journal of Economic Surveys 32 (December): 1229-1256.
                                                                                        72
Lombardi, D., P. Siklos, and X. Xie (2018), "Monetary Policy Transmission in
Systemically Important Economies and China's Impact", Journal of Asian Economics
59(C): 61-79.

McCauley, R. N. (2018). The 2008 crisis: transpacific or transatlantic? BIS Quarterly
Review December.

Monnet, E (2018), "Controlling Credit". Cambridge University Press

Powell, J.H. (2019), "Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy Review", speech at the
Council on Foreign Relations, New York, 25 June, available from
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/powell20190625a.htm.

Reid, M., S. du Plessis, and P. Siklos (2018), "What Drives Household Inflation
Expectations in South Africa? Demographics and Anchoring Under Inflation
Targeting", CAMA working paper 48/2018.

Rajan, R. G. (2011). "Fault Lines: How Hidden Fractures still threaten the World
Economy" Princeton University Press.

Reinhart, C. M., & Rogoff, K. S. (2009). "This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of
Financial Folly" Princeton University Press.

Rivera-Batiz, F.L. (2002), "Democracy, Governance, and Economic Growth: Theory
and Evidence", Review of Development Economics 6 (June): 225-247.

Schüler, Y. (2018a), "On the Cyclical Properties of Hamilton's Regression Filter",
Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper, 03/2018.

Schüler, Y. (2018b), "Detrending and Financial Cycle Facts Across G7 Countries: Mind
a Spurious Medium-Term", European Central Bank working paper 2138.

Siklos, P. (2019), "What Has Publishing Inflation Forecasts Accomplished? Central
Banks and Their Competitors" in The Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Central
Banking, Edited by David G. Mayes, Pierre L. Siklos, and Jan-Egbert Sturm, Oxford
University Press, pp. 737-777.

Siklos, P. (2017), Central Bank Into the Breach (Oxford: Oxford University Press)

Siklos, P. (2013), "Sources of Disagreement in Inflation Forecasts: An International
Empirical Investigation", Journal of International Economics 90: 218-231.
                                                                                        73
Stock, J., and M. Watson (2018), "Slack and Cyclically Sensitive Inflation", ECB Forum
on Central Banking, "Price and Wage Setting in Advanced Economies" .

Svensson, L. (2017), "Leaning Against the Wind: The Role of Different Assumptions
About the Costs, NBER working paper 23745, August.

Taylor, J. B. (2007) "Housing and monetary policy," Proceedings - Economic Policy
Symposium - Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pages 463-476.

Timmermann, A. (2006), "Forecast Combinations", in Handbook of Economic
Forecasting, vol. 1, edited by G. Elliott, C. Granger, and A. Timmermann (North
Holland: Elsevier, pp. 135-196.

Tooze, A. (2018). Crashed: How a decade of financial crises changed the world. (New
York: Penguin).




                                                                                    74
