                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     UNDERWRITER CERTIFICATION, ISSUER-UNDERWRITER MATCHING, AND
                          SEO PERFORMANCE

                                      Charles W. Calomiris
                                        Yehuda Izhakian
                                        Jaime F. Zender

                                      Working Paper 26344
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26344


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




We are very grateful to Tony Cookson for sharing his R script and for extensive discussions. We
also thank Rob Dam, Shaun Davies, Kathleen Hanley, Katie Moon, Brian Waters and participants
at the Leeds Finance Brown Bag seminar. We are grateful to Belinda Chen for excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Charles W. Calomiris, Yehuda Izhakian, and Jaime F. Zender. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Underwriter Certification, Issuer-Underwriter Matching, and SEO Performance
Charles W. Calomiris, Yehuda Izhakian, and Jaime F. Zender
NBER Working Paper No. 26344
October 2019
JEL No. D82,G14,G32

                                         ABSTRACT

The introduction of deal types for issues of seasoned equity in which the offer follows quickly
after its announcement highlights the role of underwriter certification in the performance of
SEOs. Controlling for the matching between underwriters and issuers, underwriter quality is
positively related to the announcement effect in rapidly completed SEOs. For these deal types, we
also find that the discount is significantly negatively related to underwriter quality. For fully
marketed deals we are unable to detect any significant relation between SEO performance and
underwriter quality. Issuers pay for the value provided by high-quality underwriters with higher
fees.

Charles W. Calomiris                            Jaime F. Zender
Columbia Business School                        Leeds School of Finance
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall                 University of Colorado at Boulder
New York, NY 10027                              419 UCB
and NBER                                        Boulder, Colorado 80309-0419
cc374@columbia.edu                              jaime.zender@colorado.edu

Yehuda Izhakian
Zicklin College of Business
One Bernard Baruch Way
New York, NY 10010
yud@stern.nyu.edu
1        Introduction

An interesting contrast exists between studies of initial public offerings of equity (IPOs) and those
of follow on, or seasoned equity offerings (SEOs). In most examinations of the pricing or outcomes
of IPOs the quality or reputation of the underwriter is a prominent part of the discussion. For
example, the certification hypothesis (e.g., Beatty and Ritter, 1986; Booth and Smith, 1986; Carter
and Manaster, 1990) proposes that asymmetric information between the issuing firm and investors
implies that a high-quality or highly reputable underwriter would add value by certifying the value of
the new issue to investors. Huang et al. (2008) argue that higher quality underwriters have access to
a superior quality network of investors which is important for an IPO as the underwriter is charged
not only with selling the issue but also with establishing a liquid market in the new asset. Despite a
significant body of literature discussing the impact of asymmetric information between public firms
and external investors on financial decision making, with a few exceptions (e.g., Altinkili¸
                                                                                           c and Hansen,
2003; Gao and Ritter, 2010; Fernando et al., 2015), the importance of the underwriter in mitigating
this prominent imperfection does not play a central role in the literature on SEOs.1 Prior studies have
instead emphasized how differences in SEO performance relate to the attributes of the issuer or the
circumstances of the issuance, rather than to the differences in the quality of the underwriter. These
studies consider, for example, the degree to which information about issuers' prospects is more or less
clear, the firm's size, its Tobin's Q, whether its managers are maintaining large stakes in its equity,
etc. (e.g., Korajczyk et al., 1991; Hansen and Torregrosa, 1992; Denis, 1994). While there is clearly a
greater scope for underwriter quality to affect the performance of an IPO it seems unlikely that the
quality of the underwriter has no influence on the performance of an SEO.
        This paper examines the extent to which, controlling for the matching between issuing firms and
underwriters, high-quality underwriters provide greater value to public firms as they sell seasoned
equity. The heterogeneity in the types of deals by which SEOs are now accomplished allows us to
provide empirical evidence regarding the differential importance of the quality of the underwriter
on the performance of different types of SEOs. There are currently three primary deal types for
    1
     For example, the well documented negative average price impact associated with public firms announcing SEOs has
commonly been interpreted as a market response to asymmetric information (Mikkelson and Partch, 1986). Korajczyk
et al. (1991) show that public firms tend cluster new security issues after significant release of information and avoid
issuing securities prior to such events. They interpret this behavior as rational behavior for firms anticipating the
response investors will have to the announcement of an issue of equity given that investors believe the firm may have
superior information. The documentation of abnormal profits to insiders' trades (e.g., Seyhun, 1986) indicates that public
firm insiders do possess material information that is not possessed by external investors. Theoretically, in two highly
influential papers, Myers and Majluf (1984) and Myers (1984) develop the Pecking Order Theory of incremental financing
in which the primary friction is asymmetric information between a public firm and external investors. Easterbrook (1984)
hypothesizes that one possible explanation for the use of dividends by public firms is that dividend payout makes it more
likely firms will need to seek additional equity financing. Easterbrook argues that the added scrutiny of the market when
firms issue securities represents a benefit to counter the costs associated with the distribution of dividends by public
firms; such scrutiny is only valuable if there is important information that the firm does not routinely release to investors.



                                                              1
performing an SEO. Fully marketed deals closely follow the familiar format of US IPOs in that after
the deal is announced there is a period (a few weeks to several months) during which the underwriter
exchanges information with investors (the road show) and gathers indications of investor interest in
the offering (builds a book). At the offer date the issue is sold to external investors. This was the
dominant deal type in the U.S. before about 2007. In contrast, in accelerated bookbuilt offerings and
bought offerings, the offer follows very quickly (often within 24 hours) after the announcement of the
issue. The primary difference between these two faster deal types is that in accelerated bookbuilt
offerings the issue is sold to external investors, while in bought deals the underwriter purchases the
issue from the issuing firm.
   Presumably, the ability to move quickly to offer shares has value to the issuer, perhaps because it
allows the firm to take advantage of favorable market conditions or to gain a competitive advantage
investing in a new activity. However, an offer that is completed very quickly accentuates potential
"lemons" concerns because it dramatically reduces the amount of time that investors can perform
their due diligence. In the Myers and Majluf (1984) model, the key question that concerns purchasers
is whether the value added of the issuing firm's investment opportunity is sufficiently high. Because
of the greater potential lemons problem associated with more rapidly completed deals, it follows that
underwriter certification is likely to be especially important in such cases.
   In the case of IPOs, asymmetric information about the prospects of the firm seeking to go public
is one of the most cited motivations for the importance of underwriter quality in the performance of
IPOs. This asymmetry gave rise to the "certification hypothesis," under which the IPO underwriters'
role is largely one of certifying the value of the issuer given the difficulty investors have in performing
their own due diligence. Underwriters with the best reputations (based on their past performance)
will have the greatest impact on the performance of the IPO.
   While we recognize that it is likely that asymmetric information is a greater concern in IPOs
than it is in SEOs, we demonstrate that there is a substantial role for underwriter certification in
accelerated and bought offerings. Specifically, controlling for the matching between issuing firms and
underwriters, for accelerated and bought deals, both the announcement effect and the discount are
significantly related to the quality of the underwriter.
   It is important to note that, without controlling for the matching between firms and underwriters,
the estimated relation between the announcement effect (or the discount) and underwriter quality is
insignificant. This contrast reflects the fact that there is substantial cross-sectional variation among
issuers in the extent of their informational challenges. Assortative matching occurs, in which more
information-problematic issuers, those most willing to pay the premium associated with underwriter
quality, are matched with more reputable underwriters. Because the quality of underwriters is posi-
tively correlated with the informational problems of issuers (which have unconditional negative conse-


                                                    2
quences for deal pricing), failing to control for matching will tend to understate the role of underwriters
in improving the performance of SEOs.
    In contrast, controlling for the matching between issuers and underwriters, we find that while
the relation between underwriter quality and the announcement effect is positive it is insignificant
for fully marketed deals. Similarly, the relation between the size of the discount and the quality of
the underwriter in fully marketed deals is negative but insignificant. In Section 5, we explain this
result as a possible consequence of two offsetting influences. The lack of a significant relation between
underwriter quality and the performance of fully marketed SEOs may explain the absence of significant
discussion of this relation in the prior literature.
    Finally, we show that, controlling for the matching between underwriters and firms, issuing firms
pay higher total fees for the value afforded by using a higher quality underwriter. However, consistent
with the optimality of the matching between the firm and the underwriter, higher quality underwriters
are associated with lower marginal fees (fees as a percentage of proceeds). The intuition is that higher
quality underwriters charge more in total fees but the value they provide allows issuers to raise more
capital in a given deal. These findings indicate that the cost curve associated with raising seasoned
equity differs based on the quality of the underwriter leading the deal.
    Any analysis of the performance of SEOs must consider how the different aspects of quality (both
of firms and of underwriters) may affect outcomes in the issuing process. Heterogeneity of firms and
of underwriters is fundamental to modeling the process through which issuing firms choose underwrit-
ers to represent them and underwriters select firms they are willing to represent in the market for
underwriting services. In the early corporate finance literature, the market for underwriting services
has been modeled as a one-sided selection process. In this literature, either the firm chooses the un-
derwriter (e.g., Titman and Trueman, 1986; Habib and Ljungqvist, 2001), or the underwriter selects
the firm (e.g., Chemmanur and Fulghieri, 1994). More recently, there seems to be some agreement
that issuing firms and underwriters are paired in a manner consistent with two-sided matching (e.g.,
Fernando et al., 2005; Schroth, 2006; Lyandres et al., 2016).
    Endogenous matching between firms and underwriters can cause problems for causal inference
regarding outcomes of the issuance process.2 Consider the "discount" of the offer price relative to
the closing price observed on the day prior to the offer. Suppose firm quality is observed by the
underwriter but only imperfectly observed by the econometrician. Further, suppose firm quality is
related to the issuing firm's decision to match with the underwriter, as well as to the pricing of the
offer. Any estimation of the relation between the discount and issuing firm characteristics will result in
an endogeneity problem if the unobserved aspects of firm quality matter for the underwriter's decision
   2
     Akkus et al. (2018) demonstrate that, unless properly controlled for, mutual selection between firms and underwriters
inhibits causal inference regarding outcomes of the IPO underwriting process.



                                                            3
regarding pricing and are also correlated with firm characteristics. Controlling for the matching process
is, therefore, a necessary component of our analysis.
   To capture and control for two-sided matching in the market for underwriting services we use a
two-step approach when we examine the relation between underwriter quality and the performance
of SEOs. The first step of the process controls for the endogenous matching between firms and
underwriters in the market for underwriting services by estimating a structural matching equation
(e.g., Akkus et al., 2018; Fernando et al., 2015). The second step of our estimation combines the
structural model of matching with a control function approach (Petrin and Train, 2010) to account for
endogenous selection in the examination of the determinants of the various measures of performance
for SEOs.
   Our primary empirical hypotheses concern the announcement effect, the offering discount, and the
fees associated with an SEO. The role of the underwriter's reputational capital in the context of SEOs
can be illustrated by considering the relation between the announcement effect and the reputation of
the underwriter. It is likely that, for a firm that is already public, which is seeking external equity
using a fully marketed deal (a deal that includes a full road show), there will be little scope for
underwriter "certification" to influence pricing on the announcement date. That is not to say that,
if high-quality underwriters are better able to identify high-quality firms, the market will not make
inferences at announcement of a deal. Indeed, if high-quality underwriters are able to identify higher
quality firms doing fully marketed SEOs, the market should react to the announcement of such an
issue. However, the cross-sectional implications of this expectation for announcement price effects
may be muted by other factors. For example, it may be that the choice to do a fully marketed issue is
a signal that significant due diligence is required to appropriately price the issue given that the firm
is seeking additional equity financing. Therefore, the primary signal the market extracts from the
announcement concerns the expected precision of the information to be conveyed in the road show
rather than expectations about the selectivity of firms by the underwriter.
   In an accelerated deal, the underwriter sells the issue to investors without the time or expense of
a road show. Thus, the pricing of the issue is the primary responsibility of the underwriter, implying
there should be a much greater role for the reputation of the underwriter to certify the value of the
shares, which immediately affects the market's reaction to the news of an offering. The choice of an
accelerated (or a bought) deal indicates that conveying information between the firm and investors is
not critical for the success of the issue and selectivity among issuers by high-quality underwriters is
therefore expected to be highlighted.
   In a bought deal the underwriter purchases the issue instead of marketing it to external investors
so that there is, strictly speaking, no role for the reputation of the underwriter to certify the pricing of
the issue itself. However, given the accelerated time line, one would expect investors to update their


                                                     4
expectations concerning the value of the issuing firm's equity based on the news that a high-quality
underwriter will lead the deal. In fact, the signal conveyed by the use of a high-quality underwriter
regarding the superior quality of issuing firms may be stronger than that of an accelerated deal because
the underwriter is putting both its reputational and its financial capital at risk in the deal.
    Our findings indicate that for accelerated and bought deals there is a significant relation between
underwriter quality and the performance in the SEO. Specifically, higher quality underwriters are
associated with smaller (less negative) announcement effects and a smaller discount of the offer price
from the closing price on the day before the offer. In contrast, for fully marketed SEOs, the relation
between underwriter quality and either the announcement effect or the discount is insignificant.
    While our study represents a more comprehensive analysis of the impact of underwriter quality on
SEO performance, two empirical studies have considered effects of underwriter reputation on aspects of
SEO performance. Altinkili¸
                          c and Hansen (2003) examine the relation between underwriter reputation
and the discount on the SEO relative to the prior day's closing price. Their focus is on the change in the
size of this discount between the 1980s and the 1990s and the relation between the unexpected discount
and the underpricing of the issue. Their study does not attempt to control for the matching between
firms and underwriters and due to the timing of their study, their sample is likely to include only fully
marketed offerings. Gao and Ritter (2010) also consider the that role high-quality underwriters play
in affecting the elasticity of demand for the issuing firm's equity in fully marketed offerings. While
Gao and Ritter (2010) do not control for the matching between issuers and underwriters, their view of
the role of the underwriter in fully marketed offerings is consistent with ours. Fernando et al. (2015)
consider the relation between underwriting fees and underwriter quality in IPOs and SEOs. While
they also control for the matching between issuers and underwriters, they do not consider the different
measures of performance for SEOs nor do they distinguish between the different deal types for SEOs.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the matching model. Section 3
presents the estimation technique we employ. Section 4 presents our empirical hypotheses. Section 5
describes the data. Section 6 reports the results of the empirical tests and Section 7 concludes.


2     Setting

2.1   The market for underwriting services

To examine the outcomes of SEOs, we model the selection in the matching process between firms
and underwriters, accounting for actual matches that occur as well as the alternative, possible but
counterfactual, matches. As in Sørensen (2007) and Akkus et al. (2018), the model allows for each
firm to match with one (lead) underwriter, but for each underwriter to match with multiple firms;
a one-to-many matching model. The scarcity of the human capital of the very best underwriters

                                                    5
prevents them from executing all transactions, and also implies they should earn higher fees relative
to less reputable underwriters.
    Two types of players participate in the market: issuing firms and underwriters. The set of issuing
firms is denoted F and the set of underwriters is denoted U . A match is defined as a pair m = (u, f ),
where u  U and f  F . The set of feasible matches, M = U × F , includes all possible pairs of issuing
firms matching with underwriters.
    The equilibrium concept used in the matching model is pairwise stability. A match m  M is
said to be "pairwise stable," if for all alternative feasible pairs, neither the firm nor the underwriter
benefits from breaking the stable match and choosing one of the alternative pairings. In other words,
a match m  M, is pairwise stable if for every counterfactual pairing involving the firm or the
underwriter, either the firm receives a greater payoff from the equilibrium match m, or the underwriter
receives a greater payoff from the least valuable of its equilibrium matches, or both (Sørensen, 2007).
An equilibrium match is denoted m , and the set of all equilibrium matches is denoted M , where
M  M. The set of issuing firms that match with underwriter u in equilibrium is denoted Fu
                                                                                         ; i.e.,

   {f | (u, f )  M }  F . Similarly, the underwriter that matches with firm f in equilibrium is
Fu
          ; i.e., U   {u | (u, f )  M }  U . Note that both an underwriter and a firm may have
denoted Uf         f
multiple first-best matches. The set of equilibrium (or actual) matches, M  M , consists of each
issuing firm matching with a single underwriter.3
    The set of equilibrium matches is defined by the set of values generated by the feasible matches.
The surplus value of a feasible match, Vu,f , is the joint value generated by the pairing of a specific
underwriter u with a specific issuing firm f . We construct the equilibrium in the market for under-
writing services for issues of seasoned equity using a non-transferrable utility matching model. We
follow Akkus et al. (2018) in the use this approach because the equilibrium conditions of the non-
transferrable utility model are simpler to estimate empirically than are the equilibrium conditions of
the transferrable utility model.4
    Following Sørensen (2007) and Akkus et al. (2018), we assume that issuing firms and underwriters
split the match value generated by a given match by a fixed proportion . In particular, the surplus
value generated for the firm is (1 - ) Vu,f and the surplus value generated for the underwriter is
Vu,f . For a given firm f , the condition that the surplus value of every non-equilibrium match is less
    3
      In the specification of the equilibrium we allow for ties in the match surplus (the value created by the match between
an issuing firm and an underwriter) only for generality of the model. However, this possibility does not affect the
empirical analysis.
    4
      The assumption of non-transferrable utility is relatively mild in the sense that the resulting matching equilibrium
is similar to the equilibrium in a transferrable utility model in the following sense. Every equilibrium in a transferrable
utility matching model can be identified as an underwriter-optimal stable matching in a non-transferrable utility matching
model (e.g., Echenique et al., 2013; Akkus et al., 2018). Therefore, if the matching equilibrium is optimal for the
underwriter (perhaps due to relative scarcity; e.g., Chen and Ritter (2000) in the IPO market), the empirical content of
the non-transferrable utility model and the transferrable utility model will be the same.



                                                             6
than the value of the equilibrium match can be written

                                       (1 - )VuU  ,f
                                               / f             < (1 - ) min V
                                                                            u,f
                                                                                                    (1)
                                                                           uUf

or equivalently

                                                    VuU  ,f
                                                      / f      <   min Vu,f .
                                                                     
                                                                                                    (2)
                                                                   uUf
                                                                             must be the same.
Since each firm f matches with only one underwriter, the value of every u  Uf
Therefore, this condition can be simplified to

                                                    VuU  ,f
                                                      / f      < VuUf
                                                                     ,f .                           (3)

For a given underwriter u, the condition that the value of any counterfactual match is less than the
least of that underwriter's equilibrium matches can be written

                                               Vu,f F 
                                                    / u        <  min
                                                                      Vu,f                          (4)
                                                                    f Fu

or equivalently

                                                    Vu,f F 
                                                         / u   <   min Vu,f .
                                                                      
                                                                                                    (5)
                                                                   f Fu

In a non-transferrable utility matching model, the assumption that issuing firms and underwriters
share the match value according to a fixed proportion implies that the equilibrium requirements are
independent of the proportion itself. Pairwise stability requires one (or both) of the inequalities (3)
or (5) to hold true. Therefore, for a given underwriter u and a given firm f , these conditions may be
written
                                                                    ß                  TM
                     Vu,f   |   uU 
                                 / f   or   f F 
                                              / u    < V u,f     max VuUf
                                                                         ,f , min Vu,f
                                                                                 
                                                                                          .         (6)
                                                                                 f Fu

V u,f is the upper bound of the match value for all counterfactual matches in the open set of all non-
equilibrium matches. Equation (6), therefore, can be used to estimate the upper bounds for the match
values of the feasible but counterfactual matches in a specific matching market.
   In the definition of pairwise stability, the inequality representing the underwriter's value implic-
itly assumes that the underwriter is capacity constrained, so that in each market (each period) the
underwriter may only match with a limited number of issuing firms. Khanna et al. (2008) and Hanley
and Hoberg (2010) provide empirical support for the idea that underwriters face capacity constraints.
As discussed in Akkus et al. (2018), this assumption can be eliminated, which makes the inequality
representing the issuing firm's value the only requirement. Because the definition of the upper bound
of the value on counterfactual matches is a maximum, eliminating the assumption of a capacity con-
straint makes this bound more restrictive and, therefore, represents a greater constraint on the data
in the estimation. The empirical evidence indicating that underwriters are capacity constrained and
the fact that including this constraint is a more conservative approach causes us to utilize both the



                                                               7
firm and the underwriter constraint in our implementation of the pairwise stability condition.


2.2   The match surplus

The match surplus represents the value created by the match and shared between the issuing firm
and the underwriter. This value is the basis on which any match is established. Conceptually, the
value created by a match for the firm is the sum of the funds raised in the issue and the value added
achieved by the use of the proceeds. The underwriter receives the dollar value of the fees less the
actual cost of underwriting the issue. The total value added or surplus created by the match between
underwriter u and firm f may be written
                                                              -
                               Vu,f    = M V Et+1 + GS - M V Et+1 - C                                 (7)
                                                                                          -
where M V Et+1 represents the market value of equity after the offering is complete, M V Et+1 represents

the counterfactual market value of equity in the absence of the issue, GS denotes the gross spread,
and C represents the costs of underwriting.
   Following Akkus et al. (2018), we model the match surplus Vu,f using the structural matching
equation

                                       Vu,f   = 0 + Xu,f  + u,f ,                                     (8)

which is defined for all feasible (observed and counterfactual) matches (u, f )  M. In Equation
(8), Xu,f is a column vector of observable underwriter and firm characteristics that are expected to
influence the surplus, and u,f represents the unobservable determinants of the surplus for each feasible
match.


2.3   The match surplus proxy

A challenge with this methodology is to find a proxy for the surplus created (and shared between issuer
and underwriter) by the observable matches. Once a suitable proxy is chosen, the pairwise stability
requirement can then be used to infer upper bounds for the feasible but counterfactual matches based
on the proxy. The bounds on the counterfactual matches combined with the proxy for the surplus
created by the observable matches allows consistent estimation of the structural equation for the match
surplus using a censored regression.
   Practically, one must identify the portion of the total surplus that is specific to a particular match
and is shared between the issuing firm and the underwriter. Akkus et al. (2018), in their examination
of the IPO market, use the long-run value of the issuing firm as their primary proxy for the match
surplus. Their reasoning for this choice is that because the underwriter is actively making a market in
the newly public equity and is likely to hold shares in the firm for a significant period, the underwriter



                                                    8
will necessarily share in the post issue value of the firm's equity as well as helping to determine this
value. Furthermore, it has been argued that for IPOs (Kang and Lowery, 2014) the underwriter
captures a substantial portion of the underpricing in the form of indirect compensation.
        Similar arguments are not used in the case of a seasoned offer of equity. Commonly, a liquid
market in the firm's shares exists prior to the SEO so that the underwriter is not charged with making
a market in the shares of the issuing firm. Furthermore, because the firm is relatively mature, it is
unlikely that the value added from the use of the proceeds of the offering differs across the firm's
feasible set of underwriters. For these reasons our primary proxy for the match surplus is the total
amount raised in the offering, identified as the "deal value" in the Dealogic database. This measure
consists of the issuing firm's proceeds and the fees paid to the underwriter. Compared to the concept
represented in Equation (7), deal value omits the value added by the use of proceeds (i.e., investment
NPV) as well as the underwriters costs related to the issue. As argued above, the NPV is not likely
to vary for the firm across the feasible underwriters in an SEO, nor is the NPV expected to be shared
between the issuing firm and the underwriter. Because the costs of underwriting are not observable,
we follow Akkus et al. (2018) and use industry and year fixed effects in the estimation to account for
time and industry variation in these costs. Indicator variables for the three deal types are also included
in the estimation, which will account for any difference in costs across the deal types. Accounting for
underwriting costs in this way, "deal value" then represents the value created by the match between
the firm and the underwriter that is shared by the two parties.
        For robustness purposes we perform the analysis using different representations of the more ex-
pansive definition in Equation (7) and obtain very similar results.5 This robustness is not surprising
because, as noted and demonstrated by Akkus et al. (2018), consistent estimation requires that the
proxy for the match surplus be a good proxy, not for the overall match surplus, but only for the
portion of the surplus that is not accounted for by the control variables and the fixed effects in the
structural matching equation.


3        Estimation

3.1       Estimation of the structural matching equation

The proxy for the match surplus is used to represent the match surplus for the observed matches. This
proxy then allows us to use the pairwise stability condition to provide upper bounds for the surplus for
    5
     There are various ways to capture the counterfactual equity value in the absence of an offer. One is to consider the
equity value just prior to the announcement of the SEO. Alternatively, an estimated value of the shares outstanding
prior to the SEO adjusted for a measure of the firm's systematic return from the period prior to the announcement to
a point in time after the offering. There are no meaningful differences in results using these different proxies. Again,
theoretically, use of these measures would assume that the value added from the firm's use of the proceeds of the offering
differs across its choice of underwriters. This seems unlikely.


                                                            9
each of the counterfactual matches. To generate the bounds for the counterfactual matches we assume
that each calendar year represents a relevant matching market. Feasible matches for each market are
between firms that announce an SEO during a given calendar year and any lead underwriter associated
with an SEO announced during that same year. Firms or underwriters that are not part of observed
matches during a given calendar year are assumed to not be participating in that market.
       The structural matching equation is

                                        Vu,f   = 0 + Xu,f  + i + t + u,f                                           (9)

where
                                               
                                               V  ,
                                               
                                                        if (u, f ) is observable
                                                u,f
                                 Vu,f     =                                          ,
                                               V u,f , if (u, f ) is unobservable
                                               

and i stands for industry fixed effects and t for year fixed effects.
       We use a parsimonious model to explain the surplus proxy in the matching equation. The main
explanatory variable of interest is underwriter quality. This variable is included in the regression
on its own and is also interacted with indicator variables for the deal type to allow-quality to have
differential effects on matching for the different deal types. The number of lead underwriters reported
in Dealogic is also used as an explanatory variable to represent the difficulty in placing the offering.
Sales reported at the end of the issuing firm's fiscal year prior to the announcement are used to control
for firm size because, for a given deal value, it is easier for a large firm to issue the new equity than it
is for a small firm to do so. The return volatility of the issuing firm's equity is used as a measure of
firm risk. Amihud's (2002) measure of illiquidity provides a measure of the elasticity of the demand
for the firm's equity (Gao and Ritter, 2010). We use the firm's market-to-book ratio to capture the
issuing firm's growth options.6 The number of SEOs in the previous quarter is used to capture general
financial market conditions as well as waves in the SEO market.7
       An important choice regarding the specification of the matching equation concerns the nature of
the matching in the market for underwriter services. In this market, firms match with underwriters
and deal types are chosen. How and when deal type is chosen dictates the appropriate approach to
estimating the structural matching equation.
       The deal type may affect the match between underwriters and issuing firms. If firms unilaterally
select the type of deal they will use prior to matching with an underwriter, then the matching between
firms and underwriter may be conditional on the chosen deal type and the structural matching equation
   6
     We use the market-to-book ratio as a forward looking measure of the firm's investment opportunity set. Following
Denis (1994) we instead consider the level of the firm's lagged capital expenditures normalized by the book value of
assets and obtain very similar results.
   7
     We also utilize measures of the 15 day, prior to the announcement of the SEO, average return and volatility of
return for a market index as controls for financial market conditions. Including these measures provides no incremental
explanatory power and no change to the results presented here.



                                                          10
could be estimated for each deal type separately. This approach, however, assumes that firms and
underwriters consider characteristics of their match partners differently across deal types. Such an
approach would impose a restrictive structure on the data that does not seem to be warranted by the
behavior in this market.
      In contrast, if firms and underwriters are willing to implement any of the different deal types for
each offering then the matching is conceptually between firms and underwriters deal type pairs. In
this case, feasible matches would be between firm A and underwriter X for deal type T. Where an
alternative match would be between firm A and underwriter X for deal type R (conceptually, different
divisions in an investment bank specialize in different deal types and compete against their within-firm
counterparts as well as the different divisions of other investment banks). This approach adds a great
deal of noise to the estimation of the matching equation by dramatically increasing the number of
feasible but unobserved matches.
      We take an approach that, conceptually, lies between these two extremes. The matching equa-
tion is estimated using all SEOs across all deal types. The specification matches issuing firms with
underwriters holding the observed deal type constant across all feasible matches. This presumes that
deal type is chosen prior to the match (which may be necessary for accelerated and bought deals)
but assumes that similar considerations go into the selection of a match between the firm and the
underwriter. The regression does include indicator variables for the deal types that are interacted
with the measure of underwriter quality allowing the impact of the quality of the underwriter on the
matching to differ across deal types. This allows deal types to differentially influence the matching
between the issuing firm and the underwriter while limiting the censored observations to the set of
alternative underwriters.8
      When using the structural matching equation all feasible matches are considered in the specifica-
tion, and the parameters of the equation can be consistently estimated using a censored regression
in which the surplus for each counterfactual observation is censored at the observation-specific upper
bound defined by the stability conditions, V u,f . The estimated coefficients of this model capture
the effects of the observed characteristics of the issuing firms, the underwriters, and the market for
SEOs on the match surplus. Non-zero coefficients indicate non-random matching between firms and
underwriters with respect to the relevant observed characteristics. Importantly, the estimated residual
from this equation, ^u,f , captures the influence of unobserved characteristics of the underwriters and
the firms on the matching process. The inclusion of this residual in the specification of the outcome
equations then allows us to control for these unobserved characteristics of the matching between firms
and underwriters when we examine the performance of the SEOs.
  8
    For comparison, we present findings estimated assuming matching is between firms and underwriter deal type pairs
in the Appendix. The same economic message is found in those estimates as is found in the results presented here.



                                                        11
3.2   Estimation of the outcome equations

To provide consistent estimates of the parameters in empirical models of outcomes of the underwriting
process, we follow the methodology in Petrin and Train (2010) and Akkus et al. (2018). Accordingly,
we specify the outcomes of the issue as

                                  Yu,f   = 0 + Xu,f  + i + t + u,f                                   (10)

where, Yu,f is the outcome of interest, Xu,f is a set of firm, underwriter, and market characteristics
thought to influence the outcome variable, and u,f is an error term. The outcomes and the explanatory
variables in the above equation are observed only for the actual matches. The observed characteristics,
Xu,f , are endogenous regressors in this equation because u,f includes unobserved factors that affect
the pattern of matching and, therefore, the resulting match surplus. If these unobserved factors
related to the matching are correlated with the observed characteristics, an OLS estimation of the
above equation suffers from an endogeneity problem. One, therefore, cannot consistently estimate the
coefficients of interest,  , for the outcome variables without being able to control for the unobserved
characteristics that influence the matching.
   The dependence of the outcome equation's error term on unobservable characteristics of the match-
ing process can be expressed as

                                          u,f   = u,f + u,f                                          (11)

for all observed matches. Following Akkus et al. (2018) we assume that  is independently distributed
N (0,  ), and that the parameter  captures the effect of the unobserved (to the econometrician)
determinants of matching on the outcome variable. The structural relation assumed between the
errors of the matching equation and the outcome variable equation therefore implies the following
covariance matrix for the outcome and matching errors
                                        Ñ                          é
                           u,f               0        2 +  2  2  2
                                  N  ,                            
                                                                     .                               (12)
                           u,f               0            2     2
                                                                
   With these assumptions, the two-step control function approach is used to obtain consistent es-
timates of the parameters of interest,  , in the outcome equations. In the first step the matching
Equation (9) is estimated using a censored regression so that the actual and all counterfactual matches
may be included in the estimation. From the censored regression, we obtain the estimates ^ 0 and ^,
and construct the vector of residuals ^u,f for all feasible matches. In the second step, Equation (10)
is estimated with OLS using the firm, underwriter, and deal-specific characteristics from the observed
matches used in the first-stage regression as well as the estimated residuals from the first-stage, ^u,f ,
as a regressor. Petrin and Train (2010) prove that controlling for ^u,f in the second-stage regression
controls for selection on unobservable variables. Therefore, including it as a regressor in addition to


                                                   12
the characteristics Xu,f allows consistent estimation of  . The control function approach has been
shown to account for selection in recent applications in economics and finance (Card, 2001; Schroth
and Szalay, 2009; Wooldridge, 2015; Akkus et al., 2018).9
    Following Petrin and Train (2010) and Akkus et al. (2018), we bootstrap the standard errors in
the second-stage regression to account for the sampling variation in the entire two-step process. The
standard errors are computed using a block bootstrap procedure where resampling is done underwriter
by underwriter. This process allows the within-underwriter errors to have an arbitrary correlation
structure and accounts for within-underwriter correlation among the observations that may arise from
the specification of the surplus proxy and the bounds of the surplus for the counterfactual matches.


4     Hypotheses

The empirical hypotheses focus on the relation between the measures of SEO performance and un-
derwriter quality, utilizing the logic of the certification hypothesis, as developed by Booth and Smith
(1986) and Beatty and Ritter (1986), as well as other arguments developed in the IPO literature and
adapted to the setting of a seasoned equity issue. Under the certification hypothesis, in the presence
of superior information possessed by the issuing firm, the underwriter's quality or reputation may be
used to certify the value of the issued shares to external investors. The summary statistics (discussed
in Section 5.3 below) indicate significant sorting of issuing firms into deal types, which must be taken
in to account in the empirical analysis.
    The existing literature regarding SEOs examines four primary measures of performance for SEOs.
The "announcement effect" is the most often examined measure of SEO performance. This effect is
measured as the two day cumulative abnormal return for the announcing firm's equity on the day of
and the day after the announcement day. The "rebound return" is measured as the abnormal return
for the issuing firm's equity between the closing price on the day following the announcement date and
the closing price on the day before the offer date. The "discount" is defined as the percentage difference
between the closing price on the day before the offer and the offer price, while the "underpricing" is
defined as the percentage difference between the offer price and the closing price on the offer day.
Finally, we also examine the "fees" (both total fees and fees as a percentage of the deal value) paid to
the underwriter by the issuing firm.
   9
     Akkus et al. (2018) provide an intuitive discussion of the relation between this approach and the Heckman selection
correction.




                                                          13
4.1    Announcement effect

The announcement effect, the commonly negative price response to the announcement of a firm's
decision to issue seasoned equity, is often interpreted as a response to the potential for asymmetric
information to have influenced a firm's decision to sell equity.10 The certification hypothesis suggests
that if the underwriter's reputation or quality is relied upon by investors as an indication that the
issuing firm's equity is appropriately priced, then the expectation is that the announcement effect will
be negatively related to the quality of the underwriter. In other words, if high-quality underwriters
match with high-quality firms (issuers that have valuable investment opportunities rather than those
seeking to sell overpriced equity), then the announcement of an SEO with a high-quality underwriter
will mitigate the need for investors to update their estimate of value given the announcement.
    The short time line of accelerated or bought offerings implies there may be a scope for investors to
rely on the underwriter's certification of the value of the issue. For accelerated offerings in particular,
where the underwriter markets the issue to external investors, the quality of the underwriter may
certify the value of the issue and should therefore be significantly related to the market's response
to the announcement of an accelerated SEO. One expects that there should be a smaller (i.e., a less
negative) price response to the announcement of a seasoned equity offering when the lead underwriter
for an accelerated deal is of higher quality.
    Bought deals share the shortened time line of accelerated deals, however, because the underwriter
purchases the issue in a bought deal the prediction regarding the announcement effect is somewhat
ambiguous. The market's inference regarding firm quality may be more strongly related to the under-
writer's quality in a bought deal relative to an accelerated deal because the underwriter's reputational
and financial capital are both put at risk. A counter to this argument, however, is that an alternative
investment for an underwriter to a bought deal with a publicly traded firm is to simply invest its
capital in a diversified portfolio of similar firms that are not seeking new equity financing. In light of
this alternative use of its capital, it may be that only the very highest quality firms will be able to
utilize a bought deal. In that case, there may be little cross-sectional heterogeneity within the set of
firms doing a bought deal, and therefore, little detectable relation between the announcement effect
and underwriter quality. Under this alternative investment, however, the underwriter does not benefit
from the (net) fees and discount associated with the bought deal. This added compensation from the
bought deal may induce underwriters to accept some risk that the issuing firm is not of the highest
quality.11
  10
     Myers and Majluf (1984) suggest that firms may issue either to sell overvalued shares or to fund valuable investments
and that the perceived probability of these possibilities impacts the announcement effect. In general, a high-quality
underwriter's certification may help to disentangle these possibilities.
  11
     For practical reasons, the hypothesis regarding the announcement effect for bought deals is largely irrelevant. The
need to measure the announcement effect using a two day cumulative abnormal return makes this hypothesis difficult



                                                           14
    The summary statistics (Panel D of Table 1) indicate that fully marketed deals are, on average,
used for smaller, riskier firms with less liquid equity relative to accelerated or bought deals. The
distinguishing characteristic of a fully marketed SEO is the information production and communication
that occurs during the road show. For this deal type, a high-quality underwriter's superior ability to
evaluate the appropriate price of the issue via its due diligence and the communication with investors
during the road show should be an important prominent aspect of quality. Given the nature of the
issuing firms that utilize a fully marketed deal and the fact that the equity of these firms is currently
traded, we expect there to be little scope for certification of the issue by the underwriter at the time
of the announcement. In other words, while market participants should update their expectations
based on the quality of the underwriter, given that the central feature of a fully marketed deal is
an extended period of information exchange between the underwriter and investors, the perceived tie
between underwriter quality and firm quality is expected to be relatively weak for firms that elect a
fully marketed offering relative to those that utilize the other deal types.

Hypothesis 1. Controlling for the matching between underwriters and issuing firms, accelerated offers
with higher quality lead underwriters should have smaller (less negative) announcement effects. For
bought deals, the relation between underwriter quality and the announcement effect should be positive
and should be stronger than it is for the accelerated offers. For fully marketed deals, there should be a
relatively small positive relation between the announcement effect and underwriter quality because the
underwriter does not certify the offering, and instead leads a road show to gather and share relevant
information concerning the issuing firm.


4.2    Rebound return

As noted above, one may hypothesize that a higher quality underwriter will be able to more clearly
or credibly convey information during the marketing or book building process. Fully marketed deals
allow the lead underwriter to convey information concerning valuation of the issuing firm to investors
and the information conveyed by a high-quality underwriter is expected to be more precise than the
information conveyed by a low-quality underwriter. However, given that the identity of the lead
underwriter is revealed in the issuance announcement, and expectations therefore incorporate the
identity of the underwriter, we expect no relation between the level of the rebound return in a fully
marketed offer and the reputation of the lead underwriter.12 In accelerated and bought deals there
is little opportunity for the underwriter to convey information to investors during the limited period
to examine for bought deals. Panel F of Table 1 indicates that only 4 bought deals in our sample are completed more
than one day after the announcement date. We are therefore unable to measure the announcement effect independently
of the offering for the vast majority of bought deals.
  12
     It is possible that the volatility of the rebound return is higher for deals with higher quality underwriters as the
information (both positive and negative) that these underwriters convey generates a stronger response from the market.


                                                           15
between the announcement and the offer. Bought and accelerated deals are completed so quickly after
they are announced that we do not examine the rebound return for these deal types.13

Hypothesis 2. Controlling for the matching between the underwriter and the firm, the abnormal
return for the issuing firm's equity between the day after the announcement date and the closing price
one day before offer date should be unrelated to underwriter quality in fully marketed deals.


4.3      Discount

The discount in an SEO measures the percentage difference between the closing price on the day before
the offer (a natural reference for a seasoned offering) and the offer price. For a given firm quality,
discounting the offer relative to the closing price of the prior day is a way for the underwriter to induce
external investors to purchase the issue and is a choice variable. If higher quality underwriters match
with higher quality issuers, or if higher quality issuers convey valuation information more credibly
than do lower quality underwriters, they should need to rely on this costly mechanism to a lesser
extent than lower quality underwriters.
       For an accelerated deal, the pricing of the deal is the primary input of the underwriter. Given the
risk to the investors implied by the announcement of an issue of additional equity, the average discount
should be positive. However, due to the certification of firm quality that a high-quality underwriter
is able to provide, a high-quality underwriter should be able to place an accelerated deal with a lower
discount than a low-quality underwriter.
       For bought deals, the discount represents an adjustment for the underwriter's uncertainty that
the existing market price of the issuing firm is appropriate given that the firm is seeking new equity
financing. Because the underwriter does not market the issue to external investors, the average
discount is expected to be smaller for bought deals than it is for accelerated deals. If higher quality
underwriters match with higher quality firms the discount should be negatively related to underwriter
quality.
       In a fully marketed deal, a high-quality underwriter is expected to perform a more informative
road show. Because the information released during the road show for a seasoned offering can be
incorporated into the contemporaneous stock price, the closing price on the day before the offering is
expected to be more precise. Therefore, relative to an accelerated deal (in which only the certification
of the underwriter is used to establish the closing price on the day before the offer) one could expect
a lower average discount. Furthermore, if underwriter quality facilitates the road show, then the
discount is expected to vary inversely with underwriter quality, as argued in Gao and Ritter (2010).
       For fully marketed deals, an alternative and opposing hypothesis is that higher quality underwriters
  13
    For accelerated deals the mean (median) number of days between the announcement of the deal and the offer is 1.9
(1.0). For bought deals the mean (median) value of this variable is 2.3 (1.0).


                                                        16
can use their market power to provide a greater discount to benefit the network of investors that
participate in the deal. Chen and Ritter (2000) claim that this is done in exchange for future business
from these investors. This claim, however, does not seem to have been raised with respect to SEOs,
perhaps due to the existence of an active market in the offered equity prior to the issue and the large
difference in magnitude between the average underpricing of 15% or more in IPOs and an average
discount of about 3.5% in SEOs. However, to the extent that the underwriter can influence the
allocations of the issued shares, this hypothesis cannot be dismissed. Thus, given that we have two
opposing hypotheses regarding the relation between underwriter quality and the discount in fully
marketed offerings, we regard this relation to be ambiguous.

Hypothesis 3. Controlling for the matching between the underwriter and the firm, the discount should
be positive and it should be negatively related to underwriter quality for accelerated deals. For fully
marketed deals, the affect of underwriter quality on the discount is ambiguous in sign. In bought deals,
the discount should be smaller on average (relative to that in accelerated deals) and the discount should
be negatively related to underwriter quality.


4.4   Underpricing

Underpricing on the day of the issue (e.g., Gao and Ritter, 2010) may represent a costly substitute to
having more fully marketed the issue. Therefore, it may be argued that a higher quality underwriter
will be able to price the SEO more accurately relative to the closing price on the offer day. However,
in contrast to the discount, the underpricing is less clearly affected by the actions of the underwriter.
In an efficient market, the ability to predict the closing price on the day of the offer is not necessarily
related to the quality of the underwriter. Thinking of the closing price on the offer day as being equal
to the closing price on the day before the offer (ignoring the small daily expected return) expected
underpricing should be equal to the expected discount.

Hypothesis 4. Reflecting the hypothesis for the discount, controlling for the matching between the
underwriter and the firm, for all deal types the underpricing on the offer day should vary with under-
writer quality in a manner that is similar to the discount, however, the relation should be weaker than
that observed for the discount.

   An alternative to Hypothesis 4 was proposed by Altinkili¸
                                                           c and Hansen (2003) who argue that
the unexpected discount may be a last minute signal to investors of information not released during
the marketing effort. We consider this possibility below. Finally, to the extent that matching with
a higher quality underwriter adds value to the issuing firm via superior performance of the offering,
high-quality underwriters can demand compensation for providing this value and issuing firms should


                                                    17
be willing to pay for this value.


4.5    Fees

In fully marketed deals, high-quality underwriters provide value via a more informative road show,
and a superior road show is likely to be more costly to implement. In accelerated deals, the cost of
the road show is absent. Nevertheless, to the extent the underwriters reputation certifies the value
of the issue, higher quality underwriters have greater reputational capital at risk and should demand
additional compensation for this added risk. In a bought deal, the underwriter's financial capital is
put at risk. The fact that the issue is not marketed to external investors implies that the underwriter
faces relatively little reputational risk in these offerings. Therefore, it is not clear that there is a
relation between underwriting cost and underwriter quality in a bought deal. Thus, the relation
between underwriter quality and fees is expected to be weaker for bought deals relative to accelerated
and fully marketed deals. Therefore, controlling for the matching between an issuing firm and the
lead underwriter, the total fees paid to high-quality underwriters are expected to be larger than those
paid to low-quality underwriters. This effect should be weaker for bought deals relative to accelerated
and fully marketed deals.
    Altinkili¸
             c and Hansen (2000) raise the question of whether there are economies of scale in under-
writing fees. This issue can be addressed within our context by considering the fees as a percentage
of the proceeds of the offering. Altinkili¸
                                          c and Hansen (2000) show that the percentage fee (which
approximates the marginal cost of raising an additional dollar in new financing) is decreasing in the
size of the offering (for a wide range of values of deal proceeds). Their analysis, however, does not
control for the matching between issuing firms and underwriters. We consider the closely related ques-
tion of whether, controlling for the matching between the firm and the underwriter, the marginal cost
(approximated by the fees per dollar raised) is related to the quality of the underwriter. The difficulty
with this question is that both the total fees (the numerator) and the proceeds (the denominator)
are expected to be influenced by the quality of the underwriter.14 Our expectation is that for the
firms that are willing to pay the cost associated with matching with a high-quality underwriter, the
expectation is that the proceeds of the issue will increase in greater proportion than will the fees (i.e.,
both parties must benefit from the match).

Hypothesis 5. Controlling for the matching between the underwriter and the issuer, the higher the
reputation of the underwriter leading the SEO, the higher should be the gross fees paid to the under-
writer in the SEO. This effect should be stronger for the accelerated deals and fully marketed deals
than it is for bought deals. The underwriting fee as a percentage of proceeds (which approximates the
  14
     A high-quality underwriter may charge higher fees for a given deal but may also be able to raise more proceeds for
the firm.


                                                          18
marginal cost) should be decreasing in underwriter quality for all deal types.


5      Data

The primary data sources for our analysis are Dealogic for historical information on SEOs, Compustat
for historical information on firm specific characteristics, Intraday Trade and Quote (TAQ) data for
estimation of the firm-specific degree of risk, and Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) data
for estimation of the market value of the firm and price changes.


5.1     Matching the SEO data

Following the evaluation of relative accuracy between data sources detailed by Gao and Ritter (2010),
we obtained data on all U.S. SEOs announced between February 1993 and December 2017 from the
Dealogic database. A difficulty with using these data is that the firm identifier used by Dealogic is
different from the firm identifiers used by the Compustat or the CRSP databases. To gather and
match firm-specific characteristics and pricing data, the SEO firms from Dealogic were first matched
with Compustat firms manually. To this end, we use the following process:
    i. Firms are first matched by exact name. If a firm in Dealogic has the exact same name as a
      firm in Compustat, we count the Compustat firm as a match. We confirm exact name matches
      using the fields TIC (ticker), CUSIP, and SIC to ensure they are true matches. Some of the
      exact name matches have CUSIP numbers that do not match between the Compustat and the
      Dealogic databases. We re-examine these cases by searching the Compustat database for matches
      by CUSIP number. The CUSIP matches are examined manually to determine if the CUSIP
      matches are superior to the match provided by an exact name match. In this process, 31 of the
      exact name matches are replaced with CUSIP matches.
 ii. For SEO firms in the Dealogic database that do not have an exact name match with firms in
      Compustat, if the ticker symbol is available in Dealogic, and it is an exact match for a ticker
      symbol in the Compustat database, the firm is matched using the ticker symbol. These matches
      were then confirmed manually using the firm name and the SIC code.
iii. For firms in Dealogic without exact name or ticker symbol matches, we match by CUISP. If the
      Dealogic CUSIP matched a CUSIP in Compustat, we count this as a match and these matches
      are confirmed manually using firm name and SIC code.
iv. For firms in Dealogic that do not match by exact name, ticker, or CUSIP, with a firm in Com-
      pustat, string name matches are used if the Levehnstein string match distance ratio between the
      Compustat firm name and the Dealogic name is greater than 0.8 and the SIC codes are the same
      in the Dealogic and the Compustat databases.

                                                  19
       This process results in 9,654 ECMDEALS from Dealogic with an identified GVKEY in the Com-
pustat database. The GVKEY is used to gather the relevant data from Compustat for the matched
SEO firms in the Dealogic database. After eliminating duplicate observations, the matching to the
CRSP database is accomplished using the CCM bridge from the merged CRSP Compustat database
created by WRDS. This links the ECMDEAL, GVKEY, and PERMNO firm identifiers for the SEO
firms. After matching ECMDEAL, GVKEY and PERMNO identifiers for the different databases and
eliminating the SEOs without a complete set of firm specific characteristics we are left with 4,169
unique SEOs.
       One aspect of the SEOs in the sample that may be important to consider is that in roughly 15%
of the total deals, Dealogic reports zero new shares issued. Random spot checking of these deals
indicate that these deals are dedicated to insiders selling shares (i.e., all shares sold in the offering are
secondary shares) rather than the firm raising new equity capital. Reported results examine only the
deals in which the firm raises new capital, however for robustness, we also examine the subset of deals
that are offerings of secondary shares. In the text we highlight any meaningful differences in inference
when we restrict the sample in this way.


5.2      Variables

The following firm- and deal-specific variables are employed in our empirical tests:
 · Underwriter Reputation (REPUTATION) is measured as the underwriter's market share of the
   SEO market in the year prior to the calendar year of the announcement (Megginson and Weiss,
   1991).15 Market share represents a measure of underwriter quality that aggregates different aspects
   of underwriter ability or quality that may vary over time.
 · Number of lead managers (#LEAD) is the number of lead underwriters for the issue as reported
   by Dealogic.
 · Sales (SALE) is the net sales of the firms in thousands of dollars in the year of the SEO. This is
   used to control for firm size and in all regressions we use the hyperbolic sine of this number.16
 · The market to book ratio (MARKET BOOK) is the firm's market to book ratio reported at the
   end of the fiscal year prior to the SEO.
 · The number of SEOs (#SEO) is the number of SEOs in the month prior to the firm's SEO, and is
  15
      Measured by the number of SEOs for which the underwriter is identified as the lead underwriter in the prior year
relative to the total number of SEOs in the prior year. For deals with more than one lead underwriter listed we use the
first of those listed as "lead" underwriters by Dealogic (a list that is commonly out of alphabetical order). If we instead
use the highest measure of reputation amongst the underwriters listed as lead underwriters the same results are obtained.
One could use the Carter/Manaster measure that is available in a time series on Jay Ritter's website. However, this
measure is based on IPO activity rather than SEO activity and so is less relevant for our study.
   16
      This is similar to using the natural logarithm of sales except that it allows values of zero. Filtering the data to
eliminate the observations for which the firm's sales are zero and using the natural log of sales provides the same results
but imposes an unnecessary restriction on the data.


                                                            20
   used to control for financial market conditions and waves in the SEO market.
· Illiquidity (ILIQ) is the illiquidity, measured by Amihud's (2002) measure, of the firm's equity at
   the fiscal year end in the year prior to the SEO.
· Risk (RISK) is the firm's risk during the year prior to the SEO. It is computed using five-minute
   returns taken from the TAQ database. For each firm on each day, we compute the variance of
   intraday returns, applying the Scholes and Williams (1977) correction for non-synchronous trading
   and a correction for heteroscedasticity.17 Each month, we then compute the monthly variance of
   stock returns using the average of daily variances, scaled to a monthly frequency.
The outcome variables we examine are defined as follows.
· Deal value is the total proceeds of the deal (expressed in millions of dollars). The natural log of
   this value serves as the match surplus proxy.
· The announcement effect is defined as the two day (the day of the announcement and the day
   after) unexpected return for the issuing firm, where the expected return is calculated using a single
   factor market model estimated over the 30 trading days prior to the announcement day. The two
   day effect is considered because we do not have data on the exact time of the announcement, which
   may occur after the close of trading on the announcement day.
· The rebound return is defined as the unexpected return for the issuing firm measured from the
   closing price on the day following the announcement date through the closing price on the day before
   the offer. As with the announcement effect, the expected return is measured using a market model
   where the issuing firm beta is estimated over the thirty trading days prior to the announcement
   day.
· The discount is defined as the percent difference between the closing price on the day prior to the
   offering and the offer price.
· Underpricing is defined as the percent difference between the closing price on the offer day and the
   offer price.
· Fees are defined as the dollar value (in millions of dollars) of the total underwriter fees reported
   in Dealogic. In all regressions we use the natural logarithm of this value. We also consider the
   percentage fee, as an approximation to the marginal fee, defined as the total dollar fees divided by
   the dollar value of the proceeds.
      To limit the impact of errors and outliers in the data, we trim the firm and deal characteristics at
the upper and lower 1.0 percentiles and remove observations for which the book value of assets is not
strictly positive and observations with negative values for sales and the value of Amihud's measure
of illiquidity. After these screens we are left with 3,746 total SEOs, 3,211 in which the firm issued a
 17
      See, for example, French et al. (1987).



                                                     21
strictly positive amount of new equity.


5.3    Summary statistics

Table 1 reports summary statistics of the relevant variables. These statistics are provided as a quick
overview of the nature of the firms issuing seasoned equity. They also contain information about
differences in the types of firms that utilize different types of SEO deals.
    Panel A of Table 1 presents the summary statistics for the entire sample of SEOs, panel B represents
the subsample of SEOs for which the firms issued new shares, and panel C the subsample of SEOs
for which the offering is made up of entirely secondary shares. One of the facts that is immediately
apparent from Panel A is that raising seasoned equity is an expensive proposition. Average (median)
fees as a percent of proceeds are 4.77% (5.00%). The standard deviation of 1.32% and the range of
outcomes (a minimum of 0.35% and a maximum of 8.0%) do not reflect the same type of clustering
found in fees for initial public offerings by Chen and Ritter (2000). Furthermore, the average discount
of the offer price from the closing price on the day before the offer is 4.86%, which also represents a
cost related to the issue.18
    Comparison of Panel C with Panel B shows that SEOs made up entirely of secondary shares
tend to be larger deals, to have more reputable lead underwriters, and list a greater number of lead
underwriters. Panel C also shows that deals made up of only secondary shares have higher market-to-
book ratios, lower levels of Amihud's illiquidity measure, and are less risky relative to firms that raise
new capital (Panel B). The firms in Panel C also have lower discounts of the offer price relative to the
closing price on the day before the offer and lower underpricing (measured as the percentage difference
between the offer price and the closing price the day of the offer), as well as smaller announcement
effects and lower fees.
                                                   [ Table 1 ]
    One way to classify the available choices over deal type is by whether the demand curve for the
equity of the issuing firm is elastic or inelastic. Gao and Ritter (2010), for example, examine whether
marketing by underwriters in fully marketed deals is successful in increasing the demand elasticity for
shares in the issuing firm's stock. From this perspective, accelerated and bought deals may be chosen
to raise funds for issuers whose existing demand curves are already highly elastic (or are expected to
be elastic post-announcement). A fully marketed format may be more likely to be used in cases for
which the current demand curve for the firm's share is expected to be inelastic conditional on the
announcement of the offering. From a different perspective, both fully marketed and accelerated deals
  18
     If we restrict the sample to firms with more than one day between the announcement and the offer day, then the
average discount remains relatively large at 3.5%, and the discount is measured after the market's response to the
announcement that the firm is seeking new equity financing.




                                                        22
are sold to external investors while bought deals are purchased by the underwriter. A distinction
between these deal types is that bought deals are likely to be utilized by issuers for which, from the
underwriter's perspective, the possibility that an informational asymmetry has motivated the offer to
sell equity is very small. For the firms that utilize fully marketed or accelerated deals, appropriate
pricing conditional on the firm's decision to issue, is less certain from the underwriter's perspective.
   In order to shed some light on the differences in firms pursuing different types of offers, we report
summary statistics separated by deal type in Panels D, E, and F. The statistics suggest sorting of firms
into the different deal types consistent with the discussion above. Bought deals are notable in several
respects. On average, bought deals are more frequently done by the most reputable underwriters and
have fewer lead underwriters than either fully marketed or accelerated deals. Bought deals are also
used by the least risky, most liquid issuing firms. SEOs from these issuers result in very low discounts,
have low underpricing, and the lowest average fees. Not only are the averages for risk and illiquidity
lower for bought deals but the standard deviation of these measures for the firms employing bought
deals is also very low relative to the other deal types, suggesting a relatively low level of cross-sectional
heterogeneity for issuers utilizing this type of deal.
   Accelerated deals have an intermediate average level of underwriter reputation and, on average, the
highest number of lead underwriters are involved in this type of deal. Accelerated deals also have the
highest average discount and the largest (most negative) average announcement effect of the different
deal types. Average risk and illiquidity for accelerated deals are lower than for firms utilizing fully
marketed deals. The dispersion in the measure of risk is lower than it is for firms that choose fully
marketed deals. The dispersion of the illiquidity measure is higher. Firms using accelerated deals also
have the second highest average level of fees.
   Finally, fully marketed deals are used for (on average) riskier, less liquid issuers that have the
highest market-to-book ratios. The dispersion in these measures across firms using fully marketed
deals is also relatively high. Not surprisingly, the fully marketed deals have the highest level of
average fees. The high average fees likely reflect the cost of the road show but may also reflect other
costs the underwriter is exposed to for this deal type. The average announcement effect and the
average discount for fully marketed deals are approximately equal to those of bought deals.
   These differences in deal type summary statistics are consistent with the categorization discussed
above. Bought deals are utilized for a narrow set of the highest quality (least-opaque) firms. The
summary statistics and the nature of the deal suggest that there is less of a problem associated with
asymmetric information and that the demand for their shares is highly elastic. Firms with highly
uncertain quality appear to use fully marketed offers. Again, the presence of an extended road show
indicates a significant possibility for asymmetric information and a need to identify a price at which
there will be sufficient demand for new shares. Accelerated deals are chosen for firms between these


                                                     23
extremes. The size of the average discount indicates a possibility for asymmetric information but the
accelerated nature of the deal suggests that demand for the new shares can be created quickly by
appropriate pricing by the underwriter.
    Table 2 provides the cross correlations between the variables using the full sample. None of the
explanatory variables show strong correlations. There seems to be little grounds for concern about
multi-collinearity with using this set of variables in our regression analysis.
                                               [ Table 2 ]


6     Findings

The market's response to deals in which all of the shares are secondary shares is likely to be different
from those in which the firm raises new equity capital. Furthermore, the matching between the firm
and the underwriter may or may not be determined by the same process as for firms that raise new
equity. Because of the potential differences between SEOs in which the issuing firm raise new equity
capital and those consisting entirely of secondary shares, we perform the estimations for the sample
of all SEOs and also for the sample including only those SEOs in which the issuer raises new capital.
This latter sample will be the focus of our discussion of the findings.
    The analysis also accounts for the differences in the length of time between the announcement
and the offer across deal types for some of our tests. Most importantly, if the announcement and
the offer are separated by less than two days, the measure of the announcement effect (the two-day
cumulative abnormal return) is contaminated by the offer itself. Similarly, in such a case, the discount
may reflect a closing price on the day before the offer that does not incorporate the news that the firm
will seek new financing. In our analysis of the announcement effect and the discount, we therefore
drop observations for which the number of days between the announcement and the offer is not strictly
greater than one.


6.1   First-stage regression tests

Table 3 depicts the first-stage regression tests. The findings presented here use Deal Value as the
proxy for the match surplus. Columns (1) and (3) of this table report, respectively, the findings of
an OLS estimation and the censored Tobit estimation of Equation (8) using all of the available SEOs
with no missing variables. Columns (2) and (4) report, respectively, findings of the OLS and censored
Tobit regressions restricting the data to those SEOs in which the firm issues a strictly positive number
of new shares (our main findings).
    For both samples, the difference between the OLS coefficient estimates and those of the Censored
Tobit indicates significant non-random sorting across the characteristics related to the underwriters,


                                                    24
the issuing firms, and the financial market. The estimates show that higher reputation underwriters
are associated with more valuable deals. The interaction terms imply that the relation between un-
derwriter reputation and deal value is stronger for bought deals than for accelerated or fully marketed
deals. A greater number of "lead" underwriters is associated with more valuable deals. Also, larger
firms, and firms that have higher market-to-book ratios are the issuers behind larger deals. Similarly,
riskier firms and firms with more illiquid stock tend to undertake less valuable (smaller) deals. Larger
deals are observed when the market for SEOs is most active.
       As suggested by Myers and Majluf (1984), the size of the offering is itself likely to increase the
informational problems associated with placing it in the market. This indicates that information
problems of SEOs are not a firm characteristic alone, but are also an issue characteristic. High-quality
underwriters are not just solving the problems of high-asymmetric information firms. Rather, they
are solving the problems of high-asymmetric information offerings, which may include large offerings
by firms that do not exhibit the greatest potential asymmetric information.
       The differences in the coefficient values for the explanatory variables between the OLS and the
censored Tobit estimates demonstrate the importance of including all feasible (rather than only the
observed) matches in the estimation. Also note that the coefficient estimates from the censored Tobit
regressions using the full sample or the sample restricted to firms that raise new equity capital are
relatively similar, suggesting that the matching between issuers and underwriters is the result of similar
considerations regardless of whether the issuing firm is raising new capital or simply selling secondary
shares.
                                                     [ Table 3 ]


6.2      Announcement effect

In our second-stage regressions, we utilize the estimated residual from the corresponding first-stage
regression. That is, if the second-stage regression is estimated for all SEOs (only SEOs with strictly
positive new shares) then the second-stage regression uses the estimated residual from the censored
Tobit in Column (3) (Column (4)).
       The first performance measure we examine is the announcement effect (e.g., Mikkelson and Partch,
1986). The findings are reported in Table 4. Columns (1) and (3) of this table examines all SEOs
while Columns (2) and (4) consider only those SEOs with a strictly positive number of new shares
sold for the issuing firm. In this analysis, we restrict attention to SEOs for which there is strictly
more than one trading day between the announcement of the SEO and the offer date.19 As in the
first-stage regression, we account for the different types of deals by including indicator variables for
  19
    Similar results are obtained if we restrict "days announcement to offer" to be greater than 2 or 4. However, doing
so effectively restricts the analysis to fully marketed deals.



                                                         25
fully marketed deals and for bought deals and by interacting these dummy variables with the measure
of underwriter quality.
       The main finding from Table 4 is that, consistent with the certification hypothesis and Hypothesis 1,
after controlling for the unobserved characteristics of the matching between firms and underwriters,
the use of a high-quality underwriter is associated with a significantly smaller (less negative) announce-
ment effect for accelerated deals. To see this, note that the announcement effect is negative, while
the coefficient estimate on REPUTATION is strictly positive, which reduces the absolute value of the
former. The estimated coefficient on the interaction between the dummy variable FULL and under-
writer quality indicates that this effect is significantly smaller for the fully marketed deals. In fact, the
sum of the coefficients is close to zero. The bootstrapped standard errors indicate that the relation
between the announcement effect and underwriter quality for fully marketed deals is insignificant. For
the case of bought deals, the estimated coefficient on the interaction term reported in Column (4) is
insignificant, suggesting a similar relation between underwriter quality and the announcement effect
for bought deals as there is for accelerated deals. This coefficient estimate, however, is based on so
few observations that the findings regarding the estimated relation between the announcement effect
and underwriter quality in bought deals are inconclusive.
       This appears to be the first time the certification hypothesis has been documented for US SEOs.20
Columns (1) and (2) in Table 4 indicate that standard OLS regressions explaining the announcement
effect using a measure of underwriter quality results in the finding of an insignificant relation. The
contrast in these regression tests illustrates the endogeneity introduced by the assortative matching
between firms and underwriters and the importance of controlling for this matching when examining
the relation between the announcement effect and underwriter quality. The significance of the esti-
mated coefficient on the residual from the first-stage regression (ehat) provides another indication of
the importance of controlling for the unobserved aspects of the matching between underwriters and
issuers when examining the announcement effect.
       The announcement effect is significantly smaller for deals in which the issuing firm has a higher
market-to-book ratio.21 Finally, riskier firms see a significantly stronger (more negative) announcement
effect. These findings support the view that asymmetric information is an important friction that arises
when firms raise seasoned equity.
                                                       [ Table 4 ]
  20
      Cooney et al. (2003) examine a sample of Japanese SEOs and interpret their findings as being consistent with the
certification hypothesis.
   21
      The positive coefficient estimate on the market-to-book ratio is consistent with the findings in Denis (1994), who
examines whether firms with better investment opportunities experience a lower announcement effect. In our analysis,
substituting capital expenditures (scaled by book assets) for the market-to-book ratio also results in a positive and highly
significant coefficient estimate.




                                                            26
6.3   Rebound return

Table 5 depicts the findings from our examination of the rebound return. As discussed above, the
analysis of the rebound return is restricted to fully marketed SEOs. Columns (1) and (3) provide,
respectively, the OLS and matching market corrected estimates for the set of all fully marketed SEOs,
and Column (2) and (4) present the findings for the fully marketed SEOs in which the issuing firm
raises new equity capital. Consistent with our discussion of Hypothesis 2 and market efficiency, the
rebound return for the fully marketed deals is not significantly related to the quality of the lead
underwriter. Note that the coefficient estimates in the OLS regressions for the underwriter quality
variable are much larger than in the matching market-corrected regressions. This difference and the
significance of the coefficient estimate on the residual from the first-stage regression (ehat) highlight the
importance of controlling for the matching in the examination of SEO performance. Considering the
other control variables, controlling for the matching between underwriters and firms, the unexpected
return between the announcement day and the offer day is larger for larger firms, riskier firms, and
during times of higher activity in the SEO market.
                                                [ Table 5 ]


6.4   Discount

Table 6 examines the discount, defined as the percent difference between the offer price and the
closing price on the day before the offer. Columns (1) and (3) present, respectively, the OLS and
the matching market-corrected estimates based on the sample of all SEOs. Columns (2) and (4)
presents, respectively, the results restricting the estimation to consider only those SEOs in which the
issuing firm raises new equity. In both sets of estimates, we restrict attention to those deals for which
there is strictly more than one day between the announcement of the SEO and the offer itself so
that the estimates are based upon discounts measured relative to a closing price that incorporates the
announcement of the new issue. In these estimates, however, the findings relating to bought deals are
again based on a very small number of observations.
   Consistent with Hypothesis 3, controlling for the matching between underwriters and issuing firms,
in Column (4) we see a significantly positive intercept (a reflection of the conditional average discount
for accelerated deals) and a significantly negative relation between underwriter quality and the size of
the discount for accelerated deals. In contrast, in Column (3), where estimates are based on a sample
that includes SEOs made up entirely of secondary shares, the estimated coefficient on reputation
is negative but insignificant. Note that in Columns (1) and (2) the estimated coefficients on the
reputation variable from the OLS regressions are both insignificant, again indicating the importance of
controlling for the matching between underwriters and issuing firms when examining the performance


                                                     27
of SEOs.
   For bought deals, the estimated coefficient on the interaction term between bought deals and repu-
tation also differs depending upon which sample is used. In Column (4), consistent with Hypothesis 3,
the estimated coefficient on the interaction term is negative and significant, indicating an even stronger
inverse relation between underwriter quality and the discount in bought deals relative to accelerated
deals. However, in Column (3) the estimated coefficient is positive but insignificant. Thus, in both
accelerated and bought deals the relation between underwriter quality and the discount is dependant
upon the sample used.
   One way to reconcile these conflicting estimations builds on the Hansen and Torregrosa (1992)
finding about the effects of insiders' sales of stock as a part of SEOs. Recall that the sample in
Column (3) includes deals in which only secondary shares are sold. Hansen and Torregrosa (1992)
find that when insider sales are large, underwriter fees are higher, as this reflects a negative signal
from insiders about firm value. Also, recall that we find more information-problematic deals tend
to produce matches with higher-quality underwriters, which means that deals made up entirely of
secondary shares may tend to produce more matches with high-quality underwriters. Panel C of
Table 1 indicates that this is the case: the mean REPUTATION of deals with only secondary shares
offered is 0.08, while for deals with positive new shares in Panel B, the comparable figure is 0.06.
Thus, the estimated relation between underwriter quality and the discount presented in Column (3)
may reflect the fact that the deals in Column (3) include a large proportion of highly information-
problematic deals. Such deals are more challenging to place in the market, which may explain the
difference in this estimated relation between Columns (3) and (4).
   The estimated coefficients on the interaction term between reputation and the dummy for fully
marketed deals is positive in both Columns (3) and (4) but significantly so only in the sample restricted
to firms raising new equity. This indicates that the effect of underwriter quality on the discount is
significantly weaker for fully marketed deals. The sum of these coefficients in Column (4) is not
different from zero, indicating that for fully marketed deals there is no relation between underwriter
quality and the size of the discount.
   The discount is smaller for deals with a greater number of lead underwriters, for larger firms,
for firms with higher market-to-book ratios (firms with strong investment opportunities), and during
periods of high SEO activity. The discount is larger for riskier firms and for firms with less liquid equity.
Finally, the significance of the estimated coefficient on the residual from the first-stage regression
reinforces the importance of controlling for the matching between firms and underwriters.
                                                [ Table 6 ]




                                                     28
6.5      Underpricing

Table 7 presents the findings regarding the underpricing in the offerings, defined as the percent differ-
ence between the closing price on the offer day and the offer price. Columns (1) and (3) present, re-
spectively, the OLS and matching market-corrected estimates for the sample of all SEOs and Columns
(2) and (4) present the findings using only those SEOs for which the issuing firm raised new equity
capital. As indicated in Hypothesis 4, the expectation is that underpricing should be essentially the
discount plus noise. Therefore, the prediction is that expected underpricing will be lower for higher
quality underwriters. The findings in Columns (3) and (4) of Table 7 show a significantly negative
relationship between underpricing and underwriter quality for accelerated deals. The estimated co-
efficients for the interaction terms between reputation and the deal type dummy variables indicate
this relationship is not significantly different for bought or fully marketed deals relative to accelerated
deals.
      Consistent with the findings regarding the discount, riskier and less liquid firms do see significantly
greater underpricing while larger firms experience less underpricing. Underpricing is lower for deals
with a greater number of lead underwriters. Finally, note that in this instance there is little difference
between the inference obtained from the OLS estimations and the matching market-corrected esti-
mates. However, the significance of the coefficient estimate for the first-stage residual again indicates
that controlling for matching is important when examining the performance of the SEO.
                                                       [ Table 7 ]


6.6      Fees

Table 8 presents findings related to the fees associated with the SEOs. All findings in this table are
based on the subset of SEOs in which the issuing firm raises new equity capital.22 Columns (1) and
(2) report the findings of the OLS estimates for which the dependant variables are the log of total
fees and the total fees as a percentage of the proceeds of the issue (deal value), respectively. Columns
(3) and (4) report the findings for the matching market corrected estimates for which the dependant
variables are the log of total fees and the total fees as a percent of the proceeds of the issue (or deal
value), respectively. The findings provide interesting insights into underwriting costs.
      Column (3) of Table 8 shows a significantly positive relation between the total fees paid by the
issuing firm to the underwriter and the measure of the underwriter's quality for accelerated deals.
Consistent with Hypothesis 5, the dummy variable for fully marketed deals indicates that the (condi-
tional) average fees in fully marketed deals are significantly higher than for accelerated deals while the
(conditional) average fees for bought deals are significantly lower. Furthermore, in Column (3), the
 22
      Findings for the complete sample are presented in the appendix. The results are very similar.



                                                           29
interaction terms with the indicator variables for deal type show that there is no significant difference
in the relation between underwriter quality and total fees bought or fully marketed deals as compared
to accelerated deals. While, consistent with Hypothesis 5, the estimated coefficient on the interaction
term between quality and the indicator for bought deals is negative, it is insignificant.
   In Column (3), total fees are larger for larger firms and for firms with higher market-to-book ratios.
Fees are also higher during periods of greater SEO market activity and for deals with a higher number
of lead underwriters. Fees are smaller for firms with a higher level of risk and a higher measure of
illiquidity. These last two results are difficult to reconcile with intuition, although we shed further
light on these results in the discussion of cost curves and endogenous issue size choices that appears
below.
   Column (4) of Table 8 presents the matching market corrected estimates using the percentage fee
as the dependant variable. Underwriter quality is negatively related to (this approximation of) the
marginal cost of raising capital for accelerated deals. The interaction terms also indicate that for
both bought and fully marketed deals this relation is significantly stronger. An interpretation of the
results in Table 8 is that the cost curve for raising equity capital of a high-quality underwriter has
a higher intercept but a lower marginal cost relative to the cost curve associated with a low-quality
underwriter. These findings complement the findings in Altinkili¸
                                                                c and Hansen (2000) who provide a
similar characterization of the cost curves for issuing seasoned equity. Their characterization, however,
examines the costs based upon differential sizes of the issues, while we examine the differences across
levels of underwriter quality.
   Consider the total proceeds of a given SEO. The use of a higher quality underwriter will increase
the proceeds of the deal but also increase the amount taken by the underwriter in the form of fees.
Consistent with the logic of the matching model, this tradeoff will not be equally valuable for every
firm. For a given firm, it depends upon the extent to which a higher quality underwriter can increase
the offer's proceeds relative to the increase in the associated costs and fees. Consider the finding
in the first-stage regression, indicating that larger firms match with higher quality underwriters. If
larger firms tend to issue larger amounts of equity, then the different shapes of the cost curves for high
versus low-quality underwriters explains the interest large firms have in matching with high-quality
underwriters. Similarly, if riskier firms with less liquid equity tend to issue smaller amounts of equity,
then the nature of the cost curves we identify suggest that these types of firms would find it beneficial
to match with lower quality underwriters, as was indicated in the first-stage regression findings.
                                               [ Table 8 ]




                                                   30
6.7      Residuals

Table 9 presents an examination of the relation between the residuals of the different outcome regres-
sions. This is similar in spirit to the examination in Altinkili¸
                                                                c and Hansen (2003) concerning their
finding that unexpected values of the discount correlates with underpricing. We explore three ideas,
each of which is consistent with hypotheses in the SEO and the IPO literatures. This analysis focuses
on how unexpected values of the total fees in the deal are correlated with the unexpected levels of
the announcement effect and the discount, and how unexpected levels of the discount are related to
unexpected levels of underpricing. These important questions are related to the earlier literatures and
may shed light on questions related to competition in the market for underwriting services.
       Panel A of Table 9 presents the simple cross correlations between the residuals of the second-stage
regressions for the announcement effect, the discount, underpricing, and the total fees. We see that
the unexpected level of the announcement effect correlates positively with the unexpected levels of
the fees paid by the issuing firm. Given that the residuals are from regressions that control for the
quality of the lead underwriter and the number of lead underwriters in the deal this correlation raises
the question of whether the underwriter is able to undertake other actions to limit the negative price
response to the announcement of the new issue, actions that are motivated by a higher than expected
fee.
       Notice that higher unexpected fees are also associated with lower than expected levels of the dis-
count (and lower than expected underpricing) for the issue. Therefore, there appears to be some
substitutability between the two main sources of cost to the issuer in the SEO. The discount is a
choice variable for the underwriter and can directly benefit the underwriter (in bought deals) or their
investors (in accelerated or fully marketed deals). An issuing firm that pays higher than expected
fees (conditional on the matching and the predictive firm and underwriter characteristics) may subse-
quently see superior performance in the SEO. This evidence may be seen as support for the arguments
in Chen and Ritter (2000), that the market power possessed by underwriters allows them to select
non-competitive levels of the discount, and that this is done for cases in which the issuer insists upon
a highly beneficial fee in the deal.
       The unexpected discount is highly correlated with the unexpected level of underpricing. This
finding is related to the findings in Altinkili¸
                                               c and Hansen (2003), who interpret their result as a
consequence of the underwriter's conveying information to the investors via the unexpected discount.
The information regarding the value of the issue contained in the chosen discount allows investors to
more accurately price the firm's shares in the aftermarket. We find that this result is true not only
for fully marketed deals but also for accelerated and bought deals.
                                                 [ Table 9 ]



                                                     31
    Regression analysis provides the same message as the simple correlations. Higher unexpected fees
are associated with significantly higher (less negative) unexpected announcement effects and signifi-
cantly lower than expected values for the discount and underpricing. This reinforces the notion that
there is some substitutability between the main costs of the SEO to the issuing firm, underwriter fees
and the performance of the offering. In particular, a deal with lower than expected total fees, on aver-
age, will have a significantly higher than expected discount even after controlling for the unexpected
level of the announcement effect. Further, unexpected underpricing is significantly positively related
to the unexpected discount, controlling for the residuals from the announcement effect regression and
the fees regression.


7    Conclusion

To examine the causal relations between measures of the performance of seasoned equity offerings and
characteristics of the issuing firm and the underwriting, we control for the selection in the matching
process using a structural model of two-sided matching between issuing firms and underwriters (Akkus
et al., 2018). Controlling for the matching between issuing firms and underwriters in the market
for underwriting services, the price impact of announcements of SEOs is shown to be significantly
positively related to measures of the underwriter's quality, or reputation, for accelerated and bought
deals, a relation that is not present in the absence of a control for the matching between issuing
firms and underwriters. In contrast, the relation between the announcement effect and underwriter
quality in fully marketed deals is insignificant. We also find that, for accelerated and bought deals, the
discount in the pricing of SEOs is smaller when a higher quality underwriter is used. These findings
demonstrate the important role of the underwriter in addressing informational concerns when firms
issue seasoned equity.
    The lack of a relation between either the announcement effect or the discount, on the one hand,
and underwriter quality, on the other hand, in fully marketed deals may reflect the fact that the
impact of underwriter quality on the information collected and conveyed in the road show does not
vary sufficiently across levels of underwriter quality. This finding is also consistent with a need in a
fully marketed SEO for information exchange between the underwriter and investors. If higher quality
underwriters work with a higher quality network of investors, the benefit brought by a high-quality
underwriter may be diluted by the need to compensate their investor network with a larger discount.
Finally, the result may reflect the Chen and Ritter (2000) view that high-quality underwriters may
distribute abnormal profits to their investors in the form of higher discounts in exchange for these
investors overpaying for other services.
    For all deal types the fees paid to the underwriter vary positively with underwriter quality. Fur-


                                                   32
thermore, across all deal types, fees as a percentage of deal value are negatively related to underwriter
quality. These findings are consistent with our matching model in which issuing firms are paying more
in order to match with higher quality underwriters, however, the issuing firm also shares in the higher
value created by the match. They also suggest that the nature of the cost curve for raising seasoned
equity differs significantly across levels of underwriter quality. Specifically, higher quality underwriters
have a higher fixed fee but a lower marginal cost per dollar raised.
   Despite its prominence in the IPO literature, the relation between underwriter reputation and
the announcement effect does not appear to have been examined in the SEO literature. The recent
relatively popularity of deal types which allow a significant role for underwriter certification of the
issue allows us to close this gap. Our findings illustrate the importance of information asymmetry in
raising seasoned equity capital and provide a more complete picture of the role of the underwriter in
issuing seasoned equity. They also highlight the importance the matching process in the market for
underwriting services and the impact this process can have on inference.




                                                    33
References
Akkus, O., J. A. Cookson, and A. Horta¸
                                      csu (2018) "Assortative matching and reputation in the market for first
  issues," Managment Science, Forthcoming.
Altinkili¸
         c, O. and R. S. Hansen (2003) "Discounting and underpricing in seasoned equity offers," Journal of
  Financial Economics, Vol. 69, No. 2, pp. 285­323.
Altinkili¸
         c, O. and R. S. Hansen (2000) "Are There Economies of Scale in Underwriting Fees? Evidence of Rising
  External Financing Costs," The Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 191­218.
Amihud, Y. (2002) "Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series effects," Journal of Financial
 Markets, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 31­56.
Beatty, R. P. and J. R. Ritter (1986) "Investment banking, reputation, and the underpricing of initial public
  offerings," Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 213 ­ 232.
Booth, J. R. and R. L. Smith (1986) "Capital raising, underwriting and the certification hypothesis," Journal
  of Financial Economics, Vol. 15, No. 1-2, pp. 261­281.
Card, D. (2001) "Estimating the return to schooling: Progress on some persistent econometric problems,"
  Econometrica, Vol. 69, No. 5, pp. 1127­1160.
Carter, R. and S. Manaster (1990) "Initial public offerings and underwriter reputation," the Journal of Finance,
  Vol. 45, No. 4, pp. 1045­1067.
Chemmanur, T. J. and P. Fulghieri (1994) "Investment bank reputation, information production, and financial
  intermediation," The Journal of Finance, Vol. 49, No. 1, pp. 57­79.
Chen, H.-C. and J. R. Ritter (2000) "The Seven Percent Solution," Journal of Finance, Vol. 55, No. 3, pp.
  1105­1131.
Cooney, J. W., H. K. Kato, and J. S. Schallheim (2003) "Underwriter Certification and Japanese Seasoned
  Equity Issues," The Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 16, No. 3, pp. 949­982.
Denis, D. J. (1994) "Investment Opportunities and the Market Reaction to Equity Offerings," The Journal of
  Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 29, No. 2, pp. 159­177.
Easterbrook, F. H. (1984) "Two agency-cost explanations of dividends," The American economic review, Vol.
  74, No. 4, pp. 650­659.
Echenique, F., S. Lee, M. Shum, and M. B. Yenmez (2013) "The revealed preference theory of stable and
  extremal stable matchings," Econometrica, Vol. 81, No. 1, pp. 153­171.
Fernando, C. S., V. A. Gatchev, A. D. May, and W. L. Megginson (2015) "Prestige without purpose? Reputa-
  tion, differentiation, and pricing in U.S. equity underwriting," Journal of Corporate Finance, Vol. 32, pp. 41
  ­ 63.
Fernando, C. S., V. A. Gatchev, and P. A. Spindt (2005) "Wanna dance? How firms and underwriters choose
  each other," The Journal of Finance, Vol. 60, No. 5, pp. 2437­2469.
French, K. R., G. W. Schwert, and R. F. Stambaugh (1987) "Expected stock returns and volatility," Journal
  of Financial Economics, Vol. 19, No. 1, pp. 3­29.
Gao, X. and J. R. Ritter (2010) "The marketing of seasoned equity offerings," Journal of Financial Economics,
  Vol. 97, No. 1, pp. 33­52.
Habib, M. A. and A. P. Ljungqvist (2001) "Underpricing and entrepreneurial wealth losses in IPOs: Theory
  and evidence," The Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 14, No. 2, pp. 433­458.
Hanley, K. W. and G. Hoberg (2010) "The Information Content of IPO Prospectuses," Review of Financial
  Studies, Vol. 23, No. 7, pp. 2821­2864.
Hansen, R. S. and P. Torregrosa (1992) "Underwriter Compensation and Corporate Monitoring," The Journal
  of Finance, Vol. 47, No. 4, pp. 1537­1555.
Huang, R., Z. Shangguan, and D. Zhang (2008) "The networking function of investment banks: Evidence from
  private investments in public equity," Journal of Corporate Finance, Vol. 14, No. 5, pp. 738 ­ 752.


                                                      34
Kang, A. and R. Lowery (2014) "The Pricing of IPO Services and Issues: Theory and Estimation," The Review
  of Corporate Finance Studies, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 188­234.
Khanna, N., T. H. Noe, and R. Sonti (2008) "Good IPOs Draw in Bad: Inelastic Banking Capacity and Hot
  Markets," The Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 21, No. 5, pp. 1873­1906.
Korajczyk, R. A., D. J. Lucas, and R. L. McDonald (1991) "The effect of information releases on the pricing
  and timing of equity issues," The Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 4, No. 4, pp. 685­708.
Lyandres, E., F. Fu, and E. X. Li (2016) "Do underwriters compete in IPO pricing?" Management Science,
  Vol. 64, No. 2, pp. 925­954.
Megginson, W. L. and K. A. Weiss (1991) "Venture Capitalist Certification in Initial Public Offerings," Journal
 of Finance, Vol. 46, No. 3, pp. 879­903.
Mikkelson, W. H. and M. M. Partch (1986) "Valuation effects of security offerings and the issuance process,"
  Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 15, No. 1-2, pp. 31­60.
Myers, S. C. (1984) "The Capital Structure Puzzle," The Journal of Finance, Vol. 39, No. 3, pp. 574­592.
Myers, S. C. and N. S. Majluf (1984) "Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms have information
 that investors do not have," Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 13, No. 2, pp. 187 ­ 221.
Petrin, A. and K. Train (2010) "A control function approach to endogeneity in consumer choice models," Journal
  of marketing research, Vol. 47, No. 1, pp. 3­13.
Scholes, M. and J. Williams (1977) "Estimating betas from nonsynchronous data," Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics, Vol. 5, No. 3, pp. 309­327.
Schroth, E. (2006) "Innovation, differentiation, and the choice of an underwriter: Evidence from equity-linked
  securities," The Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 19, No. 3, pp. 1041­1080.
Schroth, E. and D. Szalay (2009) "Cash breeds success: The role of financing constraints in patent races,"
  Review of Finance, Vol. 14, No. 1, pp. 73­118.
Seyhun, H. (1986) "Insiders' profits, costs of trading, and market efficiency," Journal of Financial Economics,
  Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 189 ­ 212.
Sørensen, M. (2007) "How smart is smart money? A two-sided matching model of venture capital," The Journal
  of Finance, Vol. 62, No. 6, pp. 2725­2762.
Titman, S. and B. Trueman (1986) "Information quality and the valuation of new issues," Journal of accounting
  and economics, Vol. 8, No. 2, pp. 159­172.
Wooldridge, J. M. (2015) Introductory econometrics: A modern approach: Nelson Education.




                                                      35
Tables

                                        Table 1: Summary Statistics

This table presents the number of observations, the Means, Standard Deviations, Medians, Minima, and Maxima
of variables of interest for different subsamples of the SEOs. REPUTATION is defined as the underwriter's
market share of the SEO market in the prior calendar year. #LEAD is the number of lead managers reported
by Dealogic. MARKET BOOK is the firm's market-to-book ratio reported at the end of the fiscal year prior
to the announcement year. SALE is the hyperbolic sine of the dollar value of the firms's sales (in thousands
of dollars) reported at the end of the fiscal year prior to the announcement year. #SEO is the number of
SEOs in the three months prior to the announcement date. ILIQ is Amihud's measure of the illiquidity of
the firm's equity. RISK is the average daily variance of return for the firm's equity in the year prior to the
announcement date. DEAL VALUE is dollar value (in millions of dollars) of the total proceeds raised in the
SEO. UNDERPRICE is the percent difference between the closing price on the offer day and the offer price in
the SEO. DISCOUNT is the percent difference between the closing price the trading day prior to the offer day
and the offer price in the SEO. ANNOUNCE is the two day cumulative abnormal return (estimated using a
market model) for the announcement day and the following trading day. FEES is the dollar value (in millions
of dollars) of the total fees paid to the underwriter in the SEO. %FEES is the value of the total fees paid to
the underwriter in the SEO normalized by the total proceeds.

                                            Panel A: Full Sample

           Statistic              N       Mean       St. Dev.    Median      Min         Max
           REPUTATION           3,746      0.0656    0.0583      0.0547      0.0003     0.2879
           #LEAD                3,746     1.9875     1.4941         1           1         14
           MARKET BOOK          3,746     2.7685     2.2300      1.8966     0.7912      16.3985
           SALE                 3,746      0.6187    1.3861      0.1545      0.0000    12.9320
           #SEO                 3,746     36.7696   16.8302        34           5         85
           ILIQ                 3,746     0.0204     0.0414     0.0065      0.0001      0.4774
           RISK                 3,746     0.0264     0.0265     0.0168      0.0014      0.1580
           DEAL VALUE           3,746    146.2418   143.7936    98.9600     8.4700     999.1514
           UNDERPRICE           3,746     0.0231     0.0300      0.0164     -0.0575     0.1544
           DISCOUNT             3,746      0.0447    0.0512      0.0367     -0.0667     0.3115
           ANNOUNCE             2,306    -0.0265     0.0517     -0.0254     -0.1910     0.1359
           FEES                 3,746     6.1766     5.2678     4.6000       0.4187    36.2237
           %FEES                3,746     4.7597     1.2541      5.0000     0.4650      7.0000



                                        Panel B: Positive New Shares

           Statistic              N       Mean       St. Dev.    Median      Min         Max
           REPUTATION           3,211      0.0621    0.0575      0.0514      0.0003     0.2879
           #LEAD                3,211     1.9330     1.4316         1           1         14
           MARKET BOOK          3,211     2.8116     2.2878      1.9100     0.8008      16.3985
           SALE                 3,211      0.5020    1.2634      0.1165      0.0000    12.9320
           #SEO                 3,211     36.9517   17.1015        34           5         85
           ILIQ                 3,211     0.0221     0.0436     0.0070      0.0001      0.4774
           RISK                 3,211     0.0283     0.0275     0.0192      0.0014      0.1567
           DEAL VALUE           3,211    134.9619   131.2977    93.1500     8.4700     999.1514
           UNDERPRICE           3,211     0.0239     0.0306      0.0168     -0.0575     0.1544
           DISCOUNT             3,211      0.0464    0.0529      0.0370     -0.0667     0.3115
           ANNOUNCE             1,955    -0.0266     0.0533     -0.0254     -0.1910     0.1359
           FEES                 3,211     5.9249     4.9190     4.5150       0.4376    36.2237
           %FEES                3,211     4.9096     1.1572      5.0000     0.4650      7.0000




                                                     36
                      Panel C: Only Secondary Shares

Statistic      N        Mean       St. Dev.    Median      Min       Max
REPUTATION    535        0.0870     0.0583      0.0839    0.0004     0.2879
#LEAD         535       2.3140      1.7922         2          1        11
MARKET BOOK   535       2.5101      1.8262      1.8472     0.7912   12.2976
SALE          535        1.3188     1.8182      0.6374    0.0047    12.0745
#SEO          535       35.6766     15.0682       34          6        85
ILIQ          535       0.0103      0.0217      0.0039     0.0001    0.2634
RISK          535       0.0152      0.0163      0.0104     0.0014    0.1580
DEAL VALUE    535      213.9426    189.7946    152.3250   11.3172   999.0625
UNDERPRICE    535       0.0178      0.0254      0.0143    -0.0557    0.1525
DISCOUNT      535        0.0344     0.0375      0.0330    -0.0646    0.1686
ANNOUNCE      351        0.0229     0.0217      0.0196    -0.0069    0.1394
FEES          535        7.6877     6.8184      5.5660     0.4187   35.7990
%FEES         535       3.8598      1.4260      4.2500     0.4650    6.9900




                      Panel D: Fully Marketed Deals

Statistic      N         Mean       St. Dev.    Median      Min       Max
REPUTATION    2,249       0.0622     0.0558      0.0531    0.0003    0.2879
#LEAD         2,249      1.5985      1.0428         1         1        11
MARKET BOOK   2,249      2.8601      2.1945      2.0905   0.7912     15.4038
SALE          2,249       0.5048     1.1101      0.1396    0.0000   12.2570
#SEO          2,249      35.9449    17.1765        33         6        85
ILIQ          2,249      0.0243      0.0440     0.0090    0.0001     0.4545
RISK          2,249      0.0309      0.0287     0.0209    0.0014     0.1580
DEAL VALUE    2,249     136.5007    135.6325    93.1031   8.4700    998.2500
UNDERPRICE    2,249      0.0248      0.0274      0.0183   -0.0526    0.1544
DISCOUNT      2,249       0.0354     0.0467      0.0283   -0.0667    0.3056
ANNOUNCE      2,075     -0.0256      0.0518     -0.0246   -0.1910    0.1359
FEES          2,249      6.3378      5.2041     4.7649     0.4376   36.2237
%FEES         2,249      5.0973      0.7783      5.0200   1.1430     7.0000




                        Panel E: Accelerated Deals

Statistic      N         Mean      St. Dev.     Median      Min       Max
REPUTATION    1,200      0.0685     0.0620      0.0601    0.0003      0.2879
#LEAD         1,200     2.8750      1.8989         2          1         14
MARKET BOOK   1,200     2.7741      2.3513      1.7845     0.8012    16.3985
SALE          1,200      0.7312     1.6520      0.1369    0.0000     12.1180
#SEO          1,200     38.4767    16.4869        37          5         85
ILIQ          1,200     0.0167      0.0395      0.0040     0.0001     0.4774
RISK          1,200     0.0214      0.0221      0.0142     0.0014     0.1567
DEAL VALUE    1,200    157.2648    153.0851    108.6750    9.4024   999.0625
UNDERPRICE    1,200     0.0242      0.0336       0.02        -0          0
DISCOUNT      1,200      0.0635     0.0582       0.05        -0          0
ANNOUNCE       227     -0.0350      0.0503     -0.0326    -0.1857     0.1110
FEES          1,200     6.7550      5.5338      5.1190     0.5062    34.7760
%FEES         1,200     4.8406      1.0569        4.8         0          7




                                    37
                       Panel F: Bought Deals

Statistic     N      Mean      St. Dev.   Median      Min       Max
REPUTATION    297     0.0799    0.0583     0.0744    0.0004     0.2879
#LEAD         297    1.3468     0.7912        1          1         8
MARKET BOOK   297    2.0526     1.8369     1.4298     0.8542   15.8730
SALE          297     1.0261    1.8917     0.3622    0.0000    12.9320
#SEO          297    36.1178    14.9873      34          6        68
ILIQ          297    0.0056     0.0165     0.0017     0.0001    0.2410
RISK          297    0.0123     0.0149     0.0070     0.0014    0.1058
DEAL VALUE    297   175.4683   157.7689   121.5923   11.3172   999.1514
UNDERPRICE    297    0.0056     0.0277     0.0020    -0.0560    0.1330
DISCOUNT      297     0.0382    0.0266     0.0336    -0.0467    0.1538
ANNOUNCE       4    -0.0384     0.0299    -0.0444    -0.0636   -0.0012
FEES          297     2.6197    2.6679     1.8307     0.4187   19.4194
%FEES         297    1.8759     1.2398     1.4600     0.4650    5.9410




                                38
                                                                       Table 2: Correlations

     This table presents the correlation coefficients between variables of interest. REPUTATION is defined as the underwriter's market share of the SEO
     market in the prior calendar year. #LEAD is the number of lead managers reported by Dealogic. MARKET BOOK is the firm's market-to-book
     ratio reported at the end of the fiscal year prior to the announcement year. SALE is the hyperbolic sine of the dollar value of the firms's sales (in
     thousands of dollars) reported at the end of the fiscal year prior to the announcement year. #SEO is the number of SEOs in the three months prior to the
     announcement date. ILIQ is Amihud's measure of the illiquidity of the firm's equity. RISK is the average daily variance of return for the firm's equity in
     the year prior to the announcement date. DEAL VALUE is dollar value (in millions of dollars) of the total proceeds raised in the SEO. UNDERPRICE
     is the percent difference between the closing price on the offer day and the offer price in the SEO. DISCOUNT is the percent difference between the
     closing price the trading day prior to the offer day and the offer price in the SEO. ANNOUNCE is the two day cumulative abnormal return (estimated
     using a market model) for the announcement day and the following trading day. FEES is the dollar value (in millions of dollars) of the total fees paid to
     the underwriter in the SEO. %FEES is the value of the total fees paid to the underwriter in the SEO normalized by the total proceeds.


                               (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)       (9)       (10)       (11)      (12)     (13)
     (1) REPUTATION              1
     (2) #LEAD               0.2642        1
     (3) MARKET BOOK         -0.0392   -0.1066        1
     (4) SALE                 0.2082    0.2186    -0.2125       1
     (5) #SEO                -0.1319    0.0263     0.0583   -0.0593        1
     (6) ILIQ                -0.2498   -0.1845    -0.0163   -0.1551     0.0808        1
39




     (7) RISK                -0.2357    -0.266     0.2625   -0.1945     0.082      0.2973       1
     (8) DEAL VALUE           0.3438   0.4139     -0.0426    0.4083    -0.0091    -0.2805   -0.2625        1
     (9) UNDERPRICE          -0.1271    -0.089     0.1334   -0.1305    0.0355      0.1757    0.2716    -0.1568       1
     (10) DISCOUNT           -0.1091   -0.0036     0.0554   -0.0637     0.0111     0.2043   0.2403     -0.1647    0.4105       1
     (11) ANNOUNCE            0.0504    -0.028      3e-04    0.0056     0.018     -0.0583   -0.1029    0.0977     0.052     -0.3358       1
     (12) FEES                0.3404    0.4226     0.0224    0.3063    -0.0196    -0.2668   -0.2057     0.9092   -0.0946    -0.1613    0.0996       1
     (13) %FEES              -0.2278   -0.1544     0.2156   -0.3308     0.0475     0.3107    0.3704    -0.4349   0.3054     0.1929    -0.1058    -0.1452     1
                                     Table 3: First-Stage Regression Tests

This table reports the findings of the first-stage regression tests. Columns (1) and (3) report the OLS and
Censored Tobit estimates, respectively, of Equation (9) using the entire sample of SEOs to explain the matching.
Columns (2) and (4) report the OLS and Censored Tobit estimates, respectively, of Equation (9) using the
subsample of SEOs in which the issuing firm issues a strictly positive number of new shares. VALPROXY is
the natural logarithm of the dollar value of the total proceeds raised in the SEO. REPUTATION is defined as
the underwriter's market share of the SEO market in the prior calendar year. #LEAD is the number of lead
managers reported by Dealogic. MARKET BOOK is the firm's market-to-book ratio reported at the end of
the fiscal year prior to the announcement year. SALE is the hyperbolic sine of the firms's sales (divided by
1000) reported at the end of the fiscal year prior to the announcement year. #SEO is the number of SEOs in
the three months prior to the announcement date. ILIQ is Amihud's measure of the illiquidity of the firm's
equity. RISK is the average daily variance of return for the firm's equity in the year prior to the announcement
date. Standard errors are in parentheses,  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.


                                             (1)              (2)          (3)                 (4)
                                                      OLS                           Tobit
                                                                                 
          Constant                        2.6195        2.7053          1.0848              1.2049
                                           (0.1404)      (0.1522)        (0.1202)            (0.1290)
          REPUTATION                     3.7734         3.6930          6.0182              5.6572
                                           (0.2940)      (0.3024)        (0.2267)            (0.2320)
          BOUGHT                          0.1512         0.1556           0.0682              0.0585
                                           (0.0663)      (0.0769)        (0.0483)            (0.0567)
          FULL                            0.2939        0.2813          0.1669              0.1753
                                           (0.0411)      (0.0430)        (0.0317)            (0.0335)
          REPUTATION X BOUGHT              -0.0025        0.1324         1.1143             1.5238
                                           (0.6631)      (0.7501)        (0.4991)            (0.5819)
          REPUTATION X FULL              -1.0776        -0.8779           0.4253              0.2544
                                           (0.3708)      (0.3914)        (0.2931)            (0.3073)
          #LEAD                           0.1567        0.1636          0.1616              0.1647
                                           (0.0088)      (0.0097)        (0.0070)            (0.0076)
          SALE                           0.1469         0.1339          0.1287              0.1170
                                           (0.0069)      (0.0072)        (0.0061)            (0.0063)
          #SEO                           0.0041         0.0032          0.0031              0.0023
                                           (0.0007)      (0.0008)        (0.0006)            (0.0006)
          ILIQ                           -4.2678        -4.2549         -3.6845             -3.7213
                                           (0.2632)      (0.2640)        (0.2610)            (0.2608)
          RISK                           -2.7576        -2.7917         -2.2467             -2.3515
                                           (0.4838)      (0.4925)        (0.4135)            (0.4198)
          MARKET BOOK                     0.0507        0.0456          0.0430              0.0381
                                           (0.0054)      (0.0057)        (0.0044)            (0.0046)
          Observations                      3,746            3,211
          R2                               0.5367            0.5332
          Log Likelihood                                               -13,518.7300     -11,541.5200




                                                        40
                       Table 4: Second-Stage Regression Results: Announcement Effect

This table reports the findings of OLS and Matching Market Corrected versions of Equation (10) for which the
dependent variable is the announcement effect. Columns (1) and (3) present the findings for all SEOs in the
sample and Columns (2) and (4) present the findings restricting the sample to only those SEOs in which the
issuing firm issues a strictly positive number of new shares. ANNOUNCE is the two day cumulative abnormal
return (estimated using a market model) for the announcement day and the following trading day. REPUTA-
TION is defined as the underwriter's market share of the SEO market in the prior calendar year. #LEAD
is the number of lead managers reported by Dealogic. MARKET BOOK is the firm's market-to-book ratio
reported at the end of the fiscal year prior to the announcement year. SALE is the hyperbolic sine of the
firms's sales (divided by 1000) reported at the end of the fiscal year prior to the announcement year. #SEO is
the number of SEOs in the three months prior to the announcement date. ILIQ is Amihud's measure of the
illiquidity of the firm's equity. RISK is the average daily variance of return for the firm's equity in the year
prior to the announcement date. Standard errors are in parentheses,  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.


                                              (1)               (2)         (3)           (4)
                                                       OLS               Matching Market Corrected
           Constant                       -0.0521        -0.0578         -0.0673       -0.0732
                                           (0.0155)       (0.0175)        (0.0125)      (0.0118)

           REPUTATION                        0.0817           0.1064     0.1098         0.1297
                                            (0.0641)         (0.0752)     (0.0283)       (0.0278)

           BOUGHT                            0.0037          -0.0053       0.0080       -0.0011
                                            (0.0344)         (0.0373)     (0.0051)      (0.0051)

           FULL                              0.0021           0.0042       0.0036        0.0061
                                            (0.0074)         (0.0084)     (0.0042)      (0.0040)

           REPUTATION X BOUGHT              -0.1733          -0.0951     -0.1719        -0.0615
                                            (0.3984)         (0.5015)     (0.0492)      (0.0491)

           REPUTATION X FULL                -0.0786          -0.1103     -0.0728       -0.1051
                                            (0.0672)         (0.0788)     (0.0342)      (0.0336)

           #LEAD                             0.0020           0.0014     0.0019         0.0012
                                            (0.0013)         (0.0017)     (0.0007)      (0.0007)

           SALE                              0.0004           0.0005       0.0002        0.0002
                                            (0.0008)         (0.0009)     (0.0007)      (0.0007)

           #SEO                              0.0001           0.0001       0.0001        0.0001
                                            (0.0001)         (0.0001)     (0.0001)      (0.0001)

           ILIQ                              0.0248           0.0278       0.0243        0.0266
                                            (0.0284)         (0.0303)     (0.0284)      (0.0289)

           RISK                           -0.2161        -0.2147         -0.2132       -0.2133
                                           (0.0510)       (0.0552)        (0.0516)      (0.0499)

           MARKET BOOK                      0.0014           0.0018       0.0013        0.0016
                                            (0.0006)          (0.0007)    (0.0006)       (0.0006)

           ehat                                                          0.0091         0.0092
                                                                          (0.0016)       (0.0016)

           Observations                     2,518              2,125       2,518         2,125
           R2                               0.0613            0.0733       0.0701        0.0814


                                                        41
                           Table 5: Second-Stage Regression Results: Rebound Return

This table reports the findings of OLS and Matching Market Corrected versions of Equation (10) for which
the dependent variable is the rebound return. Columns (1) and (3) present the findings for all Fully Marketed
SEOs in the sample and Columns (2) and (4) present the findings restricting the sample to only those Fully
Marketed SEOs in which the issuing firm issues a strictly positive number of new shares. REBOUND is the
idiosyncratic return (estimated using a market model) between the announcement day and the trading day
prior to the offer day. REPUTATION is defined as the underwriter's market share of the SEO market in the
prior calendar year. #LEAD is the number of lead managers reported by Dealogic. MARKET BOOK is
the firm's market-to-book ratio reported at the end of the fiscal year prior to the announcement year. SALE
is the hyperbolic sine of the firms's sales (divided by 1000) reported at the end of the fiscal year prior to the
announcement year. #SEO is the number of SEOs in the three months prior to the announcement date. ILIQ
is Amihud's measure of the illiquidity of the firm's equity. RISK is the average daily variance of return for
the firm's equity in the year prior to the announcement date. Standard errors are in parentheses,  p<0.1;

   p<0.05;  p<0.01.


                                         (1)               (2)         (3)           (4)
                                                  OLS               Matching Market Corrected
                Constant              -0.2778       -0.3060         -0.3485       -0.3920
                                       (0.1009)      (0.1157)        (0.0799)      (0.0796)

                REPUTATION             -0.2646          -0.2957      -0.0745       -0.1032
                                       (0.1666)         (0.1975)     (0.1853)      (0.1901)

                #LEAD                   0.0023           0.0011       0.0012       -0.0008
                                       (0.0107)         (0.0146)     (0.0049)      (0.0049)

                SALE                    0.0072           0.0104       0.0055       0.0083
                                       (0.0063)         (0.0072)     (0.0042)      (0.0044)

                #SEO                   0.0013           0.0013       0.0012        0.0011
                                       (0.0006)         (0.0007)     (0.0005)      (0.0005)

                ILIQ                   -0.2011          -0.1546      -0.2130       -0.1717
                                       (0.2040)         (0.2256)     (0.1568)      (0.1630)

                RISK                  1.0836            1.1209       1.0852        1.1159
                                       (0.3721)          (0.4164)    (0.4919)      (0.5041)

                MARKET BOOK            -0.0001          -0.0005      -0.0009       -0.0013
                                       (0.0045)         (0.0051)     (0.0032)      (0.0032)

                ehat                                                0.0503         0.0620
                                                                     (0.0098)       (0.0102)

                Observations             2,249           1,921         2,249        1,921
                R2                      0.0327           0.0358       0.0382        0.0427




                                                         42
                             Table 6: Second-Stage Regression Results: Discount

This table reports the findings of OLS and Matching Market Corrected versions of Equation (10) for which
the dependent variable is the discount. Columns (1) and (3) present the findings for all SEOs in the sample
and Columns (2) and (4) present the findings restricting the sample to only those SEOs in which the issuing
firm issues a strictly positive number of new shares. DISCOUNT is the percent difference between the closing
price the trading day prior to the offer day and the offer price in the SEO. REPUTATION is defined as the
underwriter's market share of the SEO market in the prior calendar year. #LEAD is the number of lead
managers reported by Dealogic. MARKET BOOK is the firm's market-to-book ratio reported at the end of
the fiscal year prior to the announcement year. SALE is the hyperbolic sine of the firms's sales (divided by
1000) reported at the end of the fiscal year prior to the announcement year. #SEO is the number of SEOs in
the three months prior to the announcement date. ILIQ is Amihud's measure of the illiquidity of the firm's
equity. RISK is the average daily variance of return for the firm's equity in the year prior to the announcement
date. Standard errors are in parentheses,  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.


                                              (1)               (2)         (3)           (4)
                                                       OLS               Matching Market Corrected
           Constant                        0.0560            0.0609      0.0680         0.0757
                                            (0.0125)          (0.0139)    (0.0115)       (0.0113)

           REPUTATION                       -0.0117          -0.0288      -0.0339      -0.0514
                                            (0.0518)         (0.0598)     (0.0230)      (0.0240)

           BOUGHT                            0.0046           0.0119       0.0012       0.0078
                                            (0.0277)         (0.0297)     (0.0033)      (0.0035)

           FULL                             -0.0015          -0.0010      -0.0028       -0.0028
                                            (0.0060)         (0.0067)     (0.0033)      (0.0034)

           REPUTATION X BOUGHT               0.0412          -0.0658       0.0401      -0.0982
                                            (0.3216)         (0.3989)     (0.0325)      (0.0329)

           REPUTATION X FULL                 0.0379           0.0554       0.0333       0.0504
                                            (0.0543)         (0.0627)     (0.0282)      (0.0289)

           #LEAD                            -0.0017          -0.0018     -0.0016       -0.0016
                                            (0.0010)         (0.0014)     (0.0006)      (0.0006)

           SALE                           -0.0036        -0.0037         -0.0034       -0.0034
                                           (0.0007)       (0.0007)        (0.0006)      (0.0006)

           #SEO                           -0.0002            -0.0002     -0.0002       -0.0002
                                           (0.0001)           (0.0001)    (0.0001)      (0.0001)

           ILIQ                            0.1692            0.1831      0.1695         0.1842
                                            (0.0229)          (0.0241)    (0.0267)       (0.0256)

           RISK                            0.3271            0.3415      0.3248         0.3401
                                            (0.0412)          (0.0439)    (0.0465)       (0.0436)

           MARKET BOOK                    -0.0021        -0.0022         -0.0020       -0.0021
                                           (0.0005)       (0.0005)        (0.0005)      (0.0005)

           ehat                                                          -0.0072       -0.0089
                                                                          (0.0013)      (0.0013)

           Observations                     2,518              2,125       2,518         2,125
           R2                               0.1748            0.1909       0.1822        0.2012


                                                        43
                           Table 7: Second-Stage Regression Results: Underpricing

This table reports the findings of OLS and Matching Market Corrected versions of Equation (10) for which the
dependent variable is the underpricing. Columns (1) and (3) present the findings for all SEOs in the sample and
Columns (2) and (4) present the findings restricting the sample to only those SEOs in which the issuing firm
issues a strictly positive number of new shares. UNDERPRICE is the percent difference between the closing
price on the offer day and the offer price in the SEO. REPUTATION is defined as the underwriter's market
share of the SEO market in the prior calendar year. #LEAD is the number of lead managers reported by
Dealogic. MARKET BOOK is the firm's market-to-book ratio reported at the end of the fiscal year prior to
the announcement year. SALE is the hyperbolic sine of the firms's sales (divided by 1000) reported at the end
of the fiscal year prior to the announcement year. #SEO is the number of SEOs in the three months prior to
the announcement date. ILIQ is Amihud's measure of the illiquidity of the firm's equity. RISK is the average
daily variance of return for the firm's equity in the year prior to the announcement date. Standard errors are
in parentheses,  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.


                                              (1)               (2)         (3)           (4)
                                                       OLS               Matching Market Corrected
           Constant                        0.0171            0.0216      0.0226         0.0279
                                            (0.0066)          (0.0074)    (0.0068)       (0.0067)

           REPUTATION                      -0.0234           -0.0289     -0.0316       -0.0373
                                           (0.0138)           (0.0147)    (0.0139)      (0.0145)

           BOUGHT                         -0.0151        -0.0109         -0.0148       -0.0105
                                           (0.0031)       (0.0037)        (0.0034)      (0.0035)

           FULL                            0.0038            0.0044       0.0043        0.0048
                                           (0.0019)          (0.0021)     (0.0021)      (0.0023)

           REPUTATION X BOUGHT              0.0129            0.0139       0.0089        0.0080
                                           (0.0310)          (0.0365)     (0.0316)      (0.0318)

           REPUTATION X FULL               -0.0137           -0.0173      -0.0192       -0.0221
                                           (0.0174)          (0.0191)     (0.0170)      (0.0180)

           #LEAD                          -0.0011            -0.0011     -0.0011       -0.0011
                                           (0.0004)           (0.0005)    (0.0004)      (0.0004)

           SALE                           -0.0010        -0.0010         -0.0010       -0.0009
                                           (0.0003)       (0.0003)        (0.0004)      (0.0004)

           #SEO                            0.000003           0.00001     0.00001        0.00002
                                           (0.00003)         (0.00004)   (0.00004)      (0.00004)

           ILIQ                            0.0458            0.0450       0.0437        0.0427
                                            (0.0123)          (0.0129)    (0.0174)      (0.0171)

           RISK                            0.2086            0.2127      0.2067         0.2108
                                            (0.0226)          (0.0240)    (0.0271)       (0.0263)

           MARKET BOOK                     -0.0001           0.00004     -0.00004        0.0001
                                           (0.0003)          (0.0003)    (0.0003)       (0.0003)

           ehat                                                          -0.0036       -0.0043
                                                                          (0.0008)      (0.0008)

           Observations                     3,746              3,211       3,746         3,211
           R2                               0.1599            0.1642       0.1649        0.1706


                                                        44
                                Table 8: Second-Stage Regression Results: Fees

This table reports the findings of OLS and Matching Market Corrected versions of Equation (10) for which the
dependent variable is a measure of the underwriter's fees in the SEO. All findings are derived from the subsample
of SEOs in which the issuing firm issues a strictly positive number of new shares. In Columns (1) and (3) the
dependent variable is the log of the dollar value of total fees in the SEO and in Columns (2) and (4) the
dependent variable is the ratio of total fees relative to the proceeds of the SEO. FEES is the natural logarithm
of the dollar value (in millions of dollars) of the total fees paid to the underwriter in the SEO. %FEES is the
value of the total fees paid to the underwriter in the SEO normalized by the total proceeds. REPUTATION
is defined as the underwriter's market share of the SEO market in the prior calendar year. #LEAD is the
number of lead managers reported by Dealogic. MARKET BOOK is the firm's market-to-book ratio reported
at the end of the fiscal year prior to the announcement year. SALE is the hyperbolic sine of the firms's sales
(divided by 1000) reported at the end of the fiscal year prior to the announcement year. #SEO is the number
of SEOs in the three months prior to the announcement date. ILIQ is Amihud's measure of the illiquidity of
the firm's equity. RISK is the average daily variance of return for the firm's equity in the year prior to the
announcement date. Standard errors are in parentheses,  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.


                                              (1)               (2)         (3)           (4)
                                                       OLS               Matching Market Corrected
           Constant                         -0.0968          5.8248      -1.4316        6.4922
                                            (0.1449)          (0.1718)    (0.1388)       (0.1388)

           REPUTATION                      3.6253            -0.4045     5.3729        -1.2782
                                            (0.2879)         (0.3413)     (0.3341)      (0.3341)

           BOUGHT                          -0.5971       -2.2776         -0.6835       -2.2344
                                            (0.0732)      (0.0868)        (0.1229)      (0.1229)

           FULL                            0.3534            0.3124      0.2590         0.3596
                                            (0.0409)          (0.0485)    (0.0567)       (0.0567)

           REPUTATION X BOUGHT             -2.4342       -3.8656          -1.1963      -4.4845
                                            (0.7141)      (0.8467)        (1.1020)      (1.1020)

           REPUTATION X FULL               -0.9715           -0.6019       0.0359      -1.1056
                                            (0.3726)         (0.4418)     (0.4188)      (0.4188)

           #LEAD                           0.1547        -0.0810         0.1556        -0.0815
                                            (0.0092)      (0.0109)        (0.0104)      (0.0104)

           SALE                            0.0875        -0.1840         0.0725        -0.1765
                                            (0.0068)      (0.0081)        (0.0089)      (0.0089)

           #SEO                            0.0034             0.0004     0.0026          0.0008
                                            (0.0007)         (0.0009)     (0.0009)      (0.0009)

           ILIQ                            -3.8547           2.1932      -3.3799        1.9558
                                            (0.2514)          (0.2980)    (0.2892)       (0.2892)

           RISK                            -2.2849           2.7875      -1.8933        2.5917
                                            (0.4688)          (0.5559)    (0.5169)       (0.5169)

           MARKET BOOK                     0.0361        -0.0327         0.0295        -0.0294
                                            (0.0054)      (0.0064)        (0.0068)      (0.0068)

           ehat                                                          0.8897        -0.4448
                                                                          (0.0201)      (0.0201)

           Observations                      3,211             3,211       3,211         3,211
           R2                                0.4996           0.6854       0.9366        0.7342
                                                        45
                                                  Table 9: Residuals

This table reports an examination of the residuals from the second-stage regressions. Panel A reports the
simple cross correlations of the residuals from the second-stage matching market corrected regressions of the
measures of performance. Panel B reports the findings of OLS regressions using the residuals from the second-
stage matching market corrected regressions of the measures of performance as the dependant and explanatory
variables. UNDERPRICE is the percent difference between the closing price on the offer day and the offer price
in the SEO. DISCOUNT is the percent difference between the closing price the trading day prior to the offer
day and the offer price in the SEO. ANNOUNCE is the two day cumulative abnormal return (estimated using
a market model) for the announcement day and the following trading day. FEES is the dollar value (in millions
of dollars) of the total fees paid to the underwriter in the SEO.

                                                 Panel A: Correlations

                            Announcement Resid.         Discount Resid.       Underpricing Resid.   Fees Resid.
    Announcement Resid.                  1
    Discount Resid.                  -0.0203                     1
    Underpricing Resid.               -4e-04                  0.4582                   1
    Fees Resid.                       0.0532                  -0.1323               -0.1347             1



                                               Panel B: Regression Tests

                                                    (1)              (2)            (3)
                                                  Announce        Discount      Underpricing
                      Constant                     -0.0000          0.0000          0.0000
                                                   (0.0012)        (0.0009)        (0.0005)

                      Fees Resid.                  0.0044         -0.0087        -0.0030
                                                   (0.0018)        (0.0014)       (0.0008)

                      Announcement Resid.                          -0.0105          0.0060
                                                                   (0.0171)        (0.0091)

                      Discount Resid.                                             0.2657
                                                                                   (0.0115)

                      Observations                   2,125         2,125            2,125
                      R2                            0.0028         0.0177          0.2157




                                                             46
Online Appendix




                  47
                              Table OA.1: Second-Stage Regression Results: Fees

This table reports the findings of OLS and Matching Market Corrected versions of Equation (10) for which the
dependent variable is a measure of the underwriter's fees in the SEO. All findings are derived from the entire
sample of SEOs. In Columns (1) and (3) the dependent variable is the log of the dollar value of total fees in
the SEO and in Columns (2) and (4) the dependent variable is the ratio of total fees relative to the proceeds of
the SEO. FEES is the natural logarithm of the dollar value (in millions of dollars) of the total fees paid to the
underwriter in the SEO. %FEES is the value of the total fees paid to the underwriter in the SEO normalized
by the total proceeds. REPUTATION is defined as the underwriter's market share of the SEO market in the
prior calendar year. #LEAD is the number of lead managers reported by Dealogic. MARKET BOOK is
the firm's market-to-book ratio reported at the end of the fiscal year prior to the announcement year. SALE
is the hyperbolic sine of the firms's sales (divided by 1000) reported at the end of the fiscal year prior to the
announcement year. #SEO is the number of SEOs in the three months prior to the announcement date. ILIQ
is Amihud's measure of the illiquidity of the firm's equity. RISK is the average daily variance of return for
the firm's equity in the year prior to the announcement date. Standard errors are in parentheses,  p<0.1;

   p<0.05;  p<0.01.


                                              (1)               (2)         (3)           (4)
                                                       OLS               Matching Market Corrected
           Constant                         -0.1852          5.8865      -1.5393        6.5646
                                            (0.1342)          (0.1627)    (0.1274)       (0.1274)

           REPUTATION                      3.7623            -0.2097     5.7430        -1.2016
                                            (0.2809)         (0.3407)     (0.3456)      (0.3456)

           BOUGHT                          -0.7262       -2.4627         -0.7994       -2.4260
                                            (0.0633)      (0.0768)        (0.1322)      (0.1322)

           FULL                            0.3560            0.2764      0.2440         0.3325
                                            (0.0392)          (0.0476)    (0.0574)       (0.0574)

           REPUTATION X BOUGHT             -2.0211       -3.0146          -1.0356      -3.5081
                                            (0.6336)      (0.7684)        (1.1736)      (1.1736)

           REPUTATION X FULL               -1.1751           -0.6992       0.1510      -1.3634
                                            (0.3543)         (0.4296)     (0.4008)      (0.4008)

           #LEAD                           0.1504        -0.0729         0.1547        -0.0750
                                            (0.0084)      (0.0102)        (0.0102)      (0.0102)

           SALE                            0.0926        -0.2086         0.0766        -0.2006
                                            (0.0066)      (0.0079)        (0.0089)      (0.0089)

           #SEO                            0.0039            -0.0006     0.0031         -0.0002
                                            (0.0007)         (0.0009)     (0.0009)      (0.0009)

           ILIQ                            -3.7929           2.4397      -3.2783        2.1819
                                            (0.2514)          (0.3049)    (0.2956)       (0.2956)

           RISK                            -2.1031           3.3958      -1.6523        3.1700
                                            (0.4622)          (0.5606)    (0.5002)       (0.5002)

           MARKET BOOK                     0.0393        -0.0399         0.0325        -0.0365
                                            (0.0052)      (0.0063)        (0.0067)      (0.0067)

           ehat                                                          0.8823        -0.4419
                                                                          (0.0200)      (0.0200)

           Observations                      3,746             3,746       3,746         3,746
           R2                                0.5180           0.7053       0.9290        0.7482
                                                        48
                      Table OA.2: Second-Stage Regression Results: Announcement Effect

This table reports the findings of OLS and Matching Market Corrected versions of Equation (10) considering
the first-stage matching to be between issuing firms and underwriter deal type pairs for which the dependent
variable is the announcement effect. Columns (1) and (3) present the findings for all SEOs in the sample
and Columns (2) and (4) present the findings restricting the sample to only those SEOs in which the issuing
firm issues a strictly positive number of new shares. ANNOUNCE is the two day cumulative abnormal return
(estimated using a market model) for the announcement day and the following trading day. REPUTATION
is defined as the underwriter's market share of the SEO market in the prior calendar year. #LEAD is the
number of lead managers reported by Dealogic. MARKET BOOK is the firm's market-to-book ratio reported
at the end of the fiscal year prior to the announcement year. SALE is the hyperbolic sine of the firms's sales
(divided by 1000) reported at the end of the fiscal year prior to the announcement year. #SEO is the number
of SEOs in the three months prior to the announcement date. ILIQ is Amihud's measure of the illiquidity of
the firm's equity. RISK is the average daily variance of return for the firm's equity in the year prior to the
announcement date. Standard errors are in parentheses,  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.


                                             (1)               (2)         (3)           (4)
                                                      OLS               Matching Market Corrected
           Constant                      -0.0521        -0.0578         -0.0693       -0.0748
                                          (0.0155)       (0.0175)        (0.0118)      (0.0123)
           REPUTATION                       0.0817           0.1064     0.1070         0.1277
                                           (0.0641)         (0.0752)     (0.0282)       (0.0283)
           BOUGHT                           0.0037          -0.0053       0.0013       -0.0091
                                           (0.0344)         (0.0373)     (0.0048)      (0.0052)
           FULL                             0.0021           0.0042       0.0036        0.0057
                                           (0.0074)         (0.0084)     (0.0041)      (0.0041)
           REPUTATION X BOUGHT             -0.1733          -0.0951     -0.1767        -0.0678
                                           (0.3984)         (0.5015)     (0.0467)      (0.0501)
           REPUTATION X FULL               -0.0786          -0.1103     -0.0701       -0.1037
                                           (0.0672)         (0.0788)     (0.0347)      (0.0333)
           #LEAD                            0.0020           0.0014      0.0018         0.0011
                                           (0.0013)         (0.0017)     (0.0007)      (0.0007)
           SALE                             0.0004           0.0005       0.0002        0.0003
                                           (0.0008)         (0.0009)     (0.0007)      (0.0007)
           #SEO                             0.0001           0.0001       0.0001        0.0001
                                           (0.0001)         (0.0001)     (0.0001)      (0.0001)
           ILIQ                             0.0248           0.0278       0.0231        0.0255
                                           (0.0284)         (0.0303)     (0.0278)      (0.0286)
           RISK                          -0.2161        -0.2147         -0.2131       -0.2129
                                          (0.0510)       (0.0552)        (0.0502)      (0.0514)
           MARKET BOOK                     0.0014           0.0018       0.0013        0.0016
                                           (0.0006)          (0.0007)    (0.0006)       (0.0006)
           ehat                                                         0.0091         0.0092
                                                                         (0.0016)       (0.0016)

           Observations                     2,518             2,125       2,518         2,125
           R2                               0.0613           0.0733       0.0701        0.0814




                                                       49
                        Table OA.3: Second-Stage Regression Results: Rebound Return

This table reports the findings of OLS and Matching Market Corrected versions of Equation (10) considering
the first-stage matching to be between issuing firms and underwriter deal type pairs for which the dependent
variable is the rebound return. Columns (1) and (3) present the findings for all Fully Marketed SEOs in the
sample and Columns (2) and (4) present the findings restricting the sample to only those Fully Marketed SEOs
in which the issuing firm issues a strictly positive number of new shares. REBOUND is the idiosyncratic
return (estimated using a market model) between the announcement day and the trading day prior to the offer
day. REPUTATION is defined as the underwriter's market share of the SEO market in the prior calendar
year. #LEAD is the number of lead managers reported by Dealogic. MARKET BOOK is the firm's market-
to-book ratio reported at the end of the fiscal year prior to the announcement year. SALE is the hyperbolic
sine of the firms's sales (divided by 1000) reported at the end of the fiscal year prior to the announcement
year. #SEO is the number of SEOs in the three months prior to the announcement date. ILIQ is Amihud's
measure of the illiquidity of the firm's equity. RISK is the average daily variance of return for the firm's equity
in the year prior to the announcement date. Standard errors are in parentheses,  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.


                                          (1)               (2)         (3)           (4)
                                                   OLS               Matching Market Corrected
                 Constant             -0.2778        -0.3060         -0.3605       -0.4058
                                       (0.1009)       (0.1157)        (0.0783)      (0.0812)

                 REPUTATION             -0.2646          -0.2957      -0.0752       -0.1079
                                        (0.1666)         (0.1975)     (0.1931)      (0.1885)

                 #LEAD                   0.0023           0.0011       0.0007       -0.0015
                                        (0.0107)         (0.0146)     (0.0050)      (0.0050)

                 SALE                    0.0072           0.0104       0.0057       0.0085
                                        (0.0063)         (0.0072)     (0.0042)      (0.0044)

                 #SEO                   0.0013           0.0013       0.0012        0.0011
                                        (0.0006)         (0.0007)     (0.0005)      (0.0005)

                 ILIQ                   -0.2011          -0.1546      -0.2196       -0.1793
                                        (0.2040)         (0.2256)     (0.1628)      (0.1606)

                 RISK                  1.0836            1.1209       1.0860        1.1187
                                        (0.3721)          (0.4164)    (0.5024)      (0.5224)

                 MARKET BOOK            -0.0001          -0.0005      -0.0009       -0.0014
                                        (0.0045)         (0.0051)     (0.0033)      (0.0033)

                 ehat                                                0.0503         0.0620
                                                                      (0.0105)      (0.0245)

                 Observations            2,249            1,921         2,249        1,921
                 R2                     0.0327            0.0358       0.0382        0.0427




                                                          50
                            Table OA.4: Second-Stage Regression Results: Discount

This table reports the findings of OLS and Matching Market Corrected versions of Equation (10) considering
the first-stage matching to be between issuing firms and underwriter deal type pairs for which the dependent
variable is the discount. Columns (1) and (3) present the findings for all SEOs in the sample and Columns (2)
and (4) present the findings restricting the sample to only those SEOs in which the issuing firm issues a strictly
positive number of new shares. DISCOUNT is the percent difference between the closing price the trading day
prior to the offer day and the offer price in the SEO. REPUTATION is defined as the underwriter's market
share of the SEO market in the prior calendar year. #LEAD is the number of lead managers reported by
Dealogic. MARKET BOOK is the firm's market-to-book ratio reported at the end of the fiscal year prior to
the announcement year. SALE is the hyperbolic sine of the firms's sales (divided by 1000) reported at the end
of the fiscal year prior to the announcement year. #SEO is the number of SEOs in the three months prior to
the announcement date. ILIQ is Amihud's measure of the illiquidity of the firm's equity. RISK is the average
daily variance of return for the firm's equity in the year prior to the announcement date. Standard errors are
in parentheses,  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.


                                               (1)               (2)         (3)           (4)
                                                        OLS               Matching Market Corrected
           Constant                         0.0560            0.0609      0.0697         0.0773
                                             (0.0125)          (0.0139)    (0.0112)       (0.0118)

           REPUTATION                       -0.0117           -0.0288      -0.0317      -0.0494
                                            (0.0518)          (0.0598)     (0.0236)      (0.0233)

           BOUGHT                            0.0046            0.0119      0.0065        0.0156
                                            (0.0277)          (0.0297)     (0.0033)       (0.0034)

           FULL                             -0.0015           -0.0010      -0.0027       -0.0024
                                            (0.0060)          (0.0067)     (0.0034)      (0.0034)

           REPUTATION X BOUGHT               0.0412           -0.0658       0.0439      -0.0921
                                            (0.3216)          (0.3989)     (0.0329)      (0.0321)

           REPUTATION X FULL                 0.0379            0.0554       0.0312       0.0491
                                            (0.0543)          (0.0627)     (0.0289)      (0.0287)

           #LEAD                            -0.0017           -0.0018     -0.0015       -0.0015
                                            (0.0010)          (0.0014)     (0.0006)      (0.0006)

           SALE                            -0.0036        -0.0037         -0.0034       -0.0035
                                            (0.0007)       (0.0007)        (0.0006)      (0.0006)

           #SEO                            -0.0002            -0.0002     -0.0002       -0.0002
                                            (0.0001)           (0.0001)    (0.0001)      (0.0001)

           ILIQ                             0.1692            0.1831      0.1705         0.1852
                                             (0.0229)          (0.0241)    (0.0263)       (0.0257)

           RISK                             0.3271            0.3415      0.3247         0.3397
                                             (0.0412)          (0.0439)    (0.0445)       (0.0440)

           MARKET BOOK                     -0.0021        -0.0022         -0.0020       -0.0021
                                            (0.0005)       (0.0005)        (0.0005)      (0.0005)

           ehat                                                           -0.0072       -0.0089
                                                                           (0.0013)      (0.0013)

           Observations                      2,518              2,125       2,518         2,125
           R2                                0.1748            0.1909       0.1822        0.2012

                                                         51
                          Table OA.5: Second-Stage Regression Results: Underpricing

This table reports the findings of OLS and Matching Market Corrected versions of Equation (10) considering
the first-stage matching to be between issuing firms and underwriter deal type pairs for which the dependent
variable is the underpricing. Columns (1) and (3) present the findings for all SEOs in the sample and Columns
(2) and (4) present the findings restricting the sample to only those SEOs in which the issuing firm issues a
strictly positive number of new shares. UNDERPRICE is the percent difference between the closing price on the
offer day and the offer price in the SEO. REPUTATION is defined as the underwriter's market share of the SEO
market in the prior calendar year. #LEAD is the number of lead managers reported by Dealogic. MARKET
BOOK is the firm's market-to-book ratio reported at the end of the fiscal year prior to the announcement
year. SALE is the hyperbolic sine of the firms's sales (divided by 1000) reported at the end of the fiscal year
prior to the announcement year. #SEO is the number of SEOs in the three months prior to the announcement
date. ILIQ is Amihud's measure of the illiquidity of the firm's equity. RISK is the average daily variance of
return for the firm's equity in the year prior to the announcement date. Standard errors are in parentheses,

 p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.


                                              (1)               (2)         (3)           (4)
                                                       OLS               Matching Market Corrected
           Constant                        0.0171            0.0216      0.0235         0.0287
                                            (0.0066)          (0.0074)    (0.0068)       (0.0067)

           REPUTATION                      -0.0234           -0.0289     -0.0304       -0.0363
                                           (0.0138)           (0.0147)    (0.0145)      (0.0149)

           BOUGHT                         -0.0151        -0.0109         -0.0121       -0.0068
                                           (0.0031)       (0.0037)        (0.0033)      (0.0033)

           FULL                            0.0038            0.0044       0.0043        0.0050
                                           (0.0019)          (0.0021)     (0.0023)      (0.0022)

           REPUTATION X BOUGHT              0.0129            0.0139       0.0108        0.0110
                                           (0.0310)          (0.0365)     (0.0306)      (0.0310)

           REPUTATION X FULL               -0.0137           -0.0173      -0.0202       -0.0227
                                           (0.0174)          (0.0191)     (0.0182)      (0.0181)

           #LEAD                          -0.0011            -0.0011     -0.0011       -0.0011
                                           (0.0004)           (0.0005)    (0.0004)      (0.0004)

           SALE                           -0.0010        -0.0010         -0.0010       -0.0009
                                           (0.0003)       (0.0003)        (0.0004)      (0.0004)

           #SEO                            0.000003           0.00001     0.00001        0.00002
                                           (0.00003)         (0.00004)   (0.00004)      (0.00003)

           ILIQ                            0.0458            0.0450       0.0442        0.0433
                                            (0.0123)          (0.0129)    (0.0180)      (0.0178)

           RISK                            0.2086            0.2127      0.2067         0.2106
                                            (0.0226)          (0.0240)    (0.0267)       (0.0271)

           MARKET BOOK                     -0.0001           0.00004     -0.00003        0.0001
                                           (0.0003)          (0.0003)    (0.0003)       (0.0003)

           ehat                                                          -0.0036       -0.0043
                                                                          (0.0009)      (0.0008)

           Observations                     3,746              3,211       3,746         3,211
           R2                               0.1599            0.1642       0.1649        0.1706

                                                        52
                              Table OA.6: Second-Stage Regression Results: Fees

This table reports the findings of OLS and Matching Market Corrected versions of Equation (10) considering
the first-stage matching to be between issuing firms and underwriters cross deal types for which the dependent
variable is a measure of the underwriter's fees in the SEO. All findings are derived from the subsample of SEOs
in which the issuing firm issues a strictly positive number of new shares. In Columns (1) and (3) the dependent
variable is the log of the dollar value of total fees in the SEO and in Columns (2) and (4) the dependent variable
is the ratio of total fees relative to the proceeds of the SEO FEES is the natural logarithm of the dollar value
(in millions of dollars) of the total fees paid to the underwriter in the SEO. %FEES is the value of the total
fees paid to the underwriter in the SEO normalized by the total proceeds. REPUTATION is defined as the
underwriter's market share of the SEO market in the prior calendar year. #LEAD is the number of lead
managers reported by Dealogic. MARKET BOOK is the firm's market-to-book ratio reported at the end of
the fiscal year prior to the announcement year. SALE is the hyperbolic sine of the firms's sales (divided by
1000) reported at the end of the fiscal year prior to the announcement year. #SEO is the number of SEOs in
the three months prior to the announcement date. ILIQ is Amihud's measure of the illiquidity of the firm's
equity. RISK is the average daily variance of return for the firm's equity in the year prior to the announcement
date. Standard errors are in parentheses,  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.


                                               (1)               (2)         (3)           (4)
                                                        OLS               Matching Market Corrected
           Constant                         -0.0968           5.8248      -1.5878        6.5703
                                            (0.1449)           (0.1718)    (0.1297)       (0.1297)

           REPUTATION                       3.6253            -0.4045     5.1724        -1.1780
                                             (0.2879)         (0.3413)     (0.3279)      (0.3279)

           BOUGHT                          -0.5971        -2.2776         -1.4620       -1.8452
                                            (0.0732)       (0.0868)        (0.1265)      (0.1265)

           FULL                             0.3534            0.3124      0.2177         0.3802
                                             (0.0409)          (0.0485)    (0.0554)       (0.0554)

           REPUTATION X BOUGHT             -2.4342        -3.8656          -1.8121      -4.1766
                                            (0.7141)       (0.8467)        (1.1131)      (1.1131)

           REPUTATION X FULL               -0.9715            -0.6019       0.1693      -1.1723
                                            (0.3726)          (0.4418)     (0.4021)      (0.4021)

           #LEAD                            0.1547        -0.0810         0.1458        -0.0765
                                             (0.0092)      (0.0109)        (0.0107)      (0.0107)

           SALE                             0.0875        -0.1840         0.0752        -0.1779
                                             (0.0068)      (0.0081)        (0.0087)      (0.0087)

           #SEO                             0.0034             0.0004     0.0026          0.0008
                                             (0.0007)         (0.0009)     (0.0009)      (0.0009)

           ILIQ                            -3.8547            2.1932      -3.4883        2.0100
                                            (0.2514)           (0.2980)    (0.3043)       (0.3043)

           RISK                            -2.2849            2.7875      -1.8523        2.5712
                                            (0.4688)           (0.5559)    (0.4853)       (0.4853)

           MARKET BOOK                      0.0361        -0.0327         0.0287        -0.0290
                                             (0.0054)      (0.0064)        (0.0070)      (0.0070)

           ehat                                                           0.8897        -0.4448
                                                                           (0.0199)      (0.0199)

           Observations                      3,211              3,211       3,211         3,211
           R2                                0.4996      53 0.6854          0.9366        0.7342
