                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE GENDER GAP IN SELF-PROMOTION

                                        Christine L. Exley
                                         Judd B. Kessler

                                       Working Paper 26345
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26345


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Christine L. Exley and Judd B. Kessler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Gender Gap in Self-Promotion
Christine L. Exley and Judd B. Kessler
NBER Working Paper No. 26345
October 2019, Revised June 2020
JEL No. C91,D90,J16

                                          ABSTRACT

In applications, interviews, performance reviews, and many other environments, individuals are
explicitly asked or implicitly invited to evaluate their own performance and ability. In a series of
experiments, involving over 4,000 participants, we find that women evaluate their performance
less favorably than equally performing men. This gender gap in self-evaluations is notably
persistent. It persists when we fully inform individuals about their absolute and relative
performance (closing any gender gap in performance beliefs) and when we eliminate financial
consequences of self-evaluations (removing incentives to distort self-evaluations). It is robust to
providing information about the average self-evaluations of others and to introducing a chance
that true performance will be revealed. However, there is no gap when men and women evaluate
others rather than themselves, suggesting the gender gap is specifically driven by evaluating
oneself. Given that self-evaluations of performance and ability can affect myriad economic
outcomes, this gender gap may contribute to persistent gender gaps in educational and labor
market environments.


Christine L. Exley
Harvard Business School
25 Baker Way
Baker Library 449
Boston, MA 02163
clexley@gmail.com

Judd B. Kessler
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
judd.kessler@wharton.upenn.edu
1       Introduction
    At various points in their educational and professional lives -- in college and professional school
applications, in job applications and interviews, in salary negotiations, in performance reviews, in
informal conversations at work -- individuals are asked to evaluate their performance and ability.
How individuals subjectively evaluate their own performance and ability, and how they respond
to explicit or implicit requests for self-evaluation, can directly impact their education and labor
market outcomes.1
    Consequently, one might be worried about the potential for a gender gap in self-evaluations. If
women communicate self-evaluations that are less favorable than equally performing men, a gender
gap in self-evaluations might contribute to observed gender gaps in education and labor market
outcomes (Goldin, 2014; Blau and Kahn, 2017). However, there is scant research on self-evaluations
and how they vary between equally performing men and women.
    In this paper, we examine behavior in a controlled setting that allows us to compare the self-
evaluations of equally performing men and women. Participants answer 20 questions from the
Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB). Participants then complete a self-evaluation
of their performance on the ASVAB test by answering several quantitative self-evaluation questions.
Mirroring questions that are typical of self-evaluations in practice, participants are asked to indicate
their agreement with statements such as "I performed well on the test" (on a scale from 0 to 100)
and are asked to select which adjective describes their performance on the test from a Likert scale
that ranges from "terrible" to "exceptional."
    There are three key features of our setting. First, since we observe performance on the ASVAB
test (i.e., the number of questions a participant answers correctly) and we elicit self-evaluations
about that specific performance, we can compare the self-evaluations of equally performing men
and women.2 Second, since answers to our self-evaluation questions are quantitative (i.e., elicited
on a Likert scale or on a scale from 0 to 100), we can examine the existence and magnitude of any
gender difference in self-evaluations and how it changes across treatments. Third, the answers to
our self-evaluation questions communicate perceptions for which there is no objective truth. There
is no correct level of agreement with the statement "I performed well" and no correct answer when
choosing how to describe one's performance from an ordered list of adjectives. This feature allows us
to explore how people convey subjective information about their ability and performance, which is
often how people communicate about themselves in practice. The lack of objective truth also helps
    1
      Even outside of formal self-evaluations (e.g., that are part of job applications or promotion reviews), communi-
cated self-evaluations can affect how an individual is viewed and can have important career implications. Consider
an academic. Self-evaluations can feed into, among other things, how one writes graduate school applications, how
one conveys his or her research ideas and technical skills, whether one gets the attention of desired advisors, how one
is perceived in seminars, and how much credit one receives for joint work. Communicated self-evaluations of one's
research can affect citations, prominence, as well as tenure and promotion decisions.
    2
      Such a comparison is infeasible in work that considers more general attitudes of self-esteem and confidence
-- since these attitudes are not tied to a specific performance that allows individuals to be classified as equally
performing -- although this work is of clear importance; see Kling et al. (1999) for a survey.


                                                          1
to distinguish our work on our self-evaluations from prior work on how people answer questions
about objective truths (e.g., beliefs about how many questions one answered correctly or about
whether one is in the top half of performers).3
    In our main study version, the Self-Promotion version, participants are aware that one of their
answers to a self-evaluation question will be reported to a potential employer who will use that
answer -- and only that answer -- to decide whether to hire them and how much to pay them.
Data from employers confirm that self-promotion pays: more favorable self-evaluations increase the
chance that participants are hired and the subsequent earnings they receive.4
    We find a large gender gap in self-evaluations. For example, when asked to indicate agreement
on a scale from 0 to 100 with a statement that reads "I performed well on the test," women report
evaluations that are 13 points lower than equally performing men. The average participant evaluates
their performance as a 53 out of 100, so this 13-point gender gap represents nearly 25% of the mean.
The gender gap is robust. It persists in all four self-evaluation questions we ask, it persists in all
of the environments that we explore to investigate the underlying causes of the gender gap, and it
persists in all of our attempts to close it.
    In considering how we might close the gender gap in self-evaluations observed in the Self-
Promotion version, we take advantage of the first design feature noted above: our self-evaluation
questions are about specific performance on the ASVAB test. If our study had instead asked sub-
jects to report beliefs about performance to a potential employer (e.g., beliefs about how many
questions they answered correctly or whether they were in the top half of performers) rather than
self-evaluations of that performance, and we observed a similar gender gap, there would be two
main mechanisms to consider. A woman might report worse performance beliefs than an equally
performing man because: (a) she believes she performed worse than the man (e.g., she believes
she answered fewer questions correctly than the man or believes she is less likely to be in the top
half of performers) and/or (b) she is relatively more averse to inflating her performance beliefs to
a potential employer. When considering the gender gap in self-evaluations, these are the first two
mechanisms that we consider. To test the role of the first mechanism, we design a treatment that
perfectly informs participants of their absolute and relative performance, correcting their beliefs. To
test the role of the second mechanism, we design a treatment that eliminates employers, removing
their incentives to distort reports.
    We examine the relevance of informing participants about their performance by asking par-
ticipants to provide self-evaluations about past performance after we provide them with perfect
information about their absolute and relative past performance (e.g., we tell them that they an-
swered 15 out of 20 questions correctly on the ASVAB and thus scored better than than 80%, and
worse than 12%, of prior participants). By telling equally performing men and women exactly how
   3
    The lack of objective truth relates to work on verifiable versus unverifiable signals of support as in Kessler (2017).
   4
    This study version and the title of the paper use the term "self-promotion" to emphasize that self-evaluations
are communicated to employers who will make judgements based on them.



                                                            2
well they performed in absolute and relative terms, we mechanically close any gender gap in beliefs
about absolute and relative performance.5
    By comparing the gender gap in self-evaluations when individuals do not know their performance
to the gender gap when individuals are informed, we can investigate whether the gender-gap in self-
evaluations is related to the gender gap in beliefs about performance. Consistent with the prior
literature on gender differences in beliefs about absolute and relative performance -- often referred to
as the literature on the gender gap in "confidence" (Lundeberg, Fox and Pun´    ccoha´r, 1994; Niederle
and Vesterlund, 2007, 2011; Coffman, 2014; Niederle, 2016; Apicella, Demiral and Mollerstrom,
2017; Bordalo et al., 2019; Born, Ranehill and Sandberg, 2018; Isaksson, 2018; Coffman, Collis and
Kulkarni, 2019a,b) -- perfect information about absolute and relative performance (directionally)
decreases the gender gap in self-evaluations, shrinking the gap by up to one-third. However, the
remaining gender gap in self-evaluations is both substantial and significant. Informing participants
of their absolute and relative past performance is not sufficient to eliminate the gender gap in
self-evaluations about that same past performance.
    We examine the relevance of eliminating incentives to distort reports by asking participants to
complete self-evaluations in a version of our study that eliminates employers. The Private version of
our study is nearly identical to the Self-Promotion version except that, in the Private version, there
are no employers that participants have an incentive to impress, self-evaluations remain private,
and payoffs do not depend on self-evaluations in any way.
    By comparing the gender gap in the Self-Promotion version to the gender gap in the Private
version, we investigate whether the gender gap in self-evaluations is due to a gender difference in
the willingness to distort reports due to strategic incentives. In addition, since self-evaluations do
not affect payoffs in the Private version, the comparison also allows us to investigate whether the
gender gap is due to a gender difference in preferences about payoff outcomes or in beliefs about
how self-evaluations map to payoff outcomes.
    Consistent with strategic incentives causing participants to inflate self-evaluations -- evidence
of participants responding to the incentives in our Self-Promotion version -- participants provide
less favorable self-evaluations in the Private version than in the Self-Promotion version. However,
the gender gap remains just as large in the Private version of our study, including when participants
are informed about their absolute and relative performance. That is, men and women both provide
higher self-evaluations when they have an incentive to do so, but the extent of this distortion is
similar for both genders. That the gender gap in self-evaluation persists in the Private version of our
study highlights that it is not driven by gender differences in willingness to distort self-evaluations
in response to strategic incentives or by gender differences in preferences over payoffs or beliefs
about how self-evaluations map to payoff outcomes.
   5
    Two of our self-evaluation questions are specifically only about past performance, and the other two questions
also relate to future, hypothetical performance. To assess the gender gap in self-evaluations when we close the gender
gap in beliefs about absolute and relative performance, we focus on the first two self-evaluation questions.



                                                          3
    We further consider how to close the gender gap in self-evaluations by investigating the robust-
ness of our results to four additional study versions. First, in the Self-Promotion (Risky) version,
we consider self-evaluations in an environment that is nearly identical to our Self-Promotion ver-
sion except that participants are told that their actual performance (i.e., how many questions they
answered correctly on the ASVAB) could be communicated to employers along with their self-
evaluations. The possibility of true performance being communicated -- which may make workers
feel more constrained to provide appropriate self-evaluations since there is some chance of "being
caught" if they inflate their self-evaluations too much -- neither increases nor decreases the gender
gap in self-evaluations. Second, in the Private (Social Norms) version, we consider self-evaluations
in an environment that is nearly identical to our Private version except that participants are pro-
vided with the average self-evaluation of others who have the same performance as they do. This
information -- which may decrease any potential gender differences in beliefs about typical or poten-
tially appropriate self-evaluations -- does not attenuate the gender gap in self-evaluations. Third,
in the Private (Immediately Informed) version, we consider self-evaluations in an environment that
is nearly identical to our Private version except that the potential for consistency motives (e.g.,
women anchoring to lower self-evaluations before they learn their performance) is reduced. The
gender gap in self-evaluations again persists.
    Only our final version closes the gender gap in evaluations. Inspired by prior work that docu-
ments how women are better advocates for others than themselves in negotiations (Bowles, Bab-
cock and McGinn, 2005), in the Private (Other-Evaluation) version, we consider evaluations in an
environment that is nearly identical to our Private (Immediately Informed) version, except that
participants are asked to evaluate the performances of other participants rather than themselves.
In this version, the gender gap in evaluations -- depending on the specific evaluation question --
is either entirely or nearly eliminated. This result highlights that the gender gap in self-evaluations
is about how men and women evaluate themselves. That is, it arises specifically from individuals
evaluating their own performance and is not about men and women having different "standards"
in general or different mappings from performance to performance evaluations. While men and
women may agree about how favorably one should evaluate another subject answering 12 out of
20 questions correctly, a gender difference emerges when men and women self-evaluate their own
performance of 12 out of 20.
    To summarize, this paper explores self-evaluations and documents a robust gender gap in self-
evaluations among equally performing men and women. When considering all our self-evaluation
questions in all our versions where participants evaluate their own performance, we find a substantial
and statistically significant gender gap in self-evaluations 56 out of 56 times. This 56/56 includes the
many settings in which we both provide information, closing the gender gap in beliefs about absolute
and relative performance, and eliminate employers, removing incentives to distort self-evaluations.
    In light of the ample academic literature and policy initiatives devoted to closing gender gaps in
economic outcomes, the persistence of the gender gap in self-evaluations is informative. It highlights


                                                   4
the limitations of "change the women" approaches to closing gender gaps that depend on how in-
dividuals view or convey their performance.6 Neither providing perfect information about absolute
and relative performance nor providing information about how others answer self-evaluation ques-
tions eliminated the gender gap in self-evaluations. These findings suggest a potential limitation
of strategies aiming to shrink gender gaps by providing information or changing beliefs. Consis-
tent with work on culture (Gneezy, Leonard and List, 2009), the drivers of self-evaluations appear
"deeply ingrained," resulting in persistent gender differences in evaluations of own performance
despite little-to-no gender differences in evaluations of others' performance. Indeed, the similar-
ity of the gender gap in the Self-Promotion and Private versions shows that the gender gap in
self-promotion has little to do with the promotion aspect and instead is reflective of an underlying
gender gap in self-evaluations. Other gender gaps observed in the literature -- such as gaps in ne-
gotiation and group decision-making -- may also relate to the gender gap in self-evaluations, since
how one negotiates and whether or how one speaks up may convey self-evaluations. An alternative
"change the system" approach may prove more promising. If the goal is to treat equally performing
men and women equally, identifying that self-evaluations may have a built-in gender bias suggests
that such self-evaluations should be deemphasized relative to more objective metrics in determining
hiring and promotion decisions. We return to this discussion in the conclusion.

2       Design and Data
    There are six primary versions of our study: the Self-Promotion version, the Private version,
the Self-Promotion (Risky) version, the Private (Social Norms) version, the Private (Informed
Immediately) version, and the Private (Other-Evaluation) version. Each version is detailed in one
of the subsections 2.1­2.6. In all versions, participants first complete a 20-question ASVAB test
that measures cognitive ability. Participants then complete self-evaluations of their performance on
that test in the first five versions and complete evaluations of others' performances on that test in
the Private (Other-Evaluation) version.
    To examine the role of beliefs about absolute and relative performance, participants provide
both "uninformed" and "informed" self-evaluations. Uninformed self-evaluations occur before par-
ticipants are provided with information about their test performance. Informed self-evaluations
occur after participants are informed of their absolute performance (i.e., number of questions they
answered correctly on the test) and their relative performance (i.e., the percentile of their perfor-
mance compared to other participants). In the Private (Informed Immediately) version, participants
learn their absolute and relative performance immediately after taking the test and so only provide
informed self-evaluations. In the Private (Other-Evaluation) version, participants are told about
another subject's absolute and relative performance immediately after taking the test and only
provide informed evaluations of that other subject's performance.
    6
    For an example of how a "change the women" approach can backfire -- in particular, by requiring women to
lean-in and negotiate more often -- see Exley, Niederle and Vesterlund (2020).



                                                     5
    To allow for an examination of the role of incentives to distort reports and, more generally,
the role of beliefs and preferences over payoff outcomes, the Self-Promotion version elicits self-
evaluations in an environment in which employers make hiring decisions based on self-evaluations
while the Private version elicits self-evaluations in a setting absent employers.
    To examine the robustness of our results, we examine self-evaluations in three additional study
versions. To potentially constrain participants to provide self-evaluations that are likely to be viewed
as appropriate by employers, participants in the Self-Promotion (Risky) version learn that there is
some chance that employers will learn both their self-evaluations and their absolute performance on
the test. To reduce the ambiguity about the typical and potentially appropriate self-evaluations as-
sociated with a given performance, participants in the Private (Social Norms) version are informed
of the average self-evaluation provided by previous participants who had the same test performance
as they did. To mitigate consistency motives or anchoring effects that may arise from providing
uninformed than informed self-evaluations, participants in the Private (Immediately Informed) ver-
sion are immediately informed of their absolute and relative performance and then provide informed
self-evaluations only (i.e., uninformed self-evaluations are not elicited).
    To examine whether gender differences arise in evaluations of performance more broadly (e.g.,
due to a gender difference in "standards" or in mappings from performance levels to performance
evaluations), the Private (Other-Evaluation) version asks participants to provide other-evaluations
instead of self-evaluations.
    A total of 3,293 participants on Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) participated in one of these
six versions of our study. Each participant was guaranteed a $2 completion fee for the 20-minute
study. In addition, one part of each study was randomly selected to determine a possible bonus
payment for each participant. After participants completed all parts of the study, they took a
short follow-up survey that collected demographic information, including gender.7 , 8 Data collection
occurred across four waves.9
    Why did we collect data over four waves? We had four waves of data collection due to the persis-
tence of the gender gap in self-evaluations across study versions and a desire to test the boundaries
of this gap. In the first wave, we randomly assigned workers to either the Self-Promotion version,
the Private version, or the Self-Promotion (Risky) version. Results from this wave allow us to iden-
   7
     Gender was not mentioned prior to this question, so participants were not primed to think about their own
gender when answering the self evaluation questions.
   8
     To be eligible for any study version, participants must have previously completed at least 100 tasks on MTurk
with a 95% or better approval rating from prior MTurk employers, and workers must be working from an United
States IP address. Across all participants in all study versions that provide self-evaluations, the median age is 33
years old, the median educational attainment is a Bachelor's Degree, and the percentage of male participants is 59%.
While participants were required to correctly answer understanding questions at various points to proceed in the
study, no participants were excluded from our data analysis.
   9
     Data collection occurred in October 2018 for the first wave, November 2019 for the second wave, and April 2020
for the third and fourth waves. In the first three waves, we aimed to recruit 300 participants per study version. In
the fourth wave, to be able to precisely identify a "null" effect in the Private (Other-Evaluation) version, we aimed
to recruit 600 participants per study version. Realized sample size for each study version appear in Table 1.



                                                         6
tify the gender gap in self-evaluations and to test the two initial approaches to closing it proposed
in our Introduction: perfectly informing participants of their absolute and relative performance
prior to eliciting self-evaluations and removing incentives to distort self-evaluations. In subsequent
waves, we ran new versions that were built off of the Private version, while always replicating one
of our prior versions. Our focus on the Private version rather than the Self-Promotion version in
these subsequent waves reflects our desire to limit the potential drivers of gender differences in self-
evaluations (i.e., the gender gap could be driven by strategic incentives or preferences and beliefs
over payoff outcomes in the Self-Promotion version but not in the Private version). In particular,
participants are randomly assigned to either the Private version or the Private (Social Norms)
version in the second wave, the Private version or the Private (Immediately Informed) version in
the third wave, and the Private (Immediately Informed) version or the Private (Other-Evaluation)
version in the fourth wave. The timing of these versions, and the number of participants run in each
wave, is summarized in Table 1. As will be discussed in what follows, this data collection allows
us to demonstrate the robustness of our results. We find a statistically significant gender gap in
self-evaluations in 56 out of 56 of specifications, where a specification is defined by: self-evaluation
question, whether participants are informed, study version, and wave. The results of each of these
specifications are shown in Tables 7 and 8. We only eliminate the gender gap by having participants
evaluate others rather than themselves. The gender gap is small or non-existent when evaluations
are about others in the Private (Other-Evaluation) version.

                                      Table 1: Study Versions by Wave

                                               Self-         Private           Private               Private
                 Self-                      Promotion        (Social        (Immediately            (Other-
              Promotion        Private       (Risky)         Norms)           Informed)            Evaluation)
 Wave 1          New            New            New
               (n=302)        (n=304)        (n=294)
 Wave 2                      Replication                       New
                              (n=302)                        (n=298)
 Wave 3                      Replication                                         New
                              (n=300)                                          (n=299)
 Wave 4                                                                      Replication               New
                                                                              (n=597)                (n=597)

   Finally, an additional 300 participants were recruited to complete a version of our study as
"employers," who are relevant for the Self-Promotion and Self-Promotion (Risky) versions of our
study. Section 2.7 describes and presents results from this study version.10
  10
    In addition, we use data from 100 participants from a prior study who completed the same ASVAB test described
below, in order to provide information to study participants on their relative performance. We also analyze data from
399 MTurk workers who evaluated free-response comments generated by participants (as described below). Including
these 499 participants and the 300 employers, this paper involves a total of 4,092 study participants.

                                                         7
2.1     The Self-Promotion Version
    The Self-Promotion version of our study proceeds in four parts, described in sequence below,
followed by a demographic survey. See Appendix B.1 for more details.
Part 1: Performance and Performance Beliefs
    In the first part of the study, participants are asked to take a test comprising of 20 multiple
choice questions from the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB). They have up
to 30 seconds to answer each question, and there are four questions each from the following five
categories: General Science, Arithmetic Reasoning, Math Knowledge, Mechanical Comprehension,
and Assembling Objects. Participants are informed that "In addition to being used by the military
to determine which jobs armed service members are qualified for, performance on the ASVAB is
often used as a measure of cognitive ability by academic researchers." If the first part is randomly
selected for payment, a participant's bonus payment is equal to 5 cents times the number of ASVB
questions answered correctly.
    As a measure of beliefs about their performance, after participants complete the 20 ASVAB
questions, and before they continue to part 2, participants are asked: "Out of the 20 questions
on the test you took in part 1, how many questions do you think you answered correctly?" This
question is not incentivized, and participants can select any number from 0 to 20.11
Part 2: Uninformed Performance Evaluations
   In the second part of the study, participants are asked five questions about their performance
on the ASVAB. Participants are told that if the second part is randomly selected for payment,
one of the responses to one of the questions will be shared with another MTurk participant called
their "employer." The employer will see the response to the randomly selected question -- and only
that response to that question (i.e., not any of the other responses or any information about actual
performance) -- and will determine whether to hire them and how much to pay them if hired.
   If an employer chooses not to hire a participant, the participant will earn a bonus of 25 cents,
and the employer will earn a bonus of 100 cents. If an employer chooses to hire a participant, the
employer will choose a wage between 25 and 100 cents, which will be the bonus for the participant.
The employer's bonus payment will then equal: 100 cents minus the wage paid to the participant
plus 5 cents times the number of questions the participant answered correctly on the ASVAB test.12
   To encourage participants to reflect on their performance, the first question is a free-response
question that states: "Please describe how well you think you performed on the test that you took
  11
     One could have imagined providing monetary incentives for answering this question correctly. However, in many
cases in practice -- particularly when individuals are asked to make self-evaluations -- they are likely to form
such beliefs about performance in the absence of such monetary incentives. In addition, we avoid concerns about
the accuracy of belief elicitation because we do not use these beliefs as controls. As discussed below, we control
for beliefs about absolute and relative performance by design, rather than statistically, which avoids any potential
concerns about noise in belief elicitation.
  12
     Note that employer earnings are based on the number of correct answers that the participant completed in part
1. This means that participants do not have to answer additional questions and the decision environment avoids any
potential uncertainty that might arise about future performance.

                                                         8
in part 1 and why." The remaining four questions elicit quantitative self-evaluations that we analyze
for the remainder of the paper.13
    The first two self-evaluation questions focus solely on participants' past performance on the test.
We first elicit a discrete self-evaluation, which we refer to as the performance-bucket evaluation.
Participants are asked to indicate how well they think they performed by selecting from one of the
following six answers: terrible, very poor, neutral, good, very good, and exceptional. We then elicit
a more continuous self-evaluation, which we refer to as the performance evaluation. Participants
are asked to indicate the extent to which they agree, on a scale from 0 (entirely disagree) to 100
(entirely agree), with the following statement: "I performed well on the test I took in part 1."
    The latter two self-evaluation questions relate to participants' past performance but also allow
participants to hold preferences and beliefs about a related, hypothetical job. Using the same 0 to
100 scale described above, participants are asked to indicate the extent to which they agree with
the following statements: "I would apply for a job that required me to perform well on the test I
took in part 1" and "I would succeed in a job that required me to perform well on the test I took
in part 1." We refer to these self-evaluations as the willingness-to-apply evaluation and the success
evaluation, respectively.
    Broadly, we use the first two self-evaluations as measures that allow us to cleanly consider
underlying mechanisms, and the latter two self-evaluations as measures that speak to the robustness
of our results. All of our results are robust to all four self-evaluation questions.
Part 3: Informed Performance Evaluations
    In the third part of the study, participants are asked precisely the same five questions about
their performance on the ASVAB, and participants are told that if part 3 is randomly selected for
payment, one of the answers to one of the questions will be shared with their employer.
    However, to examine the role of beliefs about absolute and relative performance, before answer-
ing these self-evaluation questions, participants learn precise information about their absolute and
relative performance on the ASVAB test. In particular, participants are told exactly how many of
the 20 questions they answered correctly (i.e., their absolute performance) and they are compared
to 100 other participants who amswered the same ASVAB questions as part of a prior study and
told how many of those participants answered more questions correctly and how many answered
fewer questions correctly (i.e., their relative performance). As an attention check, participants must
correctly report how many of the 20 ASVAB questions they answered correctly before proceeding
to answer the self-evaluation questions in part 3.
Part 4: Deservingness Question
    In the fourth part of the study, participants are asked one question that measures deservingness
for earnings from our experiment: "Out of a maximum amount of 100 cents, what amount of bonus
  13
    The free-response question can also theoretically be interpreted as a self-evaluation. Analyzing this free-response
data is fraught, however, as the text is hard to evaluate and can convey information such as gender and competence
that makes measuring self-evaluation per se difficult. Nevertheless, we attempt to learn what we can from this data
by having 399 MTurk participants evaluate the responses, and we summarize those findings in Appendix A.2.

                                                          9
payment, in cents, do you think you deserve for your performance on the test you took in part 1?" If
this part is randomly selected as the part-that-counts, their bonus payment equals whatever amount
they indicate from 0 to 100 cents. This question allows us to consider the potential gender difference
in deservingness (i.e., how much participants believe they deserve to earn from the study) or in the
desire to earn money from the experiment. Since this measure occurs after self-evaluations are
provided, and may theoretically be influenced by self-evaluations, it is not an appropriate "control"
variable in regressions with self-evaluations as the dependent variable. Rather, we consider it as an
alternative dependent variable and discuss it in Section 3.3.

2.2     The Private Version
    The Private version proceeds exactly as the Self-Promotion version, except that participants
provide their part 2 and part 3 self-evaluations in a non-strategic, non-incentivized setting. In
particular, there is no mention of any "employer," and participants are told that if part 2 or part
3 is randomly selected as the part-that-counts, their bonus payment will equal 25 cents regardless
of how they answer the self-evaluation questions. See Appendix B.2 for more details.
    Given the lack of employers, the Private version eliminates the relevance of strategic incentives
to provide more favorable self-evaluations in order to achieve higher study earnings. The lack of
employers more generally eliminates the relevance of participants' beliefs and preferences over payoff
for themselves and for the employers.

2.3     The Self-Promotion (Risky) Version
    The Self-Promotion (Risky) version proceeds exactly as the Self-Promotion version, except that
participants are told that there is some chance that their employers will learn their actual perfor-
mance (i.e., be informed of how many questions they answered correctly on the ASVAB test) along
with their self-evaluation.14 See Appendix B.3 for more details.
    If participants expect that employers may learn their actual performance, the Self-Promotion
(Risky) version may cause workers to feel constrained to provide self-evaluations that are more
likely to be viewed as appropriate by their employers because of a desire to avoid "being caught" as
having inflated their self-evaluations. More generally, the Self-Promotion (Risky) version helps us
to relate to labor market settings where applicants or employees are aware that signals about true
performance may be available to employers.

2.4     The Private (Social Norms) Version
    The Private (Social Norms) version proceeds exactly as the Private version, except that par-
ticipants are provided with additional information when providing their informed self-evaluations.
In particular, each of the four evaluation questions now includes a message that reads: "Also note
that, among participants in a prior study who scored the same as you on the test, the average
answer to this question was: [insert relevant average answer]." See Appendix B.4 for more details.
  14
   This chance is ambiguous in the experimental instructions. In practice, there was a 1% chance that employers
would be informed of this additional information, which resulted in them not being informed.

                                                      10
   This additional information in the Private (Social Norms) version may mitigate gender differ-
ences in beliefs about what self-evaluations are typical or viewed as appropriate by others. More
generally, the Private (Social Norms) version helps to relate our results to labor market settings in
which workers observe peer self-evaluation behavior.

2.5    The Private (Immediately Informed) Version
    The Private (Immediately Informed) version proceeds exactly as the Private version, except that
participants are immediately informed of their absolute and relative performance and then make
informed self-evaluations. Thus, this study version does not elicit uninformed self-evaluations --
skipping part 2 entirely -- and only involves three parts. See Appendix B.5 for more details.
    By only eliciting informed self-evaluations, the Private (Immediately Informed) version elimi-
nates the potential role of consistency motives or anchoring effects that arise from the elicitation of
uninformed self-evaluations before informed self-evaluations.

2.6    The Private (Other-Evaluation) Version
    The Private (Other-Evaluation) version asks workers to provide evaluations about others rather
than themselves. More specifically, the Private (Other-Evaluation) version proceeds exactly as the
Private (Immediately Informed) version, except that participants are informed of the absolute and
relative performance of another MTurk worker and asked to provide evaluations for that other
MTurk worker. Unbeknownst to participants, this other MTurk worker is selected to have exactly
the same performance on the test in the first part of the study as the participant. That is, a
participant who answers X out of 20 questions correctly in part 1 is asked to provide informed
evaluations for another participant who also answered X out of 20 questions correctly without
being told that X out of 20 is also their score. See Appendix B.6 for more details.
    The Private (Other-Evaluation) version helps identify whether there is a gender difference in
standards or in evaluations of performance generally or whether a gender difference in evaluations
is specific to own performance.

2.7    The Employer Version
    We recruited 300 workers on MTurk to complete the Employer version of our study using the
same criteria as in the main study versions (see footnote 8). Each employer received a guaranteed
$1.50 completion fee for the 15-minute study. In addition, two of their decisions (out of 21 decisions
in the study), are selected to determine a possible bonus payment for them and for associated
"workers," participants in the Self-Promotion and Self-Promotion (Risky) study versions.
    For each decision, employers are informed that they must decide whether to hire a worker, and,
if so, how much to pay that worker. If an employer chooses not to hire a worker, the employer earns
a bonus of 100 cents and the worker earns a bonus of 25 cents. If an employer chooses to hire a
worker, the employer must also choose a wage between 25 and 100 cents. The worker will receive
that wage, and that employer's bonus payment will equal 100 cents minus the wage paid to the
worker plus 5 cents times the number of questions the worker answered correctly on the ASVAB

                                                  11
test. The only information employers receive about a worker before hiring them is how the worker
answered one of the four self-evaluation questions.
    Employers make hiring and wage decisions via the strategy method. That is, their decisions
involve each of the six possible answers selected from the performance-bucket evaluation question
and five randomly selected answers (i.e., numbers from 0 to 100) from each of the three other
evaluation questions.15 Each employer's two decisions that are selected to determine bonus payments
result in payments for themselves and for the two workers who provided the corresponding self-
evaluations in those decisions. See Appendix B.7 for more details.
    As expected, self-promotion pays. Employers respond to more positive self-evaluations by being
more likely to hire workers and by paying them more. Table 2 shows how self-evaluations impact
wages. In all specifications, the coefficient on Evaluation is positive and significant. Columns (1),
(3), and (4) show that the wage given to workers increases by an average of 0.21 or 0.22 cents
more for every point participants add to their evaluation on the 100-point scale in response to
the performance evaluation question, the willingness-to-apply evaluation question, and the success
evaluation question. Column (2) shows that the wage given to workers increases by 4.26 cents for
each increase on the six-point Likert scale in the performance-bucket evaluation question. These
results highlight that participants have an incentive to inflate their self-evaluations to increase their
expected study earnings.

                                 Table 2: Employer Version, Wage Regressions

 Evaluation:            Performance         Performance-Bucket           Willingness-to-Apply            Success
 Evaluation                 0.21                    4.26                          0.22                    0.21
                            (0.02)                  (0.27)                        (0.02)                  (0.02)
 Constant                  22.70                   18.95                         21.94                   22.76
                            (0.75)                  (0.70)                        (0.61)                  (0.78)
 N                           1490                    1788                          1490                    1490
       
         p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. SEs are clustered by employer. Results are from OLS regressions of the
       wage received by the participant (25 cents if not hired and a chosen wage from 25­100 cents if hired). Evaluation
       is the self-evaluation provided by a participant in the evaluation question noted in that column. Performance
       indicates the extent of a participant's agreement (from 0­100) with the following statement: "I performed well
       on the test I took in part 1." Performance-Bucket indicates which Likert-scale response (coded from 1 for the
       lowest to 6 for the highest) a participant selects when asked to "indicate how well you think you performed on
       the test in part 1." Willingness-to-Apply indicates the extent of a participant's agreement (from 0­100) with
       the following statement: "I would apply for a job that required me to perform well on the test I took in part
       1." Success indicates the extent of a participant's agreement (from 0­100) with the following statement: "I
       would succeed in a job that required me to perform well on the test I took in part 1." Data are from the hiring
       decisions in the Employer version.


  15
    As noted above, the three other evaluation questions ask participants to state their agreement with the following
statements: "I performed well on the test I took in part 1," "I would apply for a job that required me to perform
well on the test I took in part 1," and "I would succeed in a job that required me to perform well on the test I took
in part 1." Employers face all hiring decisions related to one question before moving on to the next question, but the
order in which they face answers to each question is randomized.



                                                            12
3     Results
    In this section, we report on our experimental results. Section 3.1 confirms that our study
environment captures many of the features of a "male-typed" setting. Despite women slightly
outperforming men on the ASVAB test, we observe a large gender gap in beliefs about performance:
women report that they answered fewer questions correctly on the test than equally performing
men. Note that we chose to conduct our study in a male-typed setting, involving an analytical task,
because the gender gaps in pay and in occupational and industry representation that motivate our
study typically arise in male-typed settings.16
    Section 3.2 details our main results from the Self-Promotion and Private versions. We document
a substantial and significant gender gap in uninformed self-evaluations in the Self-Promotion version.
We then show that eliminating the gender gap in beliefs about absolute and relative performance
generates a slightly smaller, but still substantial and statistically significant, gender gap in informed
self-evaluations. We further show that the gap is not driven by strategic incentives or beliefs
or preferences over payoff outcomes. We find that eliminating employers in the Private version
results in lower self-evaluations for both men and women, but the gender gap remains substantial
and statistically significant when considering both uninformed and informed self-evaluations in the
Private version.
    Section 3.3 documents the robustness of our results. We find that the gender gap in self-
evaluations persists in three additional study versions -- the Self-Promotion (Risky) version, the
Private (Social Norms) version, and the Private (Immediately Informed) version -- as well as in
replications of the Private version. We also show the impact of restricting our sample and allowing
for heterogeneous treatment effects.
    Section 3.4 discusses results from the Private (Other-Evaluation) version, which asks about
other -- rather than own -- performance. This is the one study version in which the gender gap in
evaluations is either eliminated or substantially reduced.

3.1     Our Study Environment
    All of the participants in our study who provide self-evaluations or other-evaluations start by
taking the ASVAB test and reporting their beliefs about how many questions they answered cor-
rectly. In this section, we report on how they perform and the beliefs that they report.17
    As is common in the gender literature focusing on "male-typed" environments -- the type of
  16
     Bordalo et al. (2019) defines "male-typed" and "female-typed" settings. The paper considers: Arts and Liter-
ature, Business, Cars, Cooking, Disney Movies, Emotion Recognition, Kardashians, Mathematics, Rock and Roll,
Sports and Games, Verbal Skills, and Videogames. Men believe they perform better than women in all settings
except Disney Movies and Kardashians, the only two settings defined as "clearly female-typed" (see Bordalo et al.
(2019), Figure 1). For more literature on gender stereotypes, see also Coffman (2014); Coffman, Collis and Kulkarni
(2019b); Coffman, Flikkema and Shurchkov (2019). In societies with different gender norms, such as in matriarchal
societies, one may expect gender gaps to reverse, as shown in Gneezy, Leonard and List (2009).
  17
     The results reported in this section pool across all study versions, because participants answer the 20 ASVAB
questions and report their beliefs about performance before receiving any information that is specific to their study
version. However, the gender gap in beliefs about performance persists for each individual study version.


                                                         13
environments in which we observe pay and representation differences in the labor market -- we find
a large gender gap in beliefs about performance.
    Panel A of Figure 1 shows CDFs of the number of ASVAB questions answered correctly by men
and women. On average, women answer 9.79 questions correctly and men answer 9.13 questions
correctly. The mean difference is statistically significant (p < 0.01) and the distributions are
statistically significantly different (a Kolmogorov­Smirnov test yields p < 0.01).
    Despite women performing better than men on the test, Panels B and C of Figure 1 show that
women believe they performed worse than men. Panel B shows raw beliefs about performance. On
average, men believe they answered 11.03 questions correctly while women believe they answered
only 8.81 questions correctly. The mean difference is statistically significant (p < 0.01), and the
distributions are statistically significantly different (a Kolmogorov­Smirnov test yields p < 0.01).
Panel C shows the difference between actual performance and beliefs about performance. Again,
the mean difference is statistically significant (p < 0.01), and the distributions are statistically
significantly different (a Kolmogorov­Smirnov test yields p < 0.01). Looking at where the CDFs
cross 0, we see that the gender gap in beliefs about performance is driven both by more women
than men underestimating their actual performance and more men than women overestimating
their actual performance.
                                Figure 1: Performance (Actual vs. Believed) Distributions
                                                             (b) Performance
                (a) Performance                                                                                   (c) The Difference
                                                                  Beliefs
       1




                                                                                                       1
                                                    1
       .8




                                                                                                       .8
                                                    .8
       .6




                                                                                                       .6
                                                    .6
 CDF




                                                                                                 CDF
                                              CDF
       .4




                                                                                                       .4
                                                    .4
       .2




                                                                                                       .2
                                                    .2
       0




                                                                                                       0
                                                    0




            0     5        10       15   20                                                                 -15   -10   -5     0     5     10    15
                      Performance                        0      5          10        15     20               Absolute Performance Beliefs - Performance
                                                             Absolute Performance Beliefs




These graphs show CDFs for the noted outcome. Performance is the number of questions a participant correctly
answered out of the 20 ASVAB questions. Performance Beliefs is the number of questions a participant believes
he or she correctly answered. The Difference equals Performance Beliefs ­ Performance. Data are from all study
versions (n = 3293).


   Table 3 presents the corresponding regression results. Column 1 shows that women outperform
men on the ASVAB test (the coefficient on Female is positive and statistically significant), and the
remaining columns confirm the statistically significant gender gaps in beliefs about performance,

                                                                      14
including when considering the raw data only (Column 2), when controlling for performance with
dummies for each possible score (Column 3), and when the outcome variable directly captures the
difference between actual performance and beliefs about performance (Column 4). In the latter
three columns, the coefficient on Female is negative, large, and statistically significant.

                       Table 3: Performance (Actual vs. Believed) Regressions

         DV:                           Performance         Performance Beliefs      The Difference
                                            (1)              (2)        (3)              (4)
         Female                           0.66             -2.22      -2.15             -2.88
                                          (0.14)            (0.15)     (0.15)            (0.18)
         Constant                         9.13             11.03                         1.90
                                          (0.09)            (0.09)                       (0.12)
         N                                 3293              3293       3293              3293
         Performance FEs                    No                No        Yes                No
            
              p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. SEs are robust. Results are from OLS regressions of the
            noted dependent variable (DV). Performance equals the number of questions a participant
            correctly answered out of the 20 ASVAB questions. Performance Beliefs equals the num-
            ber of questions a participant believes he or she correctly answered. The Difference equals
            Performance Beliefs ­ Performance. Female is an indicator for the participant being female.
            Performance FEs are dummies for each possible performance (0­20) on the ASVAB test. Data
            are from all study versions.


3.2     Main Results
3.2.1   Is there a gender gap in self-evaluations?
    To assess whether there is a gender gap in self-evaluations, we turn first to the Self-Promotion
version in which participants are told that one of their self-evaluations will be shared with a potential
employer, and that this is all the employer will know when making a hiring and wage decision. Figure
2 shows raw responses to the four self-evaluation questions in part 2 of the Self-Promotion version.
As described in Section 2, we refer to these as the uninformed self-evaluations because they occur
before participants learn their absolute and relative performance.
    All four panels show large gender gaps in uninformed self-evaluations. Women evaluate their
performance less favorably than men. Panel A shows results from the question that asks participants
to respond to the statement "I performed well on the test I took in part 1" on a scale from 0 (entirely
disagree) to 100 (entirely agree). Women provide statistically significantly lower evaluations (p <
0.01 for the t-test and the Kolmogorov­Smirnov test). We obtain similar results in Panel B for
the six-point Likert scale question: "Please indicate how well you think you performed on the test
you took in part 1" (p < 0.01 for the t-test and the Kolmogorov­Smirnov test). Panels C and
D show results from the self-evaluation questions that allow participants to hold preferences and
beliefs about a related, hypothetical job. Participants respond to the statements "I would apply
for a job that required me to perform well on the test I took in part 1" (Panel C) and "I would
succeed in a job that required me to perform well on the test I took in part 1" (Panel D) on a scale

                                                      15
from 0 (entirely disagree) to 100 (entirely agree). We again see statistically significant differences
in self-evaluations (p < 0.01 for both t-tests and both Kolmogorov­Smirnov tests).

                       Figure 2: Uninformed Self-Evaluations in the Self-Promotion Version
                 (a) Performance Evaluations                        (b) Performance-Bucket Evaluations
        1




                                                                   1
        .8




                                                                   .8
        .6




                                                                   .6
  CDF




                                                             CDF
        .4




                                                                   .4
        .2




                                                                   .2
        0




                                                                   0




             0       20       40      60       80      100              1      2        3       4        5          6
                  Uninformed Performance Evaluations                    Uninformed Performance-Bucket Evaluations

         (c) Willingness-to-Apply Evaluations                               (d) Success Evaluations
        1




                                                                   1
        .8




                                                                   .8
        .6




                                                                   .6
  CDF




                                                             CDF
        .4




                                                                   .4
        .2




                                                                   .2
        0




                                                                   0




             0       20       40      60       80      100              0      20      40       60      80      100
             Uninformed Willingness to Apply Evaluations                     Uninformed Success Evaluations




    Table 4 confirms the statistical significance of these gender gaps when controlling for performance
with fixed effects for each possible test score 0 to 20. The coefficient on Female remains negative,
large, and statistically significant for all four self-evaluation questions. The performance fixed
effects allow us to compare the self-evaluations of equally performing men and women. As detailed

                                                               16
in Section 3.3, the regression results remain similar and statistically significant without performance
fixed effects as well as when considering an Ordered Probit for the performance-bucket evaluations.

                Table 4: Uninformed Self-Evaluations in the Self-Promotion Version

  Evaluation:                        Performance        Performance-        Willingness-          Success
                                                           Bucket            to-Apply
                                           (1)               (2)                 (3)                (4)
  Female                               -12.68               -0.59             -15.31             -15.09
                                         (2.96)              (0.13)             (3.46)            (3.46)
  N                                       302                 302                302               302
  Performance FEs                         Yes                 Yes                Yes               Yes
  Average                                53.43               3.46               50.13              56.43
  SD                                     27.36               1.27               31.88              31.97
  Effect Size/SD                         0.46                0.46                0.48               0.47
  Effect Size as % of Average            24%                 17%                31%                27%
     
       p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. SEs are robust. Results are from OLS regressions of the responses
     provided to the evaluation question noted in each column and as defined in the notes of Table 2. Female is
     an indicator for the participant being female. Performance FEs are dummies for each possible performance
     (0­20) on the ASVAB test. Data are from uninformed self-evaluation questions in the Self-Promotion version.


3.2.2   Is the gap driven by beliefs about absolute and relative performance?
    In Section 3.1, we document a gender gap in beliefs about absolute performance. To consider
the role of beliefs about absolute performance, we could consider controlling for reported beliefs in
our regressions. One limitation of this approach relates to measurement error. Another limitation
is that beliefs about relative performance -- not just absolute performance -- could be relevant.
    We overcome these limitations by focusing on a subset of self-evaluations for which we can
correct beliefs about absolute and relative performance by design. First, we restrict our attention to
the performance evaluation and performance-bucket evaluation questions since they only ask about
past performance on the ASVAB test. The performance evaluation question only relates to this past
performance because it asks participants to indicate their agreement on a scale from 0 to 100 with
the following statement: "I performed well on the test I took in part 1." The performance-bucket
evaluation question only relates to this past performance because it asks participants to choose a
Likert-scale response that indicates "how well you think you performed on the test in part 1."
    Second, we restrict our attention to the informed self-evaluations that are provided to these two
questions in part 3 of our study. The informed self-evaluations are provided after participants are
informed of their absolute performance (i.e., the number of questions they answered correctly on
the ASVAB test) and their relative performance (i.e., the percent of participants who answered
more questions correctly than them and the percent of participants who answered fewer questions
correctly than them on the ASVAB test). Since we compare equally performing men and women who
have both learned their (identical) score and their (identical) place in the performance distribution,

                                                       17
beliefs about absolute and relative performance can no longer drive gender differences in informed
self-evaluations. That is, after we have perfectly informed participants about their absolute and
relative past performance -- such that there can no longer be gender differences in beliefs about
absolute and relative past performance -- gender differences in self-evaluations of this same past
performance cannot be driven by beliefs about absolute and relative past performance. Two main
results follow.
    The first result relates to prior literature that shows how beliefs about absolute and relative
performance contribute to gender gaps in economic outcomes. We find that correcting beliefs about
absolute and relative performance -- and thus closing any gender gap in beliefs about absolute
and relative performance -- (directionally) decreases the gender gap in self-evaluations by up to
one-third. The top panel of Table 5 presents regression results involving both the uninformed and
informed self-evaluations in the Self-Promotion version. As indicated by the coefficient estimates on
Informed *Female in Columns 1 and 2, correcting beliefs about absolute and relative performance
insignificantly decreases the gender gap in self-evaluations in response to the performance question
by 32% and in response to the performance-bucket question by 20%. When we are better powered
-- by pooling across all study versions involving self-evaluations in the bottom panel of Table 5 --
the coefficient estimates on Informed *Female in Columns 1 and 2 become statistically significant
and show that correcting beliefs about absolute and relative performance decreases the gender
gap in self-evaluations in response to the performance question by 31% and in response to the
performance-bucket question by 31% as well.
    The second result is that the gender gap in self-evaluations remains large and statistically sig-
nificant even when agents are informed. That is, correcting beliefs about absolute and relative
performance does not eliminate the gender gap in self-evaluations. One way to convey this result
is to note that the sums of the coefficient estimates on Female and Informed *Female are all sta-
tistically significantly negative in Table 5. More simply, the summary table shown later, Table
8, reports that the gender gap in informed self-evaluations remains substantial and statistically
significant when considering only the Self-Promotion version (Columns 1 and 2, Panel 1) or when
considering any of the other versions involving self-evaluations (Columns 1 and 2, Panels 2­8).
    What role do beliefs about absolute and relative performance play in the self-evaluations pro-
vided in response to the willingness-to-apply and success questions?18 There is some evidence that
correcting beliefs about absolute and relative performance shrinks the gender gap for these self-
evaluation questions as well. However, the coefficient estimates on Female and the sum of Female
and Informed *Female in Columns 3 and 4 of Table 5 are all statistically significantly negative, and
  18
     These questions ask participants about the extent of their agreement with statements reading "I would apply
for a job that required me to perform well on the test I took in part 1" and "I would succeed in a job that required
me to perform well on the test I took in part 1." Consequently, for these questions, beliefs about future performance
(in the referenced hypothetical job) could be relevant. Since informing participants about their absolute and relative
past performance may not eliminate the role of beliefs about the relevant (future) absolute and relative performance,
we focus on the other two self-evaluation questions, which are only about past performance, to be conservative in
our examination of absolute and relative performance beliefs.


                                                         18
   Table 5: The Role of Beliefs about Absolute and Relative Performance on Self-Evaluations

  Evaluation:                       Performance         Performance-        Willingness-           Success
                                                           Bucket            to-Apply
                                          (1)                (2)                 (3)                  (4)
  Self-Promotion Version
  Female                    -11.75        -0.55         -14.09                                    -14.29
                              (2.95)       (0.13)         (3.44)                                    (3.43)
  Informed                     -1.10         0.04          1.67                                      -0.04
                              (1.36)       (0.07)         (1.50)                                    (1.51)
  Informed *Female             3.80          0.11          2.15                                       1.76
                              (2.37)       (0.11)         (2.44)                                    (2.39)
  N                             604          604            604                                       604
  Performance FEs               Yes          Yes           Yes                                        Yes
  All Versions with Uninformed and Informed Self-Evaluations
  Female                    -13.89        -0.67         -16.59                                    -15.38
                              (1.25)       (0.06)         (1.42)                                    (1.44)
                                   
  Informed                   -1.95          -0.02          0.27                                      -0.91
                              (0.60)       (0.03)         (0.59)                                    (0.57)
  Informed *Female           4.34         0.21            2.14                                      1.49
                              (0.94)       (0.05)         (0.90)                                    (0.88)
  N                            3600         3600           3600                                      3600
  Performance FEs               Yes          Yes           Yes                                        Yes
    
      p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. SEs are clustered by participant. Results are from OLS regressions of
    the responses provided to the evaluation question noted in each column and as defined in the notes of Table
    2. Female is an indicator for the participant being female. Performance FEs are dummies for each possible
    performance (0­20) on the ASVAB test. Data in the top panel are from self-evaluations in the Self-Promotion
    version. Data in the bottom panel are from self-evaluations in all versions that contain uninformed and
    informed self-evaluation questions -- that is, from all versions except for the Private (Immediately Informed)
    version and the Private (Other-Evaluation) version. Participants provide both uninformed and informed
    self-evaluations and so there are two observations for each participant.


Table 8 shows that the gender gap in informed self-evaluations remains substantial and statistically
significant when considering only the Self-Promotion version (Columns 3 and 4, Panel 1) or when
considering any of the other versions involving self-evaluations (Columns 3 and 4, Panels 2­8).
    A few methodological notes are worth making. First, we provide perfect information about
absolute and relative performance because doing so closes the gender gap in three types of con-
fidence identified by Moore and Healy (2008). Overestimation suggests overconfidence in actual
performance, overplacement suggests overconfidence in one's ranking relative to others, and over-
precision suggests beliefs about an unknown state that are too precise. We counter overestimation
by telling participants their absolute performance, we counter overplacement by telling participants
their relative performance, and we counter overprecision by providing participants with perfect
information on a known state of the world (i.e., their past performance) and asking them to provide
self-evaluations about that known state. By addressing these types of confidence -- and showing


                                                       19
that the gender gap in self-evaluations shrinks but persists -- we highlight that the gender gap in
self-evaluations is driven in part -- but only in part -- by a gender gap in these types of confidence.19
    Second, we view correcting beliefs about absolute and relative performance by design (for the
performance and performance-bucket evaluations) as a methodological strength of our paper. It
guards against inaccurate conclusions about the role of beliefs in driving our results. For example,
imagine if we had instead attempted to control for these beliefs statistically, say by including a
control variable for participants' reported beliefs about their absolute performance. As shown in
the top panel of Table A.1, statistically controlling for beliefs about absolute past performance --
either linearly or with fixed effects -- in the Self-Promotion version would have suggested that
these beliefs account for the majority of the gender gap in self-evaluations. But, as already shown
in Table 5 by the coefficient estimates on Informed *Female, beliefs about absolute and relative
past performance in the Self-Promotion version account for the minority of the gender gap in self-
evaluations and fail to be statistically significant. Similar discrepancies in magnitudes also arise
when we are better powered by pooling across all versions with uninformed and informed self-
evaluations (see the bottom panel of Table A.1). The gender gap in self-evaluations is driven by
much more than beliefs about absolute and relative performance, but statistically accounting for
the role of beliefs about absolute performance would have suggested otherwise.
    Third, correcting beliefs about absolute and relative performance by design is neither feasible
nor desirable for most papers with interests that are different from ours. For instance, fully inform-
ing participants about their absolute performance (e.g., telling them they answered 12 out of 20
questions correctly) is not desirable if a paper seeks to understand how individuals form or update
beliefs about that absolute performance. This is one reason why prior work on beliefs does not aim
to eliminate beliefs by design. Since our paper is not interested in how individuals update their
beliefs about absolute and relative performance, correcting these beliefs by design is helpful.
    Fourth, while fully informing individuals of objective truths can eliminate gender differences in
beliefs about those objective truths, there is no parallel strategy for eliminating gender differences in
self-evaluations for which there is no objective truth. There are no objectively accurate responses
to self-evaluation questions about the extent to which individuals agree they performed well or
whether individuals believe their performance was "good" or "exceptional." While this lack of
objective truth may pose a particular challenge to interventions targeted at closing the gender gap
in self-evaluations, it reinforces our view that more work on self-evaluations is warranted.
3.2.3    Is the gap driven by incentives to distort reports or beliefs and preferences
         about payoff outcomes?
    As noted in the Introduction, the gender gap in self-promotion could theoretically reflect gender
differences in willingness to distort reports or gender differences in beliefs and preferences over
  19
    For additional literature that considers the beliefs that underly these types of confidence, see Schotter and
Trevino (2014). For work on biased beliefs more generally, see Ertac (2011); Mobius et al. (2011); Buser, Gerhards
and Van der Weele (2018); Coutts (2018).



                                                       20
payoff outcomes. For examples: men could be more responsive to the strategic incentives to inflate
self-evaluations to increase their chances of being hired, women could be more averse to inflating
their self-evaluations due to a concern that they are misleading employers, or men and women may
hold different beliefs about what level of self-evaluation is likely to get them hired and paid well.
    To examine whether explanations like these drive the gender gap in self-evaluations that we
observe, we compare the results from the Self-Promotion version to results from the Private ver-
sion, which eliminates the role of employers and pays participants a fixed amount, thus removing
incentives to distort reports and making irrelevant the role of participants' beliefs and preferences
over payoff outcomes for themselves and employers. In particular, Table 6 presents results from the
uninformed and informed self-evaluations in the Self-Promotion version and the Private version.
Two main results follow.
    First, self-evaluations are lower in the Private version than in the Self-Promotion version. The
coefficient estimates on Private are significantly negative in 7 out of the 8 regressions and direc-
tionally negative in the remaining regression shown in Table 6. This finding is consistent with
participants responding to strategic incentives to inflate their self-evaluations in the Self-Promotion
version, where employers observe a self-evaluation before making a hiring and wage decision.
    Second, the gender gap in self-evaluations persists even when the role of preferences and be-
liefs over payoff outcomes are eliminated. The coefficient estimates on Private *Female are small
and insignificant and, more importantly, the sum of the coefficient estimates on Female and Pri-
vate *Female are always significantly negative in Table 6. More simply, consider the results from
the summary tables that are shown later: when considering the Private version only, Table 7 shows
that the gender gap in uninformed self-evaluations is substantial and statistically significant (see
Columns 1­4, Panel 2), and Table 8 shows that the gender gap in informed self-evaluations is
also substantial and statistically significant (see Columns 1­4, Panel 2), Moreover, this finding is
replicated many times when considering the subsequent Private versions we ran (see Columns 1­4,
Panels 3­6 of Table 7 and Columns 1­4, Panels 3­8 of Table 8).
    That the gender gap persists in the Private version highlights that the gender gap in self-
evaluations does not rely on: gender differences in willingness to strategically answer self-evaluations
to increase payment from employers, related to prior work on distorted and misreported beliefs about
performance (Reuben, Sapienza and Zingales, 2014; Charness, Rustichini and Van de Ven, 2018;
Sold` a et al., 2019; Schwardmann and van der Weele, 2019); gender differences in risk aversion about
how employers will respond to self-evaluations, related to work on gender differences in risk aversion
over payoffs (Dwyer, Gilkeson and List, 2002; Eckel and Grossman, 2008; Croson and Gneezy, 2009);
gender differences arising from a lack of control over payoffs given that employers determine wages,
related to work on gender differences in locus of control (Cobb-Clark, 2015; Apicella, Demiral
and Mollerstrom, 2020); or gender differences in other-regarding preferences towards employers,
related to work on gender differences in preferred payoffs for others (Andreoni and Vesterlund, 2001;
Croson and Gneezy, 2009; DellaVigna et al., 2013) and gender differences in deception (Dreber and


                                                  21
Johannesson, 2008; Childs, 2012; Erat and Gneezy, 2012; Houser, Vetter and Winter, 2012; Gylfason,
Arnardottir and Kristinsson, 2013; Adams, Kuhn and Waddell, 2019).20

                        Table 6: The Role of Beliefs and Preferences over Payoffs

   Evaluation:                   Performance        Performance-         Willingness-               Success
                                                       Bucket             to-Apply
                                       (1)               (2)                  (3)                      (4)
   Self-Promotion and Private versions, Uninformed Self-Evaluations
   Female                -12.20          -0.59         -15.54                                       -15.45
                           (2.94)         (0.13)         (3.43)                                       (3.41)
                                               
   Private                 -6.25          -0.26           -4.27                                      -6.93
                           (2.72)         (0.13)         (3.35)                                       (3.30)
   Private *Female          -1.66          0.00           -2.30                                        -1.07
                           (4.04)         (0.18)         (4.77)                                       (4.84)
   N                         606            606            606                                          606
   Performance FEs           Yes            Yes            Yes                                          Yes
   Self-Promotion and Private versions, Informed Self-Evaluations
   Female                  -7.14         -0.43         -11.73                                       -12.58
                           (2.86)         (0.13)         (3.37)                                       (3.29)
   Private                -7.79           -0.34         -6.72                                        -9.00
                           (2.85)         (0.14)         (3.34)                                       (3.24)
   Private *Female          -1.41          0.09           -2.08                                        -1.31
                           (3.93)         (0.18)         (4.74)                                       (4.70)
   N                         606            606            606                                          606
   Performance FEs           Yes            Yes            Yes                                          Yes
       
         p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. SEs are robust. Results are from OLS regressions of the responses
       provided to the evaluation question noted in each column and as defined in the notes of Table 2. Female is
       an indicator for the participant being female. Performance FEs are dummies for each possible performance
       (0­20) on the ASVAB test. Data are from uninformed and informed self-evaluation questions in the Self-
       Promotion and Private versions.


3.3       Robustness of the gender gap in self-evaluations
   In the previous section, we found that the gender gap in self-promotion is reflective of the gender
gap in self-evaluations (i.e., it is not driven by the evaluations being shared with employers) and
that the gender gap in self-evaluations persists even after we have closed any gender gap in beliefs
about absolute and relative performance. We therefore want to further explore the robustness of
the gender gap in self-evaluations. Does it persist in other environments? Can the provision of
other information help close the gap? In the following subsections, we consider these questions and
others by examining results from several additional study versions and from additional analyses of
our data. Tables 7 and 8 show the results from our additional study versions along with the two
study versions we have already discussed, reproduced in Panels 1 and 2 for reference.
  20
    We repeat "related to" to emphasize that these gender gaps have not been studied in the context explored by
our paper. Indeed, we note that "deception" (or lying or cheating) is not well-defined in our setting since there are
no objectively "truthful" self-evaluations.

                                                         22
3.3.1   Is the gap robust to employers potentially learning true performance along with
        self-evaluations?
   Participants in the Self-Promotion (Risky) version are aware that information about their actual
performance could be communicated to employers along with their self-evaluation. This could
make participants feel more constrained to provide appropriate self-evaluations since there is some
chance of "being caught" if they inflate their self-evaluations too much. Nonetheless, Table 7
(Columns 1­4, Panel 3) shows that the gender gap in uninformed self-evaluations remains substantial
and significant, and Table 8 (Columns 1­4, Panel 3) shows that the gender gap in informed self-
evaluations remains substantial and significant.
3.3.2   Is the gap robust to providing information on the average self-evaluations of
        others?
    As detailed in our Introduction, a defining characteristic of the self-evaluations we study involves
the lack of objective truth. As such, a potential driver of our results could relate to men and women
holding different beliefs about what self-evaluations are typical or socially appropriate. The Private
(Social Norms) version decreases the scope for potential differences in beliefs about what self-
evaluations are typical, since prior to providing informed self-evaluations, participants also learn
the average self-evaluations provided by prior participants with the same performance as them. As
shown in Table 8 (Columns 1­4, Panel 5), this information (along with the perfect information on
their absolute and relative performance) proves ineffective at closing the gender gap, which remains
large and statistically significant.
3.3.3   Is the gap robust to reduced consistency motives and anchoring effects?
    When considering gender gaps in self-evaluation that may arise in the labor market, consis-
tency could play a role. Initial self-evaluations -- which could take place before participants get
information about their performance -- could affect subsequent self-evaluations. More generally,
self-evaluations at one point in time may influence self-evaluations at a later point in time as indi-
viduals progress through their schooling and careers.
    In the study versions discussed above, consistency motives or anchoring effects could influence
our informed self-evaluations since we always elicit informed self-evaluations after participants pro-
vide uninformed self-evaluations. The Private (Immediately Informed) version decreases the scope
for such consistency motives or anchoring effects by only asking participants to provide informed
self-evaluations. As shown in Table 8 (Columns 1­4, Panel 7), this design change does not eliminate
the gender gap in informed self-evaluations, a result that is also replicated when this study version
is run for a second time (Columns 1­4, Panel 8).
3.3.4   Is the gap robust across study versions?
   As evident from the many study versions discussed to this point, the gender gap in self-
evaluations is quite robust. Including the replications that we ran, Table 7 (Columns 1­4, Panels
1­6) and Table 8 (Columns 1­4, Panels 1­8) show that separately considering each self-evaluation

                                                  23
question, whether or not participants are informed, each study version, and each wave, generates
56 possible settings to look for a gender gap. We find a statistically significant gender gap in
self-evaluations 56 out of 56 times.
    Pooling across all of these versions involving self-evaluations, Table 7 (Columns 1­4, Panel 7)
and Table 8 (Columns 1­4, Panel 9) show that the average gender gap (and the percent of the
mean self-evaluation that it represents) is 13.71 (26%) in uninformed performance evaluations, 0.66
(19%) in uninformed performance-bucket evaluations, 16.63 (33%) in uninformed willingness-to-
apply evaluations, 15.26 (28%) in uninformed success evaluations, 9.63 (18%) in informed perfor-
mance evaluations, 0.47 (13%) in informed performance-bucket evaluations, 14.76 (28%) in informed
willingness-to-apply evaluations, and 15.13 (27%) in informed success evaluations.
3.3.5    Is the gap robust to controlling for other demographic characteristics?
    Table A.2 presents regressions that include the other demographic characteristics we observed
in our follow-up survey (i.e., age, education, and political orientation) as controls. The gender
gap in self-evaluations remains just as strong when we additionally control for these demographic
characteristics, highlighting that the gender gap is not due to women and men in our sample differing
in other observable ways.
3.3.6    Is the gap robust to excluding performance controls?
   As detailed throughout our paper, we include performance fixed effects in our regressions so
that we can compare self-evaluations among equally performing men and women. We view this as
an important feature of our design. That said, Table A.3 (Columns 1­4, Panels 1­2) shows similar
results when we do not include performance fixed effects.
3.3.7    Is the gap robust to excluding "inattentive" participants?
   Table A.4 (Columns 1­4, Panels 1­2) shows similar results when we restrict our data to partici-
pants who correctly answered at least 6 out of 20 questions on the ASVAB test. Since each question
involved selecting an answer from four options, we would expect participants responding randomly
to correctly answer 5 out of 20 questions on average. That the gender gap in self-evaluations is
similar when excluding participants who answered 5 or fewer questions correctly is consistent with
our results not being driven by "inattentive" participants.
3.3.8    Is the gap robust to other distributional tests?
   Table A.5 (Columns 1­4, Panels 1­3) show that the gender gap in self-evaluations -- among
the self-evaluation questions elicited on a 0 to 100 scale -- remains statistically significant when
considering quantile regressions estimated at the 25th percentile, the 50th percentile, and the 75th
percentile. This provides evidence against the possibility of our results about the average self-
evaluations provided by men and women being driven by "extreme" answers by men or women.21
  21
     Note that quantile regressions are not presented for the performance-bucket question that is elicited on 6-point
scale to avoid convergence issues given the discrete nature of this question and the inclusion of performance fixed
effects.



                                                         24
3.3.9    Does the gender gap differ by other individual characteristics?
    Tables A.6 investigates how the gender gap interacts with the other demographic character-
istics we collected, and Table A.7 investigates how the gap interacts with ASVAB performance
(replacing performance FEs with a linear control for performance). We see that the gender gap in
self-evaluations is directionally (and sometimes significantly) larger for older individuals, not signif-
icantly influenced by education, significantly larger for individuals who feel more favorably about
the Republican party, and significantly smaller for individuals with higher performances.22 Never-
theless, median splits reveal that the gender gap in self-evaluations persists among those who are:
older and younger, more educated and less educated, lean more Republican and lean less Republi-
can, and higher performers and lower performers. Put differently, each of the 64 specifications that
result from these 8 groups of individuals and 8 types of uninformed and informed self-evaluations
questions yield a statistically significant gender gap in self-evaluations.
3.3.10    Is there a gender gap in a measure of deservingness?
    In light of the gender gap in self-evaluations, one might wonder if women also believe they
deserve to earn less money from the study than men. To consider this possibility, we consider
results from the following question that is asked after all self-evaluations are elicited: "Out of a
maximum amount of 100 cents, what amount of bonus payment, in cents, do you think you deserve
for your performance on the test you took in part 1?" As shown in Appendix Figure A.1 and Table
A.8, even when pooling across all study versions that involve self-evaluations, we find no statistically
significant (nor economically meaningful) gender difference in response to this question, suggesting
that women in our study do not simply feel less deserving or desire to earn less from the study.




  22
    When considering heterogeneity by performance, recall from Figure 1 that very high ASVAB performances are
rare: 75% of performances fall no more than 2.6 questions above average and 90% of performances fall no more than
4.6 questions above average.


                                                       25
              Table 7: Uninformed Self-Evaluations in Each Study Version

Evaluation:              Performance      Performance-     Willingness-        Success
                                             Bucket         to-Apply
                              (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
Panel 1: Self-Promotion Version, Wave 1
Female                  -12.68       -0.59                   -15.31           -15.09
                          (2.96)      (0.13)                   (3.46)           (3.46)
N                           302        302                      302              302
Panel 2: Private Version Wave 1
Female                  -13.46       -0.56                   -17.57           -16.46
                          (2.93)      (0.13)                   (3.51)           (3.61)
N                           304        304                      304              304
Panel 3: Self-Promotion (Risky) Version, Wave 1
Female                   -9.15       -0.47                   -12.82            -9.24
                          (2.93)      (0.13)                   (3.29)           (3.32)
N                           294        294                      294              294
Panel 4: Private Version, Wave 2
Female                  -12.21       -0.55                   -17.25           -14.39
                          (3.18)      (0.15)                   (3.54)           (3.53)
N                           302        302                      302              302
Panel 5: Private, Social Norms Version, Wave 2
Female                  -15.14       -0.80                   -16.93           -15.62
                          (3.28)      (0.16)                   (3.71)           (3.71)
N                           298        298                      298              298
Panel 6: Private Version, Wave 3
Female                  -16.45       -0.79                   -15.69           -16.16
                          (3.18)      (0.15)                   (3.92)           (3.87)
N                           300        300                      300              300
Panel 7: All Uninformed Self-Evaluations
Female                  -13.71       -0.66                   -16.63           -15.26
                          (1.25)      (0.06)                   (1.42)           (1.44)
N                          1800        1800                     1800             1800
Performance FEs            Yes         Yes                      Yes              Yes
  
    p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. SEs are robust. Results are from OLS regressions of
  the responses provided to the evaluation question noted in each column and as defined in
  the notes of Table 2. Female is an indicator for the participant being female. Performance
  FEs are dummies for each possible performance (0­20) on the ASVAB test. Data in each
  panel are from uninformed self-evaluations of the noted study version(s).




                                            26
               Table 8: Informed Self-Evaluations in Each Study Version

Evaluation:              Performance      Performance-     Willingness-        Success
                                             Bucket         to-Apply
                              (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
Panel 1: Self-Promotion Version, Wave 1
Female                    -7.01       -0.40       -10.73                      -11.73
                          (2.90)       (0.13)       (3.40)                      (3.30)
N                           302          302          302                        302
Panel 2: Private Version, Wave 1
Female                   -8.01         -0.33      -13.25                      -13.15
                          (2.88)       (0.14)       (3.53)                      (3.53)
N                           304          304          304                        304
Panel 3: Self-Promotion (Risky) Version, Wave 1
Female                    -7.24       -0.36        -9.11                        -8.07
                          (2.83)       (0.14)       (3.38)                      (3.29)
N                           294          294          294                         294
Panel 4: Private Version, Wave 2
Female                    -7.58       -0.42       -14.15                      -14.37
                          (3.18)       (0.15)       (3.53)                      (3.46)
N                           302          302          302                        302
Panel 5: Private, Social Norms Version, Wave 2
Female                  -11.93        -0.62       -16.39                      -15.77
                          (3.15)       (0.16)       (3.42)                      (3.58)
N                           298          298          298                        298
Panel 6: Private Version, Wave 3
Female                  -12.70        -0.52       -16.55                      -15.87
                          (3.04)       (0.14)       (3.73)                      (3.76)
N                           300          300          300                        300
Panel 7: Private, Immediately Informed Version, Wave 3
Female                    -7.61       -0.47       -11.42                      -12.48
                          (3.35)       (0.16)       (3.81)                      (3.61)
N                           299          299          299                        299
Panel 8: Private, Immediately Informed Version, Wave 4
Female                   -8.54        -0.42       -16.63                      -18.66
                          (2.22)       (0.10)       (2.42)                      (2.30)
N                           597          597          597                        597
Panel 9: All Informed Self-Evaluations
Female                   -9.63        -0.47       -14.76                      -15.13
                          (1.00)       (0.05)       (1.14)                      (1.13)
N                          2696         2696         2696                        2696
Performance FEs             Yes          Yes         Yes                         Yes
  
    p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. SEs are robust. Results are from OLS regressions of
  the responses provided to the evaluation question noted in each column and as defined in
  the notes of Table 2. Female is an indicator for the participant being female. Performance
  FEs are dummies for each possible performance (0­20) on the ASVAB test. Data in each
  panel are from informed self-evaluations of the noted study version(s).

                                            27
3.4    Other-Evaluations
    One potential explanation for a gender gap in self-evaluations is that men and women have
different "standards" in general or a different mapping from performance to self-evaluations. For
example, women may believe that scoring a 15 out of 20 (and being in the 80th percentile) is only
"good" and worth a 70/100 on the 100-point scale while men believe such a score is "very good"
and worth an 85/100.
    On one hand, how we identify the gender gap in self-evaluations is synonymous with this ex-
planation, and correspondingly, is not an explanation we seek to "rule out." That we document a
gender gap in self-evaluations between equally performing men and women -- even when they know
how well they performed -- directly implies that men and women have a different mappings from
performance to self-evaluations.
    On the other hand, we can investigate if a gender difference in mappings from performance
to evaluations exists in general or is specific to evaluations of own performance. First, as shown
in Table A.9, if we return to data from our Employer version and include controls for whether
the employer is female, we find no gender difference in how male and female employers respond
to the self-evaluations provided by workers, suggesting that men and women do not differ in how
they view self-evaluations provided by others. Second, and more directly, we turn to our Private
(Other-Evaluation) version, where we can examine if a gender gap exists in evaluations about the
performance of others. In particular, we ask whether there is a gender gap in informed other-
evaluations (uninformed other-evaluations would be difficult to interpret and were not collected).
    Figure 3 and Table 9 show that there is little-to-no gender difference in other-evaluations. More
specifically, the gender gap in other-evaluations is small and statistically insignificant when con-
sidering performance evaluations and performance-bucket evaluations. While the gender gap in
other-evaluations is statistically significant when considering willingness-to-apply evaluations and
marginally statistically significant when considering success evaluations, the magnitudes of these
gaps are notably small. In particular, see Table 8 (Columns 3 and 4, Panel 8) to consider the
gender gap in the corresponding self-evaluations from the Private (Immediately Informed) version
that was run at the same time as the Private (Other-Evaluation) version. These gender gaps are
on average equal to 16.63 and 18.77, implying that asking participants to evaluate others rather
than themselves causes the gender gap in willingness-to-apply evaluations to decrease by 80% and
the gender gap in success evaluations to decrease by 83%. If we include an interaction variable to
capture the impact of evaluating someone else rather than oneself, we see that all of the decreases
in the gender gap are statistically significant (p < 0.01).




                                                 28
                                                 Figure 3: Other-Evaluations
               (a) Performance Evaluations                              (b) Performance-Bucket Evaluations
      1




                                                                       1
      .8




                                                                       .8
      .6




                                                                       .6
CDF




                                                                 CDF
      .4




                                                                       .4
      .2




                                                                       .2
      0




                                                                       0




           0         20       40       60       80         100              1         2        3       4        5          6
                  Informed Performance Evaluations                              Informed Performance-Bucket Evaluations

       (c) Willingness-to-Apply Evaluations                                        (d) Success Evaluations
      1




                                                                       1
      .8




                                                                       .8
      .6




                                                                       .6
CDF




                                                                 CDF
      .4




                                                                       .4
      .2




                                                                       .2
      0




                                                                       0




           0         20       40       60       80         100              0         20      40       60      80         100
               Informed Willingness to Apply Evaluations                             Informed Success Evaluations




                                                                   29
                                         Table 9: Other-Evaluations

    Evaluation:                     Performance        Performance-        Willingness-          Success
                                                          Bucket            to-Apply
                                         (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)
    Female                               0.29                -0.11            -3.54               -3.17
                                        (1.58)              (0.08)            (1.69)              (1.68)
    N                                    597                  597               597                597
    Performance FEs                      Yes                  Yes               Yes                Yes
      
        p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. SEs are robust. Results are from OLS regressions of the responses
      provided to the evaluation question noted in each column and as defined in the notes of Table 2. Female is
      an indicator for the participant being female. Performance FEs are dummies for each possible performance
      (0­20) on the ASVAB test. Data are from informed other-evaluation questions in the Private (Other-
      Evaluation) version.



4     Conclusion
     We have documented a gender gap in self-evaluations. When providing evaluations of their own
performance, women systematically provide less favorable self-evaluations than equally performing
men. The gap is only partially explained by the gender gap in beliefs about absolute and relative
performance; we find that over two-thirds of the gap persists when participants are perfectly in-
formed of their absolute and relative performance. The gap is not driven by differential willingness
to distort self-evaluations or to gender differences in beliefs or preferences over payoffs; we find that
it is present, and just as large, in study versions absent employers. In addition, we find that the gap
is robust to: an environment where actual performance -- along with self-evaluations -- may be
provided to employers, an environment where information on the average self-evaluations of others
is provided, and an environment in which the potential for consistency motives or anchoring effects
is reduced.
     We focus our work on self-evaluations because we view it as an understudied behavior that
could have important implications for labor market outcomes. To narrow in on self-evaluations
themselves, to identify and compare equally performing men and women, and to exogenously ma-
nipulate potential underlying mechanisms (e.g., the role of beliefs about performance and the role
of incentives to distort self-evaluations), we conducted this work in a series of experiments. An im-
portant avenue for future work, however, is to explore the extent to which self-evaluations impact
labor market outcomes in field contexts. In many field settings, individuals are explicitly asked to
complete self-evaluations: in applications to educational institutions, in job applications, and in
performance reviews. Other contexts may invite implicit opportunities to provide self-evaluations.
Individuals may communicate about their performance in written work products -- for example,
a recent article published in the British Medical Journal finds that women are less likely to use
"positive" words in their titles and abstracts for papers on clinical research (Lerchenmueller, Soren-




                                                       30
son and Jena, 2019).23 Individuals may also communicate about their performance and ability in
negotiations, in presentations and meetings, in group decision-making contexts, and in other con-
versations at work. Understanding how individuals construct and convey self-evaluations in all of
these contexts is likely to be important and policy relevant.
    Three additional avenues of future work appear promising to pursue. First, what explains the
existence of the gender gap in self-evaluations? Our paper makes progress on this question by
showing that the gender gap in evaluations is eliminated or substantially reduced when participants
evaluate the performance of others rather than themselves. Our findings suggest that the gender
gap in self-evaluations is deeply ingrained (i.e., it survives in every context we examine) and is
specific to evaluations of own performance. How could the gender gap in self-evaluations be deeply
ingrained? One possibility is that, consistent with the importance of culture (Gneezy, Leonard
and List, 2009), the experiences of women and men in society lead women to internalize different
benefits and costs to providing favorable self-evaluations (i.e., even if these benefits and costs are
not relevant in our study).24
    Second, given the prevalence of self-evaluations, how can impacts of the gender gap in self-
evaluations on education and labor market outcomes be mitigated? Given our inability to close
the gender gap with perfect information about absolute and relative performance and information
about the average self-evaluations of others, the potential for information interventions to close the
gap seems limited. That there is little to no gender differences in other-evaluations further suggests
that men and women do not need more information to close the gap in mapping from performance
to evaluations. Thus, the most effective approaches could involve "changing the system" rather than
"changing the women," perhaps by decreasing the importance of self-evaluations in educational and
work environments.25
    Third, in light of the large literature on discrimination and gender-specific backlash (Riach and
Rich, 2002; Bowles, Babcock and Lai, 2007; Rudman and Phelan, 2008; Blau and Kahn, 2017), how
does making gender known influence self-evaluations and how employers view self-evaluations?26
  23
      For work on gender differences in communication and perceptions of that communication, see also Bohren, Imas
and Rosenberg (2018), Grossman et al. (2019), and Manian and Sheth (2020).
   24
      For additional work on how gender gaps vary by culture, see Andersen et al. (2013) and Andersen et al. (2018).
For work on the importance of gender norms and identity, see Akerlof and Kranton (2000), Bertrand (2011), and
Bertrand, Kamenica and Pan (2015).
   25
      While not on self-evaluations, prior literature does find evidence in support of some change-the-system ap-
proaches. For instance, He, Kang and Lacetera (2019) shows that the gender gap in willingness to enter competition
is eliminated when individuals must "opt-out" of a competition rather than "opt-in" to a competition; Apicella,
Demiral and Mollerstrom (2017) and Apicella, Demiral and Mollerstrom (2020) show that gender gaps in competi-
tive entry are mitigated when women are asked to compete against themselves rather than others; Coffman, Collis
and Kulkarni (2019a) shows that the gender gap in willingness to apply to an advanced job is eliminated when
individuals are provided with clear guidance as to the conditions under which they should apply (e.g., if they have
scored above some threshold on a skills-assessment test); and a reduction in ambiguity along with other contextual
features has mitigated gender gaps in negotiations (Bowles and McGinn, 2008; Mazei et al., 2015; Leibbrandt and
List, 2015).
   26
      Bursztyn, Fujiwara and Pallais (2017) show how image concerns can cause women to downplay how they describe
their career ambitions to others. For recent evidence on gender discrimination and how the ability of men and



                                                        31
Employers and workers in our experiment do not learn the gender -- nor any other identifiable
characteristics -- of each other. We view future work on the interaction between self-evaluations and
making gender known as important and note that the expected results could go in either direction.
On one hand, if employers make their own mental corrections because they accurately expect that
men will have higher self-evaluations conditional on performance, this may mitigate any gender
gap in labor market outcomes that arises from a gender gap in self-promotion. However, Reuben,
Sapienza and Zingales (2014) provides evidence against the empirical relevance of this possibility.
That paper finds that men, more than women, tend to inflate their performance estimates (for which
objective truths exist), but it finds that employers do not (fully) account for this. On the other
hand, prior literature makes clear the potential for greater backlash for women relative to men,
which could exacerbate gender gaps in self-evaluations -- and their associated impact on education
and labor market outcomes -- when gender is known.




women are judged differently, see Reuben, Sapienza and Zingales (2014); Milkman, Akinola and Chugh (2015);
Baert, De Pauw and Deschacht (2016); Bohnet and Bazerman (2016); Sarsons (2017a,b); Alston (2019); Bohren,
Imas and Rosenberg (2019); Bohren et al. (2019); Coffman, Exley and Niederle (Forthcoming); Kessler, Low and
Sullivan (2019); Sarsons et al. (Forthcoming)


                                                    32
References
Adams, Nathan R., Michael A. Kuhn, and Glen R. Waddell. 2019. "Confidence and Contrition:
  Is Cheating Internalized in Performance Assessments?" Working Paper.

Akerlof, George A, and Rachel E Kranton. 2000. "Economics and identity." The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 115(3): 715­753.

Alston, Mackenzie Alston. 2019. "The (Perceived) Cost of Being Female: An Experimental Investiga-
  tion of Strategic Responses to Discrimination." Working Paper.

Andersen, Steffen, Seda Ertac, Uri Gneezy, John A List, and Sandra Maximiano. 2013. "Gen-
  der, competitiveness, and socialization at a young age: Evidence from a matrilineal and a patriarchal
  society." Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(4): 1438­1443.

Andersen, Steffen, Seda Ertac, Uri Gneezy, John A List, and Sandra Maximiano. 2018. "On
  the cultural basis of gender differences in negotiation." Experimental Economics, 21(4): 757­778.

Andreoni, James, and Lise Vesterlund. 2001. "Which is the fair sex? Gender differences in altruism."
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(1): 293­312.

Apicella, Coren L., Elif E. Demiral, and Johanna Mollerstrom. 2017. "No Gender Difference
  in Willingness to Compete When Competing against Self." American Economic Review: Papers &
  Proceedings, 107(5): 136­140.

Apicella, Coren L, Elif E Demiral, and Johanna Mollerstrom. 2020. "Compete with others? No,
  thanks. With myself? Yes, please!" Economics Letters, 187.

Baert, Stijn, Ann-Sophie De Pauw, and Nick Deschacht. 2016. "Do employer preferences contribute
  to sticky floors?" ILR Review, 69(3): 714­736.

Bertrand, Marianne. 2011. "New perspectives on Gender." Handbook of Labor Economics, 4: 1543­1590.

Bertrand, Marianne, Emir Kamenica, and Jessica Pan. 2015. "Gender identity and relative income
  within households." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(2): 571­614.

Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2017. "The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends. and
  Explanations." Journal of Economic Literature, 55(3).

Bohnet, Iris, Alexandra van Geen, and Max Bazerman. 2016. "When Performance Trumps Gender
  Bias: Joint Versus Separate Evaluation." Management Science, 62(5): 1225­1234.

Bohren, Aislinn, Alex Imas, and Michael Rosenberg. 2018. "The Language of Discrimination:
  Using Experimental versus Observational Data." AEA Papers and Proceedings, 108(169­74).

Bohren, J Aislinn, Alex Imas, and Michael Rosenberg. 2019. "The Dynamics of Discrimination:
  Theory and Evidence." American Economic Review, 109(10): 3395­3436.

                                                   33
Bohren, J. Aislinn, Kareem Haggag, Alex Imas, and Devin G. Pope. 2019. "Inaccurate Statistical
  Discrimination." University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper No.
  2019-86.

Bordalo, Pedro, Katherine Coffman, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. 2019. "Beliefs about
  Gender." American Economic Review.

Born, Andreas, Eva Ranehill, and Anna Sandberg. 2018. "A man's world? ­ The impact of a male
  dominated environment on female leadership." University of Gothenburg Working Paper in Economics
  No. 744.

Bowles, Hannah Riley, and Kathleen L. McGinn. 2008. "Gender in job negotiations: a two-level
  game." Negotiation Journal, 24(4): 393­410.

Bowles, Hannah Riley, Linda Babcock, and Kathleen L. McGinn. 2005. "Constraints and triggers:
  situational mechanics of gender in negotiation." Journal of personality and social psychology, 89(6): 951­
  965.

Bowles, Hannah Riley, Linda Babcock, and Lei Lai. 2007. "Social incentives for gender differences
  in the propensity to initiate negotiations: Sometimes it does hurt to ask." Organizational Behavior and
  Human Decision Processes, 103(1): 84­103.

Bursztyn, Leonardo, Thomas Fujiwara, and Amanda Pallais. 2017. "'Acting Wife': Marriage
  Market Incentives and Labor Market Investments." American Economic Review, 107(11): 3288­3319.

Buser, Thomas, Leonie Gerhards, and Jo¨
                                      el J Van der Weele. 2018. "Measuring responsiveness to
  feedback as a personal trait." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 56(2): 165­192.

Charness, Gary, Aldo Rustichini, and Jeroen Van de Ven. 2018. "Self-confidence and strategic
  behavior." Experimental Economics, 21(1): 72­98.

Childs, Jason. 2012. "Gender differences in lying." Economics Letters, 114(2): 147­149.

Cobb-Clark, Deborah A. 2015. "Locus of control and the labor market." IZA Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics, 4(1).

Coffman, Katherine Baldiga. 2014. "Evidence on Self-Stereotyping and the Contribution of Ideas."
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1625­1660.

Coffman, Katherine B., Christine L. Exley, and Muriel Niederle. Forthcoming. "The Role of
  Beliefs in Driving Gender Discrimination." Management Science.

Coffman, Katherine B., Manuela R. Collis, and Leena Kulkarni. 2019a. "When to Apply?"
  Working Paper.

Coffman, Katherine, Clio Bryant Flikkema, and Olga Shurchkov. 2019. "Gender Stereotypes in
  Deliberation and Team Decisions." Harvard Business School Working Paper.

                                                    34
Coffman, Katherine, Manuela Collis, and Leena Kulkarni. 2019b. "Stereotypes and Belief Updat-
  ing." Working Paper.

Coutts, Alexander. 2018. "Good news and bad news are still news: Experimental evidence on belief
  updating." Experimental Economics, 1­27.

Croson, Rachel, and Uri Gneezy. 2009. "Gender Differences in Preferences." Journal of Economic
  Literature, 47(2): 448­474.

DellaVigna, Stefano, John A. List, Ulrike Malmendier, and Gautam Rao. 2013. "The Impor-
  tance of Being Marginal: Gender Differences in Generosity." American Economic Review: Papers &
  Proceedings, 103(3): 586­590.

Dreber, Anna, and Magnus Johannesson. 2008. "Gender differences in deception." Economics Letter,
  99(1).

Dwyer, Peggy D, James H Gilkeson, and John A List. 2002. "Gender differences in revealed risk
  taking: evidence from mutual fund investors." Economics Letters, 76(2): 151­158.

Eckel, Catherine C., and Philip J. Grossman. 2008. "Men, Women and Risk Aversion: Experimental
  Evidence." In Handbook of Experimental Economics Results. 1061­1073.

Erat, Sanjiv, and Uri Gneezy. 2012. "White Lies." Management Science, 50(4): 723­733.

Ertac, Seda. 2011. "Does self-relevance affect information processing? Experimental evidence on the
  response to performance and non-performance feedback." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization,
  80(3): 532­545.

Exley, Christine L., Muriel Niederle, and Lise Vesterlund. 2020. "Knowing When to Ask: The
  Cost of Leaning-in." Journal of Political Economy, 128(3): 816­854.

Gneezy, Uri, Kenneth L Leonard, and John A List. 2009. "Gender differences in competition:
  Evidence from a matrilineal and a patriarchal society." Econometrica, 77(5): 1637­1664.

Goldin, Claudia. 2014. "A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter." American Economic Review,
  104(4): 1091­1119.

Grossman, Philip J, Catherine Eckel, Mana Komai, and Wei Zhan. 2019. "It pays to be a man:
  Rewards for leaders in a coordination gam." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 161: 197­
  215.

Gylfason, Haukur Freyr, Audur Arna Arnardottir, and Kari Kristinsson. 2013. "More on gender
  differences in lying." Economic Letters, 119(1): 94­95.

He, Joyce, Sonia Kang, and Nicola Lacetera. 2019. "Leaning In or Not Leaning Out? Opt-Out
  Choice Framing Attenuates Gender Differences in the Decision to Compete." NBER Working Paper No.
  26484.

                                                   35
Houser, Daniel, Stefan Vetter, and Joachim Winter. 2012. "Fairness and cheating." European
  Economic Review, 56: 1645­1655.

Isaksson, Siri. 2018. "It Takes Two: Gender Differences in Group Work." Working Paper.

Kessler, Judd B. 2017. "Announcements of support and public good provision." American Economic
  Review, 107(12): 3760­87.

Kessler, Judd B, Corinne Low, and Colin D Sullivan. 2019. "Incentivized Resume Rating: Eliciting
  Employer Preferences without Deception." American Economic Review, 109(11): 3713­44.

Kling, Kristen C, Janet Shibley Hyde, Carolin J Showers, and Brenda N Buswell. 1999.
  "Gender differences in self-esteem: a meta-analysis." Psychological bulletin, 125(4).

Leibbrandt, Andreas, and John A. List. 2015. "Do women avoid salary negotiations? Evidence from
  a large-scale natural field experiment." Management Science, 61(9): 2016­2024.

Lerchenmueller, Marc J, Olav Sorenson, and Anupam B Jena. 2019. "Gender differences in how
  scientists present the importance of their research: observational study." British Medical Journal, 367.

Lundeberg, Mary A, Paul W Fox, and Judith Pun´
                                             ccoha´
                                                  r. 1994. "Highly confident but wrong:
  Gender differences and similarities in confidence judgments." Journal of educational psychology, 86(1).

Manian, Shanthi, and Keith Sheth. 2020. "Follow my Lead: Assertive Cheap Talk and the Gender
  Gap." Working Paper.

Mazei, Jens, Joachim H¨
                      uffmeier, Philipp Alexander Freund, Alice F. Stuhlmacher, Lena
  Bilke, and Guido Hertel. 2015. "A meta-analysis on gender differences in negotiation outcomes and
  their moderators." Psychological Bulletin, 141(1): 85­104.

Milkman, Katherine L, Modupe Akinola, and Dolly Chugh. 2015. "What happens before? A
  field experiment exploring how pay and representation differentially shape bias on the pathway into
  organizations." Journal of Applied Psychology, 100(6).

Mobius, Markus M., Muriel Niederle, Paul Niehaus, and Tanya S. Rosenblat. 2011. "Managing
  Self-Confidence: Theory and Experimental Evidence." NBER Working Paper No. 17014.

Moore, Don A, and Paul J Healy. 2008. "The trouble with overconfidence." Psychological review,
  115(2).

Niederle, Muriel. 2016. "Gender." In Handbook of Experimental Economics. Vol. 2, , ed. John Kagel and
  Alvin E. Roth, 481­553. Princeton University Press.

Niederle, Muriel, and Lise Vesterlund. 2007. "Do Women shy away from competition? Do men
  compete too much?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3): 1067­1101.




                                                    36
Niederle, Muriel, and Lise Vesterlund. 2011. "Gender and Competition." Annual Review of Eco-
  nomics, 3: 601­630.

Reuben, Ernesto, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2014. "How stereotypes impair women's
  careers in science." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(12): 4403­4408.

Riach, P. A., and J. Rich. 2002. "Field Experiments of Discrimination in the Market Place." The
  Economic Journal, 112(483).

Rudman, Laurie A, and Julie E Phelan. 2008. "Backlash effects for disconfirming gender stereotypes
  in organizations." Research in organizational behavior, 28(6-79).

Sarsons, Heather. 2017a. "Interpreting Signals in the Labor Market: Evidence from Medical Referrals."
  Working Paper.

Sarsons, Heather. 2017b. "Recognition for Group Work: Gender Differences in Academia." American
  Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 107(5): 141­145.

Sarsons, Heather, Klarita G¨
                           erxhani, Ernesto Reuben, and Arthur Schram. Forthcoming. "Gen-
  der Differences in Recognition for Group Work." Journal of Political Economy.

Schotter, Andrew, and Isabel Trevino. 2014. "Belief elicitation in the laboratory." Annual Review of
  Economics, 6(1): 103­128.

Schwardmann, Peter, and Jo¨
                          el van der Weele. 2019. "Deception and Self-Deception." Nature Human
  Behavior, 3: 1055­1061.

Sold`
    a, Alice, Changxia Ke, Lionel Page, and William von Hippel. 2019. "Strategically Delusional."
  Experimental Economics.




                                                   37
A      Appendix
A.1      Additional Tables

       Table A.1: Statistically controlling for the role of beliefs in uninformed self-evaluations

 Evaluation               Performance            Performance-            Willingness              Success
                                                    -Bucket               to Apply
                          (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)          (5)       (6)          (7)        (8)
 Self-Promotion Version
 Female             -3.72  -3.81  -0.19     -0.19                     -7.14      -6.71       -6.70      -6.48
                   (2.37) (2.44)  (0.11)   (0.12)                     (3.16)     (3.33)      (3.07)     (3.11)
 Performance Be- 4.08             0.18                                3.72                   3.82
 liefs
                   (0.29)         (0.01)                              (0.38)                 (0.38)
 N                   302    302     302      302                       302         302        302         302
 All Versions with Uninformed Self-Evaluations
 Female           -5.39 -4.73 -0.28 -0.25                            -8.65       -8.01      -7.11      -6.30
                   (0.95) (0.96)  (0.05)   (0.05)                     (1.24)      (1.25)     (1.23)     (1.24)
 Performance Be- 4.06             0.19                               3.89                   3.98
 liefs
                   (0.13)         (0.01)                              (0.15)                 (0.15)
 N                  1800   1800    1800     1800                       1800       1800        1800       1800
 Performance FEs     Yes    Yes     Yes      Yes                       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
 Belief FEs          No     Yes     No       Yes                        No        Yes          No        Yes
    
      p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. SEs are robust. Results are from OLS regressions of the responses
    provided to the evaluation question noted in each column and as defined in the notes of Table 2. Female is
    an indicator for the participant being female. Performance FEs are dummies for each possible performance
    (0­20) on the ASVAB test. Belief FEs are dummies for each possible reported absolute performance belief
    (0­20) on the ASVAB test. Data in the top panel are from uninformed self-evaluations in the Self-Promotion
    version. Data in the bottom panel are from uninformed self-evaluations in all versions that contain uninformed
    self-evaluation questions, that is from all versions except for the Private (Immediately Informed) version and
    the Private (Other-Evaluation) version.




                                                       38
         Table A.2: Including additional controls, the gender gap in self-evaluations

Evaluation:                    Performance     Performance-      Willingness-        Success
                                                  Bucket          to-Apply
                                    (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)
Panel 1: All Uninformed Self-Evaluations
Female                      -12.44       -0.60                     -15.17           -13.82
                              (1.19)      (0.06)                     (1.38)           (1.40)
Age                          -0.30       -0.01                      -0.31            -0.24
                              (0.06)      (0.00)                     (0.07)           (0.07)
                                  
Education (1-9)              4.34        0.22                       4.67             5.09
                              (0.43)      (0.02)                     (0.50)           (0.51)
                                  
Republican Leaning (0-100)   0.14        0.01                       0.12             0.11
                              (0.02)      (0.00)                     (0.02)           (0.03)
N                              1800        1800                       1800             1800
Panel 2: All Informed Self-Evaluations
Female                       -8.37       -0.41                     -13.32           -13.62
                              (0.96)      (0.05)                     (1.10)           (1.10)
                                  
Age                          -0.29       -0.01                      -0.24            -0.20
                              (0.04)      (0.00)                     (0.05)           (0.05)
                                  
Education (1-9)              3.44        0.16                       4.24             4.50
                              (0.35)      (0.02)                     (0.40)           (0.40)
                                  
Republican Leaning (0-100)   0.17        0.01                       0.16             0.13
                              (0.02)      (0.00)                     (0.02)           (0.02)
N                              2694        2694                       2694             2694
Performance FEs                Yes         Yes                        Yes              Yes
  
    p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. SEs are robust. Results are from OLS regressions
  of the responses provided to the evaluation question noted in each column and as defined in
  the notes of Table 2. Female is an indicator for the participant being female. Age equals
  each participant's age, demeaned by the average age. Education (1-9) is a number from 1 to
  9 that corresponds with lower to higher levels of education, demeaned by the average level.
  Republican Leaning (0-100) is a number from 0 to 100 that indicates the extent to which a
  participant indicated feeling favorably about the Republican party, demeaned by the average
  number. Performance FEs are dummies for each possible performance (0­20) on the ASVAB
  test. Data are from all study versions involving self-evaluations except for the 2 participants
  who indicated "other" as their educational attainment, restricted to the set of self-evaluations
  noted in each panel.




                                               39
  Table A.3: Without performance fixed effects, the gender gap in self-evaluations

Evaluation:           Performance      Performance-     Willingness-       Success
                                          Bucket         to-Apply
                           (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
Panel 1: All Uninformed Self-Evaluations
Female               -15.54         -0.78                 -18.40           -17.06
                       (1.25)        (0.06)                 (1.42)           (1.44)
Constant              59.07         3.80                  58.25            62.03
                       (0.78)        (0.04)                 (0.89)           (0.87)
N                       1800          1800                   1800             1800
Panel 2: All Informed Self-Evaluations
Female               -10.71         -0.55                 -16.16           -16.21
                       (1.08)        (0.05)                 (1.18)           (1.18)
Constant              58.01         3.78                  59.12            62.40
                       (0.65)        (0.03)                 (0.70)           (0.68)
N                       2696          2696                   2696             2696
Performance FEs          No            No                     No               No
  
    p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. SEs are robust. Results are from OLS regressions
  of the responses provided to the evaluation question noted in each column and as
  defined in the notes of Table 2. Female is an indicator for the participant being
  female. Performance FEs are not included. Data are from all study versions involving
  self-evaluations.
     Table A.4: Excluding very low performers, the gender gap in self-evaluations

Evaluation:           Performance      Performance-     Willingness-       Success
                                          Bucket         to-Apply
                           (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
Panel 1: All Uninformed Self-Evaluations
Female               -13.57         -0.62                 -16.88           -15.69
                       (1.31)        (0.06)                 (1.54)           (1.55)
N                       1490          1490                   1490             1490
Panel 2: All Informed Self-Evaluations
Female                -8.62         -0.39                 -14.37           -14.66
                       (1.04)        (0.05)                 (1.22)           (1.22)
N                       2175          2175                   2175             2175
Performance FEs         Yes           Yes                    Yes              Yes
  
    p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. SEs are robust. Results are from OLS regressions
  of the responses provided to the evaluation question noted in each column and as
  defined in the notes of Table 2. Female is an indicator for the participant being
  female. Performance FEs are dummies for each possible performance (0­20) on the
  ASVAB test. Data are from all study versions involving self-evaluations, restricted to
  the set of participants who answered at least 6 out of 20 questions correctly.




                                          40
           Table A.5: Quantile regressions, the gender gap in self-evaluations

Evaluation:               Performance           Willingness-to-            Success
                                                    Apply
                               (1)                    (2)                    (3)
Panel 1: All Uninformed Self-Evaluations (25th percentile)
Female                  -19.00              -25.00                        -29.00
                          (2.45)              (2.64)                        (3.17)
N                          1800                1800                          1800
Panel 2: All Informed Self-Evaluations (25th percentile)
Female                  -10.00              -20.00                        -24.00
                          (1.68)              (2.17)                        (2.34)
N                          2696                2696                          2696
Panel 3: All Uninformed Self-Evaluations (50th percentile)
Female                  -14.00              -22.00                        -17.00
                          (2.15)              (2.44)                        (2.31)
N                          1800                1800                          1800
Panel 4: All Informed Self-Evaluations (50th percentile)
Female                   -9.00              -16.00                        -17.00
                          (1.28)              (1.85)                        (1.88)
N                          2696                2696                          2696
Panel 5: All Uninformed Self-Evaluations (75th percentile)
Female                  -11.00              -13.00                        -10.00
                          (1.38)              (1.88)                        (1.79)
N                          1800                1800                          1800
Panel 6: All Informed Self-Evaluations (75th percentile)
Female                   -5.00              -10.00                        -10.00
                          (1.14)              (1.41)                        (1.45)
N                          2696                2696                          2696
Performance FEs            Yes                 Yes                           Yes
  
    p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. SEs are robust. Results are from quantile
  regressions, estimated at the percentile noted in each panel, of the responses provided
  to the evaluation question noted in each column and as defined in the notes of Table 2.
  Female is an indicator for the participant being female. Performance FEs are dummies
  for each possible performance (0­20) on the ASVAB test. Data are from all study versions
  involving self-evaluations.




                                           41
 Table A.6: By other demographics, the heterogeneity in the gender gap in self-evaluations

Evaluation:                    Performance     Performance-      Willingness-        Success
                                                  Bucket          to-Apply
                                    (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)
Panel 1: All Uninformed Self-Evaluations
Female                      -12.51       -0.60                     -15.12           -13.69
                              (1.19)      (0.06)                     (1.39)           (1.40)
Age                          -0.23       -0.01                        -0.17            -0.07
                              (0.08)      (0.00)                     (0.09)           (0.09)
                                   
Education (1-9)              4.45         0.22                      4.36             4.53
                              (0.55)      (0.03)                     (0.67)           (0.66)
                                   
Republican Leaning (0-100)   0.19        0.01                       0.19             0.17
                              (0.03)      (0.00)                     (0.03)           (0.03)
Age *Female                    -0.12       -0.00                     -0.28           -0.33
                              (0.12)      (0.01)                     (0.13)           (0.13)
Education (1-9) *Female        -0.23       -0.01                       0.72            1.31
                              (0.87)      (0.04)                     (1.01)           (1.03)
                                   
Republican Leaning (0-100)   -0.11       -0.01                      -0.14            -0.12
*Female                       (0.04)      (0.00)                     (0.05)           (0.05)
N                              1800        1800                        1800            1800
Panel 2: All Informed Self-Evaluations
Female                       -8.34       -0.41                     -13.24           -13.52
                              (0.96)      (0.05)                     (1.11)           (1.10)
Age                          -0.24       -0.01                       -0.15             -0.10
                              (0.06)      (0.00)                     (0.07)           (0.07)
                                   
Education (1-9)              3.34         0.17                      4.10             4.32
                              (0.47)      (0.02)                     (0.52)           (0.50)
                                   
Republican Leaning (0-100)   0.23        0.01                       0.20             0.17
                              (0.02)      (0.00)                     (0.03)           (0.03)
Age *Female                    -0.11       -0.00                     -0.21           -0.24
                              (0.09)      (0.00)                     (0.10)           (0.10)
Education (1-9) *Female        0.21        -0.02                      0.34             0.46
                              (0.72)      (0.03)                     (0.83)           (0.82)
Republican Leaning (0-100)   -0.14       -0.01                      -0.11            -0.08
*Female                       (0.03)      (0.00)                     (0.04)           (0.04)
N                              2694        2694                       2694             2694
Performance FEs                 Yes         Yes                        Yes              Yes
  
    p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. SEs are robust. Results are from OLS regressions
  of the responses provided to the evaluation question noted in each column and as defined in
  the notes of Table 2. Female is an indicator for the participant being female. Age equals
  each participant's age, demeaned by the average age. Education (1-9) is a number from 1 to
  9 that corresponds with lower to higher levels of education, demeaned by the average level.
  Republican Leaning (0-100) is a number from 0 to 100 that indicates the extent to which a
  participant indicated feeling favorably about the Republican party, demeaned by the average
  number. Performance FEs are dummies for each possible performance (0­20) on the ASVAB
  test. Data are from all study versions involving self-evaluations except for the 2 participants
  who indicated "other" as their educational attainment, restricted to the set of self-evaluations
  noted in each panel.                        42
     Table A.7: By performance, the heterogeneity in the gender gap in self-evaluations

Evaluation:                        Performance     Performance-    Willingness-      Success
                                                      Bucket        to-Apply
                                       (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)
Panel 1: All Uninformed Self-Evaluations
Female                         -15.95                -0.78          -18.64          -17.41
                                 (1.30)               (0.06)          (1.45)          (1.47)
Demeaned Performance            -0.69                -0.07           -0.54           -0.44
                                 (0.19)               (0.01)          (0.21)          (0.20)
Demeaned Performance *Female     1.52                0.09            1.07            1.12
                                 (0.36)               (0.02)          (0.40)          (0.41)
Constant                        58.96                3.79           58.17           61.96
                                 (0.78)               (0.04)          (0.89)          (0.87)
N                                 1800                 1800            1800            1800
Panel 2: All Informed Self-Evaluations
Female                         -11.82                -0.58          -16.82          -17.12
                                 (1.08)               (0.05)          (1.19)          (1.18)
Demeaned Performance             0.42                 -0.02            0.03          0.45
                                 (0.15)               (0.01)          (0.16)          (0.16)
Demeaned Performance *Female     1.98                0.10            1.57            1.45
                                 (0.30)               (0.01)          (0.32)          (0.32)
Constant                        58.13                3.78           59.13           62.54
                                 (0.64)               (0.03)          (0.70)          (0.68)
N                                 2696                 2696            2696            2696
Performance FEs                    No                   No              No              No
  
    p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. SEs are robust. Results are from OLS regressions of the
  responses provided to the evaluation question noted in each column and as defined in the notes
  of Table 2. Female is an indicator for the participant being female. Demeaned Performance
  equals each participant's performance out of the 20 questions on the ASVAB, demeaned by the
  average performance. Data are from all study versions involving self-evaluations, restricted to
  the set of self-evaluations noted in each panel.




                                              43
                        Figure A.1: Deservingness Measure Distributions




                                1
                                .8
                                .6
                          CDF
                                .4
                                .2
                                0




                                     0   20     40      60    80     100
                                              Deservingness



This graph shows the CDF of the deservingness measure in response to the following question:
"Out of a maximum amount of 100 cents, what amount of bonus payment, in cents, do you think
you deserve for your performance on the test you took in part 1." Data are from all study versions
involving self-evaluations.




                                                 44
                             Table A.8: Deservingness Measure Regressions

                                                             (1)                  (2)
                     Female                               1.96                   -1.74
                                                         (1.35)                 (1.14)
                     Constant                           56.56
                                                         (0.90)
                     Performance FEs                       No                    Yes
                     N                                    2696                   2696
                        
                          p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. SEs are robust. Results are
                        from OLS regressions of the deservingness measure in response to the
                        following question: "Out of a maximum amount of 100 cents, what
                        amount of bonus payment, in cents, do you think you deserve for your
                        performance on the test you took in part 1." Female is an indicator
                        for the participant being female. Performance FEs are dummies for
                        each possible performance (0­20) on the ASVAB test. Data are from
                        all study versions involving self-evaluations.



                            Table A.9: Employer Version, Wage Regressions

Evaluation                              Performance        Performance-        Willingness-          Success
                                                              Bucket            to-Apply
                                              (1)               (2)                 (3)                 (4)
Evaluation                                  0.21               4.23                0.23               0.22
                                            (0.03)              (0.41)             (0.02)             (0.02)
Evaluation*Female Employer                   -0.01                0.06              -0.01              -0.02
                                            (0.03)              (0.55)             (0.03)             (0.03)
Female Employer                              -1.30               -2.23              -1.37              -1.21
                                            (1.51)              (1.40)             (1.24)             (1.56)
Constant                                   23.37               20.11              22.66              23.39
                                            (1.28)              (1.08)             (1.03)             (1.22)
N                                            1490                1788               1490               1490
    
      p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. SEs are clustered by employer. Results are from OLS regressions of the
    wage received by the participant (25 cents if not hired and a chosen wage from 25­100 cents if hired). Female
    Employer is an indicator for a female employer. Evaluation is the evaluation provided by each participant in the
    evaluation question noted in that column. Performance indicates the extent of each participant's agreement
    (from 0­100) with the following statement: "I performed well on the test I took in part 1." Performance-
    Bucket indicates which Likert-scale response (coded from 1 for the lowest to 6 for the highest) a participant
    selects when asked to "indicate how well you think you performed on the test in part 1." Willingness-to-Apply
    indicates the extent of each participant's agreement (from 0­100) with the following statement: "I would apply
    for a job that required me to perform well on the test I took in part 1." Success indicates the extent of each
    participant's agreement (from 0­100) with the following statement: "I would succeed in a job that required
    me to perform well on the test I took in part 1." Data are from the hiring decisions in the Employer version.




                                                        45
A.2        The Free-Response Evaluators Versions
       In February 2019, we recruited 400 workers on MTurk to complete the Free-Response Evaluators ver-
sions of our study using the same criteria as in the main study versions (see footnote 8). We collected
data from 399 workers.27 Each participant received a guaranteed $1.50 completion fee for the 15-minute
study. In addition, one of their decisions, out of the 21 decisions in the study, was selected to determine a
possible bonus payment for them and, if relevant, for an associated "worker."28 After evaluators completed
all decisions of the study, they took a short follow-up survey that collected demographic information.
       The evaluators were randomly assigned either to make 21 hiring decisions (n=198) or to make 21 sets
of predictions (n=201). Before making each decision or set of predictions, the evaluator was provided with
the text entered by a participant to the free-response question: "Please describe how well you think you
performed on the test that you took in part 1 and why." The free response either came from part 2 or
part 3. Evaluators were randomly assigned these 21 free responses from the set of eligible free responses
written by the participants from the three versions of the study run in the first wave.29
       Evaluators assigned to make hiring decisions were asked whether they would like to hire the participant
who provided that free response and, if so, how much to pay them. The payoffs for the evaluator and
associated participant are the same as described in the Employer version.30 While similar to the Employer
version, there are many more possible free responses than answers to the quantitative self-promotion
questions, which means our analysis on hiring decisions is underpowered relative to the Employer version,
since we only have at most a few evaluators reacting to each free response.
       Evaluators assigned to make predictions were instead asked to predict whether the participant who
wrote the free response was male or female and how many questions, out of 20, that participant answered
correctly on the ASVAB. The payoffs for evaluators are determined as follows. One of the two predictions
from one of the 21 sets was randomly selected. If the prediction was correct, the evaluator received a bonus
payment of 50 cents.31
       Relative to the Employer version, there are three important differences when considering the results
  27
     One worker was excluded from participation for having previously participated in the study but was counted as
being recruited.
  28
     Each participant who completed the Self-Promotion or Self-Promotion (Risky) versions of our study was matched
with an employer from the Employer version of our study and received corresponding payoffs from their employers'
hiring decisions. By contrast, in the Free-Response Evaluators versions, only select workers from the Self-Promotion
and Self-Promotion (Risky) versions were matched with an evaluator and received corresponding payoffs, rather than
everyone. Since we also wanted evaluators to provide data on the free responses from the Private version, evaluators
were (accurately) told that one of their decisions would be selected to count but not that one of their decisions would
be randomly selected to count (as this would have required putting 0% weight on free responses from the Private
version in the randomization).
  29
     Not all of the free responses collected in the study were evaluated. First, the Free-Response Evaluators versions
were run after the first wave but before the second wave, so free responses from the 2nd­4th waves did not yet
exist. We consequently consider the 1800 free responses from the Self-Promotion version, the Self-Promotion (Risky)
version, and the Private version run in the first wave. Second, a research assistant -- blinded to sex and study version
-- deemed 130 of the 1800 potentially eligible free responses "ineligible" due to the answer not relating to the question
asked or due to severe grammar and/or spelling issues that made an answer incomprehensible. Consequently, the
evaluators were each randomly shown 21 free-responses from the set of 1670 eligible free responses. Finally, note
that some eligible free-responses were never randomly selected to be shown to an evaluator.
  30
     As explained in footnote 28, however, free responses from the Private version were never selected for payment.
  31
     Unlike hiring decisions, the randomly selected prediction can come from a participant from any of our three
study versions run in the first wave.


                                                           46
in the Free-Response Evaluators versions. First, since there is no objective way to rank free-response
answers, we cannot examine how hiring decisions or predictions vary as the responses improve (as we did
when examining the impact of a one unit increase on the 0­100 scales in the Employer version). Second,
while evaluators are not informed of the gender of the associated worker, they may be able to infer gender
-- to some degree -- given how the free responses are written. Below, we test this hypothesis using data
from the predictions. Third, as noted above, given the large number of possible free responses, we are
underpowered to consider the effect of specific free responses.
       For these reasons, we favor the analysis of our quantitative self-evaluation questions presented in the
main text to examine the gender gap in self-evaluation. Here, however, we investigate the hiring decisions
and predictions from the Free-Response Evaluators versions to present several interesting (but inherently
secondary) results. Given our power issues, we combine free responses from all three study versions (i.e.,
the Self-Promotion, Private, and Self-Promotion (Risky) versions).32 In cases where multiple evaluators
faced a decision about the same free response, we use the average decision provided by the evaluators (e.g.,
if a free response is predicted to be written by a female participant by one evaluator but a male participant
by another evaluator, that participant is recorded as being predicted to be female with a 0.50 probability).
       Table A.10 presents results from regressions testing whether the gender of the free response author
affects the hiring decisions and predictions of evaluators. Columns (1) and (3) have no controls, and (2)
and (4) have dummies for each level of performance. Panel 1 shows that evaluators predict that free
responses provided by female participants come from lower-performing workers. This evidence is relatively
consistent with our findings from the quantitative self-evaluation questions since women appear to provide
less favorable subjective evaluations of their performance. Panel 2 shows that, although these evaluators
are not informed of the gender of the participant associated with the free response, evaluators can infer
gender -- to some degree -- when viewing the responses. Evaluators are significantly more likely to predict
that a response was written by a female participant when it was indeed written by a female participant.
Panel 3 shows that the relationship between the gender of the worker and evaluators' hiring decisions is
inconclusive. Based on the free response answers, evaluators pay directionally, but not significantly, less
to female worker. We note that there are several possible explanations for this last finding. For instance,
a preference to hire workers believed to be higher performing (who are more likely to be male, per our
first finding) may counteract a preference to hire workers believed to be female (who are more likely to
be female, per our second finding). In other words, hiring decisions based off of the free responses may
conflate performance beliefs and other preferences. As mentioned in footnote 13 in the main text of the
paper, this difficulty with the free-response data contributes to our decision to focus our self-evaluation
analysis on the quantitative self-evaluation questions we explore in the main text of the paper.




  32
    The results are qualitatively similar when restricting to the data from each of these three versions, with one
possible exception: the gender difference in the wage data is largely statistically insignificant but is sometimes
directionally negative and sometimes directionally positive, depending on the study version.


                                                       47
                               Table A.10: Free Response Regressions

Sample:                              Uninformed Free Responses                Informed Free Responses
                                         (1)           (2)                       (3)            (4)
Panel 1: DV = Predicted Performance
Female                    -0.82         -0.67                                   -0.51                -0.35
                           (0.23)        (0.22)                                 (0.24)              (0.23)
                                
Constant                  12.16                                                12.36
                           (0.17)                                               (0.18)
N                            749          749                                     773                773
Panel 2: DV = Predicted Probability Female
Female                    0.08          0.08                                    0.09               0.09
                           (0.03)        (0.03)                                 (0.03)             (0.03)
                                
Constant                  0.37                                                  0.34
                           (0.02)                                               (0.02)
N                            749          749                                     773                773
Panel 3: DV = Wage
Female                      -1.28        -1.44                                   -0.96               -0.66
                           (0.82)        (0.81)                                 (0.99)              (1.04)
                                
Constant                  33.58                                                35.45
                           (0.60)                                               (0.76)
N                            743          743                                     755                755
Performance FEs              No           Yes                                     No                 Yes
  
    p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. SEs are robust. Results are from OLS regressions of the noted
  dependent variable (DV). Predicted Performance equals the number of questions that an evaluator predicts
  a participant correctly answered out of the 20 ASVAB questions. Predicted Probability Female equals the
  probability with which an evaluator predicted a participant to have been female. Wage equals the wage given
  to the participant by an evaluator. Female is an indicator for the participant being female. Performance
  FEs are dummies for each possible performance (0­20) on the ASVAB test. Data in columns in (1) and
  (2) are from uninformed free responses elicited in part 2 and data in columns (3) through (4) are from
  informed free responses elicited in part 3 of all three study versions run in our first wave of data collection:
  the Self-Promotion version, the Private version, and the Self-Promotion (Risky) version.




                                                      48
B      Experimental instructions
B.1     Instructions for Self-Promotion version
    Prior to participating in the study, participants must correctly answer a captcha and consent to partic-
ipate in the study. At the end of the study, participants must complete a short follow-up survey to gather
demographic information.
    The study begins by informing each participant of the $2 study completion fee and of the opportunity
to earn additional payment for themselves. Figure B.1 shows how this payment information is explained
along with the understanding question that the participant must answer correctly to proceed.

                                   Figure B.1: Payment Information




                                                    49
   The instructions for part 1 are displayed in Figures B.2 and an example of an ASVAB question is
displayed in Figure B.3 (note that the timer in that screenshot indicates the participant has 23 seconds
left to answer the question although the timer starts at 30 seconds).

                                  Figure B.2: Instructions for Part 1




                                                    50
Figure B.3: Part 1: Example ASVAB question




                   51
   After completing the ASVAB questions in part 1 but before proceeding to part 2, participants are asked
about their absolute performance belief, as shown in Figure B.4.

                         Figure B.4: Absolute Performance Belief Question




                                                   52
   Participants then receive instructions for part 2 (see Figure B.5), must correctly answer understanding
questions about those instructions (see Figure B.6), and then are asked the self-evaluation questions (see
Figure B.7).

                                    Figure B.5: Part 2 Instructions




                                                   53
Figure B.6: Part 2 Understanding Questions




                   54
Figure B.7: Part 2 Self-Evaluation Questions




                    55
   After completing part 2, participants are provided with perfect information on their absolute and
relative performance and are required to correctly report back their absolute performance as shown in
Figure B.8.

                   Figure B.8: Absolute and Relative Performance Information




                                                 56
   In part 3, participants are provided with the same instructions (see Figure B.9), understanding questions
(see Figure B.10), and self-evaluation questions (see Figure B.11) as they were in part 2.

                                    Figure B.9: Part 3 Instructions




                                                    57
Figure B.10: Part 3 Understanding Questions




                    58
Figure B.11: Part 3 Self-Evaluation Questions




                     59
   Finally, participants receive instructions about and are asked to answer the deservingness question in
Part 4 (see Figure B.12).

                    Figure B.12: Part 4 Instructions and Deservingness Question




                                                  60
B.2     Instructions for the Private version
   The Private version run in the first wave proceeds in the same manner as the Self-Promotion version,
except for the instructions about part 2 and part 3. Participants are simply informed that they will receive
25 cents regardless of how they answer the self-evaluation questions. See Figure B.13 for these instructions
and the corresponding understanding question. The Private versions run in the second and third waves
are identical to the Private version in the first wave, except for a slight formatting change in the part 2 and
part 3 questions to allow for room to introduce the additional information in the Private (Social Norms)
version. See Figure B.14 for the corresponding screenshot of the part 3 self-evaluation questions (and note
that this is identical to how they appear in part 2).

        Figure B.13: The Private version: Part 2 Instructions and Understanding Question




                                                        61
Figure B.14: The Private version: Part 3 Self-Evaluation Questions With a Slight Formatting
Change




                                            62
B.3     Instructions for the Self-Promotion (Risky) version
   The Self-Promotion (Risky) version of the study proceeds in the same manner as the Self-Promotion
version of the study, except for the instructions about part 2 and part 3. Participants are informed that
there is some chance that their employer will learn their actual performance. See Figures B.15 and B.16
for these instructions and the corresponding understanding questions, respectively.

               Figure B.15: The Self-Promotion (Risky) version: Part 2 Instructions




                                                   63
Figure B.16: The Self-Promotion (Risky) version: Part 2 Questions about Performance




                                        64
B.4     Instructions for the Private (Social Norms) version
   The Private (Social Norms) version of the study proceeds in the same manner as the Private version
of the study, except that, in part 3, additional information is provided on the average answer to each of
the self-evaluation questions from prior participants with the same score as the participant. See Figure
B.17 for the corresponding screenshot of the part 3 questions.

Figure B.17: The Private (Social Norms) version: Part 3 Self-Evaluation Questions for a Participant
who Correctly Answered 10 out of 20 ASVAB Questions




                                                   65
B.5     Instructions for the Private (Immediately Informed) version
   The Private (Immediately Informed) version of the study proceeds in the same manner as the Private
version of the study, except that uninformed self-evaluations are not elicited. That is, parts 3 and 4 in the
Private version become parts 2 and 3 in this version so that the study proceeds as follows: participants
complete the test in part 1, report their beliefs about their absolute performance on that test, are informed
of their absolute and relative performance on that test, provide informed self-evaluations about that test
in part 2, and answer the deservingness question in part 3.




                                                     66
B.6     Instructions for the Private (Other-Evaluation) version
   The Private (Other-Evaluation) version proceeds in the same manner as the Private (Immediately
Informed) version, except that participants are informed of the absolute and relative performance of another
MTurk worker (see Figure B.18) and then are asked to provide informed other-evaluations about this other
MTurk worker rather than themselves (see Figures B.19 and B.20).

Figure B.18: The Private (Other-Evaluation) version: Absolute and Relative Performance Infor-
mation on Another MTurk Worker




                                                    67
Figure B.19: The Private (Other-Evaluation) version: Part 2 Instructions and Understanding Ques-
tions




                                              68
Figure B.20: The Private (Other-Evaluation) version: Part 2 Other-Evaluation Questions for An-
other Participant who Correctly Answered 10 out of 20 ASVAB Questions




                                             69
B.7     Instructions for Employer version
   Prior to participating in the study, participants must correctly answer a captcha and consent to partic-
ipate in the study. At the end of the study, participants must complete a short follow-up survey to gather
demographic information.
   The study begins by informing each participant of the $1.50 study completion fee and of the opportunity
to earn additional payment. Figure B.21 shows how this payment information is explained. Figure B.22
shows the understanding questions that the participant must answer correctly to proceed.

                                  Figure B.21: Payment Information




                                                   70
Figure B.22: Understanding Questions of Payment Information




                            71
   The 21 decisions that employers face involve four blocks. Three blocks relate to the three evaluation
questions that involve the 0 to 100 scale (i.e., the performance evaluation question, the willingness-to-apply
evaluation question and the success evaluation question), and each of these blocks involves five decisions
that correspond to five randomly selected evaluations (i.e., numbers from 0 to 100). Another block relates to
the evaluation question involving a six point Likert-scale (i.e., the performance-bucket evaluation question),
and this block involves six decisions that correspond to each of the six possible evaluations in that question.
The order of these four blocks is randomized on the participant-level.
   The instructions for, and examples of, decisions relating to the performance evaluations are displayed
in Figures B.23 and B.24, respectively.

                   Figure B.23: Instructions for Performance Evaluation Decisions




                                                      72
Figure B.24: Performance Evaluation Decisions




                     73
   The instructions for, and examples of, decisions relating to the performance-bucket evaluations are
displayed in Figures B.25 and B.26, respectively.

              Figure B.25: Instructions for Performance-Bucket Evaluation Decisions




                                                    74
Figure B.26: Performance-Bucket Evaluation Decisions




                        75
   The instructions for, and examples of, decisions relating to the willingness-to-apply evaluations are
displayed in Figures B.27 and B.28, respectively.

             Figure B.27: Instructions for Willingness To Apply Evaluation Decisions




                                                    76
Figure B.28: Willingness To Apply Evaluation Decisions




                         77
   The instructions for, and examples of, decisions relating to the success evaluations are displayed in
Figures B.29 and B.30, respectively.

                     Figure B.29: Instructions for Success Evaluation Decisions




                                                  78
Figure B.30: Success Evaluation Decisions




                   79
