                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    CREDIT SMOOTHING

                                        Sean Hundtofte
                                        Arna Olafsson
                                        Michaela Pagel

                                      Working Paper 26354
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26354


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




We thank Andreas Fuster, Michael Haliassos, Ori Heffetz, Constantine Yannelis, Scott Nelson,
Kyle Herkenhoff, Botond Koszegi, Thomasz Piskorski, Jesse Schreger, Michael Weber, and
conference and seminar participants at the NY Fed, Toulouse School of Economics (finance),
University of Mannheim (finance), Nottingham University (economics), University of St. Gallen
(finance), AEA, the 2018 European Household Finance Conference, CFPB Research Conference,
EEA Annual Symposium, Colorado Finance Summit in Vail, and the Workshop on New
Consumption Data at Copenhagen University, WFA, and the Consumer Finance: Micro and
Macro Approaches Conference for valuable comments and advice. We also thank David Laibson,
Peter Maxted, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman for sharing the solution code of their life-
cycle model in Laibson et al. (2017). This project has benefitted from funding from the Carlsberg
Foundation. We are indebted to Meniga and their data analysts for providing and helping with the
data. We also thank Fedra De Angelis Effrem and Andrea Marogg for outstanding research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Sean Hundtofte, Arna Olafsson, and Michaela Pagel. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Credit Smoothing
Sean Hundtofte, Arna Olafsson, and Michaela Pagel
NBER Working Paper No. 26354
October 2019
JEL No. D14,D90,G51

                                         ABSTRACT

Standard economic theory says that unsecured, high-interest, short-term debt -- such as
borrowing via credit cards and bank overdraft facilities -- helps individuals smooth consumption
in the event of transitory income shocks. This paper shows that -- on average -- individuals do
not use such borrowing to smooth consumption when they experience a typical transitory income
shock of unemployment. Instead, individuals smooth their credit card debt and overdrafts by
adjusting consumption. We first use detailed longitudinal information on debit and credit card
transactions, account balances, and credit lines from a financial aggregator in Iceland to
document that unemployment does not induce a borrowing response at the individual level. We
then replicate this finding in a representative sample of U.S. credit card holders, instrumenting
local changes in employment using a Bartik (1991)-style instrument. The absence of a borrowing
response occurs even when credit supply is ample and liquidity constraints, captured by credit
limits, do not bind. Standard economic models predict a strictly countercyclical demand for
credit; in contrast, the demand for credit appears to be procyclical which may deepen business
cycle fluctuations.

Sean Hundtofte                                  Michaela Pagel
Better.com and NYU Stern                        Columbia Business School
shundtofte@better.com                           3022 Broadway
                                                Uris Hall
Arna Olafsson                                   New York, NY 10027
Copenhagen Business School                      and NBER
Department of Finance                           mpagel@columbia.edu
Solbjerg Plads 3
2000 Frederiksberg
Denmark
ao.fi@cbs.dk
1 Introduction
How does unsecured, high-interest, short-term borrowing respond to income shocks?


Standard consumption models make a clear-cut prediction: if such credit is ever used,

                                                                                                     1
then it is used to smooth consumption in the event of adverse transitory income shocks.


However, empirical evidence for a strong borrowing response to transitory income shocks


has remained scarce. This can partly be explained by a lack of data containing accurate,


high-frequency information on both individual credit use and income.                   Furthermore,


disentangling the eects of the demand and supply of credit (adverse income shocks


may increase demand but decrease supply) and transitory from permanent income


shocks (the former should entice a borrowing response while the latter should not) is


dicult.


    In this paper, we investigate and quantify how credit card and overdraft borrowing


responds to a quintessential transitory income shock due to unemployment. We rst use


monthly data from a personal nance platform in Iceland (a nancial account aggrega-


tor), containing comprehensive transaction-level information on individual spending,


income, account balances, and credit limits, to investigate how consumer debt changes


upon temporary job loss.         The longitudinal nature of our data allows us to include


individual xed eects in our estimations and thereby control for selection on all time-


invariant (un)observed characteristics.


    Using the nancial aggregator data, we nd that, over the average spell of unem-


ployment, individuals reduce their spending, but do not increase their consumer debt


holdings substantially, even if they borrow regularly and have sucient liquidity. More


specically, we do not nd an increase in the likelihood to have an overdrawn checking


account, in the number of overdrawn accounts, or in the overdraft amount as measured

   1 Unsecured debt or non-collateralized debt refers to loans that are not tied to any asset. In the
U.S. and Iceland as well as other developed countries, unsecured debt consists primarily of credit card
loans and overdrafts from current accounts.



                                                  1
by interest payments.       The data covers the period 2011 to 2017, a time of economic


expansion in Iceland over which unemployment was low and generally short-lasting. Un-


employment in such circumstances is a quintessential kind of transitory income shock,


which we conrm in the data by showing that income of individuals is not permanently


aected by job loss. These ndings thus suggest that large transitory income shocks


are not a major driver of the substantial consumer debt holdings we observe (the base-


line probability of holding an overdraft is approximately 50%, i.e., individuals in our


sample borrow half the time).           This nding is inconsistent with a view of unsecured


high-interest borrowing as an important tool for smoothing consumption in the event


of adverse transitory income shocks.


    We then turn to the U.S. using household credit data from the Federal Reserve


Bank of New York and the Equifax Consumer Credit Panel (CCP) that covers the


universe of credit card accounts nationwide from 2000 to the present. In this data set,


we conrm and replicate our ndings using the nancial aggregator data from Iceland.


Constructing county-quarter measures of credit outcomes and employing a Bartik-style


shift-share instrument as a plausibly exogenous source of variation in county-level em-


ployment, we estimate the responses of credit card account balances, limits, inquiries,

                                    2
utilization, and delinquencies.         We replicate our ndings in that we do not nd large


or statistically signicant changes in borrowing in response to unemployment shocks.


More specically, individuals in counties with adverse unemployment shocks neither


appear to increase their overall outstanding balances (even among those with a slack


in their credit utilization ratios), nor do they appear to increase their inquiries for new


credit relative to counties with less adverse unemployment shocks.


    This paper's analysis using U.S. data faces two challenges: rst, in the credit report

   2 The estimation and interpretation of causal eects using a Bartik-style instrument to isolate shocks
to labor demand has been employed by a number of authors. An incomplete list of papers includes
Blanchard et al. (1992); Gould et al. (2002); Aizer (2010); Nguyen et al. (2015); Chodorow-Reich et al.
(2012); Maestas et al. (2016); Keys et al. (2017).



                                                     2
data, we (as well as all existing papers in this space such as Keys et al., 2017; Braxton


et al., 2018) use snapshots of credit card balances as a measure of rolled-over consumer


debt; and second, we do not observe individual-level incomes in the U.S. data. In con-


trast, in the Icelandic data, we know exactly how much consumer debt is rolled over


and paid interest upon and who became unemployed.         To nevertheless address both


concerns in the U.S. data to some extent, we complement this analysis by looking at


the distribution of individual borrowing outcomes conditional on county-level unem-


ployment shocks.   Using quantile regressions, two facts stand out: even amongst the


top half of the conditional distribution, responses are economically small and if any-


thing, point estimates are in the wrong direction. The largest increases in borrowing


occur in counties in which unemployment, as captured by the Bartik instrument, is low.


We thus conclude that, while average credit card balances in the U.S. are materially


high, most individuals do not increase credit card debt in response to unemployment,


even when they could have done so and for unemployment shocks that are arguably


transitory (we separate the time periods before and during the nancial crisis).


   The 2015 American Household Credit Card Debt Study estimates the total credit


card debt owed by an average indebted U.S. household to be $5,762 and the average


Icelandic household's amount borrowed is of similar magnitude. Such large high-interest


debt holdings over longer periods of time are very hard to rationalize in standard


economic models.   For example, Laibson et al. (2003) argue that such debt holdings


constitute a puzzle for standard life-cycle models in which fully rational agents would


rather forgo the benets of consumption smoothing than borrow at such high interest


rates. Laibson et al. (2017) show that a model with hyperbolic discounting and illiquid


assets rationalizes the amount of borrowing we see in U.S. data.       There also exist


rational models that generate some borrowing in response to permanent income shocks


in the presence of illiquid assets (Kaplan and Violante, 2014). However, Kaplan and




                                           3
Violante (2014) assume the absence of transitory income shocks, to which any rational


agent would respond by holding a small buer of liquidity. Furthermore, agents in this


model bunch at zero borrowing when interest rates are high, such as the rates on credit


cards or overdrafts, and only borrow (up to their credit limits) when interest rates are


relatively low, such as the rates observed on home equity lines of credit.


   The aforementioned models, and, to to best of our knowledge, all other existing


economic models predict that credit demand should be countercyclical. We demonstrate


this holds theoretically for hyperbolic as well as standard preferences using the model


by Laibson et al. (2017). In the event of an income shock calibrated to the Icelandic


unemployment replacement rate, the hyperbolic agents in the model, calibrated to


match the real-world borrowing on credit cards that we see, increase their likelihood to


borrow by 31%, increase their amount borrowed by 319%, and decrease their spending


by 7%.   While the spending responses matches our empirical results quite well, the


strong borrowing response is clearly a prediction that is not borne out in the data.


Theoretically it is important to note that any economic model in which individuals have


a concave utility function and thus want to smooth consumption will predict a negative


correlation between borrowing and income (in the absence of supply-side responses or


other features such as varying costs of default).   However, empirically, we conclude


that households allow consumption to adjust while smoothing their debt balances and


thus document an important discrepancy between the theoretical predictions and the


empirical ndings.


   As a broader implication, the credit smoothing we observe in the data will amplify


business cycles compared to the countercyclical demand predicted by the economic


models. While an extensive literature has explored supply ampliers during the Great


Recession, our paper suggests that we should also examine demand ampliers during


the initial expansionary and then contractionary period.     Our results are consistent




                                           4
with household demand driving dynamics in consumer credit markets which relates


our paper to the demand-side (Adelino et al., 2016) versus supply-side (Mian and Su,


2009; Mian et al., 2013) studies in the mortgage market. In the same manner as for


mortgages (Mian et al., 2013), consumer credit may cause debt overhang , creating


credit-driven business cycles that operate through household demand.      Furthermore,


if unsecured, high-interest lines of credit such as credit cards are not used to smooth


consumption, self-insurance benets from these nancial products are limited. In turn,


if individuals misunderstand the high costs, then government (through regulatory policy


or education) may have a role to play in aecting not only the supply of credit, but


also its demand.




2 Literature review
The rapid growth in the use of consumer credit in recent decades has spurred a lot


of interest in this area of research while recent improvements in data availability have


made it possible to investigate this phenomenon empirically. Müller (2018) documents


that over the last 50 years, household credit has risen dramatically. Furthermore, he


shows that unsecured consumer credit, rather than mortgage lending, accounts for the


majority of this growth. Whether or not consumer credit is used as economic models


suggest, i.e., a tool to smooth consumption and is thus countercyclical, is an open


empirical question.


   Several recent studies document that consumer demand for credit is not counter-


cyclical. Closest to our paper, Baker and Yannelis (2017), Gelman et al. (2015), Ganong


and Noel (2018), Olafsson and Pagel (2018a), and Olafsson and Pagel (2018b) show a


lack of consumption smoothing in response to predictable positive and negative income


shocks using transaction-level income and spending data. Baker and Yannelis (2017)




                                           5
and Gelman et al. (2015) analyze individual responses to a temporary shortfall in income


due to the 2013 government shutdown. Strikingly, despite the short nature and perfect


certainty of this transitory income shock, Gelman et al. (2015) nd insignicant and


small coecients for credit card spending and balances but a brief decrease and delay


of credit card repayments. Individuals simply cut spending suciently and substitute


to home production (as shown in Baker and Yannelis, 2017) to get by. Following these


two papers, we show that this lack of borrowing also generalizes to larger and longer-


lasting  but still temporary  income shocks due to short spells of unemployment. Our


ndings are in line with Ganong and Noel (2018) who show that consumption drops


in response to unemployment but borrowing increases by merely $23 two months after


the onset of unemployment and by merely $45 two months after unemployment bene-

                                                                                   3
t exhaustion, even when individuals have substantial credit available.                 Using survey


data, Fuster et al. (2018) nd consumption declines in surveys of hypothetical negative


shock scenarios, and that these declines are similar even when the scenario includes an


interest free loan. Finally, Hundtofte (2017) also nds evidence of self-imposed nan-


cial constraints in eld data by observing voluntary credit card closures. Furthermore,


voluntary closures increase in response to negative economic news such as declines in


house prices or increases in unemployment.


    However, other recent studies show that the demand for credit is countercyclical


and that individuals indeed tap their credit lines when they experience a temporary


income decline unless they face liquidity constraints imposed by the supply of credit.


Using survey data, Browning and Crossley (2009) and Sullivan (2008), for example,


nd that very low asset households as well as wealthy households do not increase their


debt in response to unemployment, while the average eect for all other households


is positive. The authors both argue that low asset households are credit constrained,

   3 As the authors observe only checking and credit card accounts from one bank, they do not explore
this lack of a borrowing response further.



                                                 6
which we can directly address in this study by observing credit limits. Our ndings are


in contrast to Keys et al. (2017) who use a similar, but larger, sample of unmatched


(to the individual) credit card data and the same source of variation in employment for


the U.S. However, the authors focus on the cross-sectional variation provided by the


Bartik shock in the rst quarter of 2008 and show that total credit card borrowing is


reduced in counties hit by adverse unemployment shocks relative to counties in better

            4
standing.


    Another recent study is Braxton et al. (2018) who also show that job losers retain


access to credit and that the average borrowing response to unemployment as well as


the eect on credit limits is small in annual data. However, the authors argue that this


zero result is due to unconstrained job losers borrowing (an increase in balances), while


constrained job losers delever and default (a decrease in balances).                 In our quarterly


U.S. data, we do not nd an increase in borrowing by unconstrained job losers nor a


substantial increase in delinquent balances in response to unemployment. In Iceland,


where defaulting is very rare, we can proxy delinquencies with late fee payments but do


not see an increase there. Additionally, before defaulting, we would expect individuals

                                   5
to use their open credit lines.

   4 Our ndings can be reconciled with those in Keys et al. (2017) by noting that Keys et al. (2017)
document a relative response: it could be that counties with relatively high unemployment reduce their
credit card borrowing by less than those with low unemployment. Eorts to replicate the ndings of
Keys et al. (2017) as closely as possible have revealed that the dierent conclusions can be explained
by two important dierences between the analyses.        First, our results are based on individual-level
observations while the analysis in Keys et al. (2017) is based on card-level observations aggregated up
to the county-level and weighted by the base-period number of accounts in the county. If individuals
with dierent number of cards behave dierently, a dierent relationship should be reected in dif-
ferent estimates from aggregating individual-level rather than card-level data. Secondly, Keys et al.
(2017) focus on the cross-sectional variation of the Bartik employment shock in the beginning of 2008,
examining various longer horizon outcomes in response to that shock, while we focus on shorter-run
responses to employment shocks, pursuing a panel analysis of shocks over the period 2000 to 2016.
   5 If individuals in Iceland default they are enlisted in the ocial defaulters' list which prevents them
from taking out new loans and opening up new credit cards for up to 4 years among other sanctions.
Therefore, defaulting has serious consequences while borrowing using existing credit lines does not.
Furthermore, banks would recover almost all delinquent balances via wage garnishment.




                                                    7
3 Theoretical background
We consider the same model as in Laibson et al. (2017) to formally illustrate the stan-


dard predictions of how borrowing responds to income shocks in a life-cycle model that


successfully explains the extent of credit card borrowing via illiquid savings and naive


hyperbolic discounting (see, Laibson, 1997; O'Donoghue and Rabin, 1999; Kuchler and


Pagel, 2015). Additionally, the model explains the existing evidence documenting a lack


of consumption smoothing by showing that individual marginal propensities to consume


out of transitory income shocks are very high (see Shapiro and Slemrod, 1995, among


many other studies). Beyond illiquid assets and naive hyperbolic discounting prefer-


ences, the model features revolving high-interest credit, liquidity constraints, stochastic


labor income, social security, child and adult household dependents, retirement, and


mortality. The authors estimate the preference parameters using the method of simu-


lated moments; in particular, the exponential discount function of a standard agent as


well as the present-biased discount function of a hyperbolic-discounting agent. The au-


thors show that the standard model of exponential discounting can be formally rejected


in favor of hyperbolic discounting. Nevertheless, the hyperbolic discount factor the au-


thors estimate is relatively low in comparison to typical estimates and assumptions in


the micro literature (see, for instance DellaVigna, 2009, for a literature survey).

                                                                                               6
       More specically, Laibson et al. (2017) consider the following model.                        The agent lives


for    t = {1, ..., T } periods.   Each period the agent selects an optimal level of consumption


Ct .    Additionally, he decides how much to save in both the liquid and illiquid assets.


The variable       Xt   represents liquid asset holdings in the beginning of period                        t   before


receipt of period       t   income   Yt .   If   Xt < 0         then uncollateralized high-interest debt, i.e.,


credit card debt, was held between                    t   and   t-1   at an interest rate of   RCC .     The agent


also faces a credit limit in period              t   of   >0      times average income at age      t.   If the agent

   6 We thank the authors for kindly sharing their solution code.



                                                                 8
saves instead of borrows, he earns an interest                    R.   The stock variable        Zt  0   represents


illiquid asset holdings at the beginning of period                     t,   earning interest   RZ     and providing


consumption value. However, illiquid assets can be liquidated only with a proportional

                                                                      1/2
transaction cost, which declines with age                  t =     1+et-50/10
                                                                              . Let     ItX and ItZ   represent net


investment each period into the liquid and illiquid assets so that the budget constraint


is given by


                                  Ct = Yt - ItX - ItZ + t min(ItZ , 0).

The consumer has constant relative risk aversion quasi-hyperbolic preferences and max-


imizes



           ( Ct +
                nt
                  Zt 1-
                    )             T -t
                                         
                                                                  ( Ct+n+
                                                                        t+
                                                                          Zt+ 1-
                                                                             )
max {nt                   +Et [           (    -1
                                              j =1 st+j   )(st+                        +(1-st+ )B (Xt+ , Zt+ ))]}
 X ,I Z
It   t        1-                   =1
                                                                        1-

each period    t   subject to the budget constraint. Here                   nt   represents family size in period


t,  is    the coecient of relative risk aversion,                  is a hyperbolic discount factor, and            is


an exponential discount factor. The agent is fully naive in the sense that his period                          t self
does not take into account that his period                 t + 1 self is present-biased. B (·) incorporates
the bequest motive in the death state which is represented by                           st = 0   instead of   st = 1
when the agent survives. More details can be found in Laibson et al. (2017) and the


model is solved by numerical backward induction. Laibson et al. (2017) estimate the


environmental parameters of the model using data from the American Community


Survey of the U.S. Census Bureau, the Survey of Consumer Finances, and the Panel


Study of Income Dynamics and the preference parameters of this model to match the


patterns of wealth accumulation and credit card borrowing over the life-cycle and we


adopt the parameters of their best t for the hyperbolic agent. In turn, we consider a


standard agent by setting          = 1.
     We simulate the life-cycle consumption paths of 10,000 agents and then run the




                                                            9
equivalent of our empirical specication in the simulated data; i.e.,



                                                      15
                       log(abs(Xi,t )|Xi,t < 0) =  + Ii,t + agei,t +              i,t




where   log(abs(Xi,t )|Xi,t  0)    is the amount borrowed by agent                i   at age    t   (set to zero

                                         15
if the agent does not borrow) and       Ii,t   is an indicator variable if agent          i's   realization of


income at age   t   is 67% or less than his income at age            t - 1.   The income process is cal-


ibrated to include social security and unemployment benets but does not specically


model unemployment which is why we choose a low draw of income to represent a tran-


sitory income shock. Here, we take 67% as it represents the Icelandic unemployment


insurance replacement rate. The simulation results are robust to modifying this cuto;


the lower the cuto the more extreme the borrowing response. Furthermore, to elimi-


nate life-cycle eects,   agei,t   is a set of age or cohort xed eects. Alternatively, we can


use an indicator for whether or not agent          i   at time   t   borrows as the outcome variable


as well as log consumption. Because all agents are the same in the sample of simulated


data, this regression is equivalent to our empirical specication with individual xed


eects. Of course, in reality, there does not only exist one type of agents but agents


are heterogenous in their preferences. That is why we report the regression results for


two types of agents: a hyperbolic agent, whose preference parameters are estimated by


Laibson et al. (2017) using a representative sample of the U.S. population, and also a


standard agent who does not have a hyperbolic discounting problem. If one were to


observe a mixed group of these two agents, the coecients would be an average of the


ones displayed.


   As we can see in Table 1, having an income realization less than 67% the previous


income results in a 31% and 319% increase in the likelihood and amount borrowed and


a 7% decrease in consumption in the hyperbolic discounting model. After all, present-




                                                  10
biased agents in the model are consumption smoothing as standard agents are. There-


fore, they both use borrowing as a tool to smooth transitory income shocks. Therefore,


when income is low then borrowing increases. For the standard agent, the borrowing


response is somewhat less pronounced but still positive and signicant. However, the


standard agent almost never borrows at the level of interest rates considered in this


model (calibrated to match actual interest rates on credit cards). In fact, the standard


agent only borrows 0.15% of the time.



                                  [Table 1 about here]




4 Data
In this study, we exploit two complementary data sources. We rst use detailed lon-


gitudinal information on debit and credit account transactions (providing a detailed


measure of spending), balances, and limits from a nancial aggregator in Iceland. We


then test whether our results based on the nancial aggregator data are supported by


ndings based on credit card data in a representative sample of U.S. credit card hold-


ers. Even though the U.S. data is not as detailed as the nancial aggregator data, we


believe that the replication of our ndings in U.S. data ameliorates concerns regarding


external validity of the results based on the aggregator data. In the following sections


we will describe our data sources in detail.




4.1 Icelandic data: Financial Aggregator Data
The nancial aggregator data we use is generated by Meniga, a nancial aggregation


software provider to European banks and nancial institutions. Meniga's account ag-


gregation platform allows bank customers to manage all their bank accounts and credit


cards across multiple banks in one place by aggregating data from dierent nancial



                                           11
institutions.   We generate a panel of aggregated user-level data for dierent income


and spending categories as well as account balances and credit limits for 2011 to 2017.


We aggregate our data to the monthly level and restrict the analysis to individuals for


which we have full records, dened by four requirements.


   First, we restrict our sample to individuals for whom we see bank account balances


and credit lines. Second, we restrict our sample to individuals for whom we observe


income arrivals (this not only includes labor market income, but also covers sources


such as unemployment benets, pension payments, invalidity benets, and student


loans). The third requirement is that key demographic information about the user is


available (age, gender, marital status, and postal code). The nal requirement is that


the consumption of each user must be credible, which we ensure by requiring at least 5


food transactions in at least 23 months of a 24 months period.


   Furthermore, we infer employment status from salary and unemployment benet


payments we see in the data. This data set has been proven useful in multiple studies,


e.g., to analyze individual spending responses to income payments together with indi-


vidual liquidity constraints (Olafsson and Pagel, 2018a), individual spending, savings,


and consumer debt responses to retirement (Olafsson and Pagel, 2018b), and the drivers


of individual attention to personal nances (Olafsson and Pagel, 2017).


   Because our nancial aggregator data is derived from actual transactions and ac-


count balances, it overcomes the accuracy, scope, and frequency limitations of the


existing data sources of consumption, income, and nancial standing. The data we use


is exceptionally thorough and accurate with respect to capturing all income and spend-


ing because of three reasons:   (1) the income and spending data are precategorized


(with very few uncategorized transactions), (2) the app is marketed through banks


and supplied for their customers (thus covering a fairly representative sample of the


population), and (3) the data are basically free of one important shortcoming of all




                                          12
transaction-level datathe absence of cash transactions (in Iceland, consumers almost


exclusively use electronic means of payment and less than 1% by volume or number of


our transactions are ATM withdrawals). Such detailed information on consumption is


rare within this literature, which typically relies on proxies for consumption (e.g., car


purchases), noisy survey measures of consumption, or imputed measures of consumption


from yearly snapshots of wealth and income.




Description of sample

Table 2 displays summary statistics of employed and unemployed individuals. Further-


more, Figure 1 shows the evolution of income and unemployment benets in the months


around job loss while Figure 2 shows the distribution of the length of unemployment


spells.



                       [Table 2 and Figures 1 and 2 about here]



   The evolution of income and unemployment benets shows that income increases


slightly in the months leading up to job loss. This can be explained by the fact that


unused holiday payments are paid out together with the last salary payment for indi-


viduals asked to leave their jobs. Upon unemployment there is a sharp drop in income


which is quite stable and then increases. This can be explained by the fact that not all


unemployed individuals claim their unemployment benets from the very start of their


unemployment spell (this does not mean that they forego their benets, only that they


are paid out later).


   As can be seen when looking at the distribution of the length of unemployment spells,


the vast majority of unemployment spells are relatively short. The median length of


an unemployment spell is 4 months while the mean length is 6.3 months. In terms of


labor market regulations, Iceland is characterized by relatively exible labor laws, more




                                           13
similar to the U.S. than continental Europe. Moreover, unemployment is low. In 2017


only 2.4% of individuals were unemployed. In comparison, 2017 average unemployment


was 6% in the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)


countries, 8% in the European Union, and 4.5% in the U.S.


    Historically, the Icelandic labor market has been characterized by a very low and


stable rate of unemployment with unemployment generally uctuating below 3%. Even


during the nancial crisis, unemployment peaked at only around 8%.                   High levels of


economic growth in Iceland in the years after the 2008 nancial crisis have helped reduce


the level of unemployment down to a level near its historical average. In that sense, we


are not overly concerned that the crisis in Iceland matters for our ndings. While the


Icelandic nancial crisis undoubtedly aected individuals, the country recovered very


quickly after the crisis and experienced high economic growth and low unemployment

                                     7
during our entire sample period.         Furthermore, the fact that unemployment is and has


been low in Iceland makes it unlikely that those without a job fear being unemployed


for a long period of time, i.e., unemployment is arguably a transitory income shock


in our setting as opposed to countries where unemployment rates and durations are


higher.


    Furthermore, Iceland is very similar to many other economies, including the U.S.,


when it comes to usage of high-interest unsecured consumer debt. Individuals hold on


average approximately $2,000 in overdrafts, the main source of unsecured borrowing.


Furthermore, if we condition on individuals having an overdraft, the average overdraft


amount is approximately $6,000. In Iceland, individuals typically pay o their credit

   7 The OECD Economic Survey Iceland from June 2011 states that the economic contraction and
rise in unemployment appear to have been stopped by late 2010 with growth under way in mid-2011.
The Icelandic government was successfully able to raise $1 billion with a bond issue in June 2011,
which indicates that international investors have given the government and the new banking system a
clean bill of health. By mid-2012, Iceland was regarded as a recovery success story (Forelle, Charles
(19 May 2012) Wall Street Journal.). According to OECD gures, the Icelandic economy grew by 7.2%
in 2016, which was the second highest growth in the OECD in 2016.




                                                 14
card in full and use overdrafts to roll-over debt (more details can be found in the next


section). Nevertheless, individuals still enjoy substantial liquidity or borrowing capac-


ities. In fact, the average individual could borrow another $10,000 on average before


hitting their credit limits.   In comparison, the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF)


shows that the average credit card debt for individuals rolling over is approximately


$4,000 in the U.S. We thus believe that our results can be generalized to the U.S. and


other European countries with relatively large consumer debt holdings, e.g., the U.K.,


Spain, and Turkey.




Institutional background: borrowing and unemployment in Iceland

Individuals in Iceland use overdrafts as their main means of high-interest unsecured


consumer debt. An overdraft occurs when withdrawals from a checking account exceed


the available balance. This means that the balance is negative and hence that the bank


is providing credit to the account holder and interest is charged at the agreed rate.


Virtually all current accounts in Iceland oer a pre-agreed overdraft facility, the size of


which is based upon aordability and credit history. This overdraft facility can be used


at any time without consulting the bank and can be maintained indenitely (subject


to ad hoc reviews). Although an overdraft facility may be authorized, technically the


money is repayable on demand by the bank. In practice this is a rare occurrence as the


overdrafts are protable for the bank.


   Wage earners in Iceland or self-employed individuals who lose their jobs may be


entitled to unemployment benets. More specically, wage earners and self-employed


individuals may be entitled to basic unemployment benets for the rst half-month (10


working days) after they lose their job. After having been paid basic benets for the


rst two weeks after the loss of their jobs, wage earners and self-employed individuals


may be entitled to income-linked unemployment benets for up to three months. The




                                           15
income-linked benets of wage earners can be up to 67% of their average income during


a six-month reference period beginning two months before the loss of employment and


this reference period cannot be shorter than four months. The income-linked benets


of self-employed individuals can as well be up to 67% of their average income during the


preceding income year in which the individual became unemployed. The income-linked


benets are capped at approximately               $3,800,     i.e., there is a maximum in the amount


of monthly payments of unemployment benets. Furthermore, after three months of


unemployment, the income-linked benets are canceled, and only basic benets are


paid thereafter.       Unemployment benets are paid for a maximum of thirty months.


Moreover, individuals receiving unemployment benets who have children under the


age of 18 to provide for may be entitled to an additional 4% of their average income


of undiminished basic benets for each child. The basic benets amount is capped at


approximately       $2,400.8
   After being in a job for six months, individuals are entitled to a three months notice


of unemployment and can be entitled to a notice up to six months in advance (which


is not the case for the majority of the population however). To include periods of time


in which unemployment would have been unexpected at least for some of the sample,


we begin four months prior to the beginning of unemployment for any event study


illustrations.




Denitions of variables

Total discretionary spending                  - Spending is pre-classied into 15 categories and


aggregated to generate a monthly panel. The spending categories are groceries, fuel,

           9
alcohol,       ready made food, home improvement, transportation, clothing and acces-

  8 Further      details   can   be   found     here:        https://vinnumalastofnun.is/en/unemployment-
benets/unemployment-benet-amounts
  9 We can observe expenditures on alcohol that is not purchased in bars or restaurants because a
state-owned company, the State Alcohol and Tobacco Company, has a monopoly on the sale of alcohol



                                                        16
sories, sports and activities, pharmacies, media, bookstores, thermal baths, toy stores,


insurances, and various subcategories of recreation (e.g., cinemas, gaming, gambling


etc.). Total spending is the sum of the spending in all these categories and excludes all


recurring spending, e.g., rent and bills.


    Necessities - Expenditures in grocery stores, gas stations and pharmacies.
    Discretionary entertainment        - Expenditures in the alcohol, restaurants/take-


outs, lottery, gambling, gaming, and cinema categories.


    Cash - Cash is dened as the sum of checking and savings account balances, nor-
malized by the average discretionary spending per day of individuals, i.e., we measure


cash in consumption days. We observe checking and savings account balances for ap-


proximately half of the sample period.


    Liquidity - Liquidity is dened as cash plus credit and overdraft limits minus credit
card and overdraft balances, normalized by the average discretionary spending per day


of individuals, i.e., we measure liquidity in consumption days.


    Credit lines - Credit lines are dened as borrowing capacity until individuals hit
their overdraft and credit card limits, normalized by the average income per month of


individuals, i.e., we measure credit lines in month of average income.


    Overdraft usage     - Individuals typically pay o their credit card in full and use


overdrawn checking accounts to roll-over debt.    We look at whether individuals hold


an overdraft in a given month, i.e., their checking account balance is negative at least


once, how many overdrawn checking accounts they have, and how much they pay in


overdraft interest.


    Late fees - Fees assessed for paying bills after their due date.
    Income - Income is pre-classied by the aggregator app and we observe the following
regular income categories: child support, benets, child benets, interest income, inva-

in Iceland.




                                            17
lidity benets, parental leave, pension income, housing benets, rental benets, rental


income, salaries, student loans, and unemployment benets. In addition, we observe


the following irregular income categories:     damages, grants, other income, insurance


claims, investment transactions, reimbursements, tax rebates, and travel allowances.




4.2 U.S. data: consumer credit panel
For the U.S. replication, we use the Consumer Credit Panel (CCP) of the Federal


Reserve Bank of New York containing detailed information on individual debt and credit


(Lee and Van der Klaauw, 2010). The Consumer Credit Panel (CCP) is an anonymous


longitudinal panel of individuals, comprising a 5% random sample of all individuals


who have a credit report with Equifax for the period between 1999 and 2017.             Our


quarterly sample starts in 1999 rst quarter and ends in 2017 third quarter. The data


is described in detail in Lee and Van der Klaauw (2010). We use a 0.01% sample for


purposes of the current analysis, which includes information on approximately 250,000


randomly selected individuals each quarter. For our main specications, we aggregate


data to the county level.


   The CCP provides credit registry information on all debts monitored by one of the


three main credit bureaus, in addition to public records (bankruptcies and deaths) and


mobility (address changes) for all individuals that are visible to the credit registry (i.e.,


the very young and any others without reported debts are excluded). This panel data


set allows us to study a number of aspects of individuals' nancial liabilities, including


their bankruptcies and foreclosures, mortgages, detailed delinquencies, various types of


debts, the number of accounts, and balances. Information on location of residence is


available at the census block level.


   Table 3 provides summary statistics on the average change in revolving credit card


debt as well as total debt balances and utilization ratios in the U.S. credit panel. It



                                             18
also reports the number of inquiries as well as individual risk scores, age, and income.



                                 [Table 3 about here]



   The main benet of the U.S. data is that it provides an externally valid test of any of


our ndings based on the nancial aggregator data. The CCP is a representative sample


of the U.S. population and we can look at individuals' entire balance sheet responses


because it links all borrowing and credit cards to each individual. Moreover, the sample


is large and has sucient statistical power to perform quantile regressions as we do.


The main drawback is that we do not have information on income and employment


status of the individuals in our sample, so we must restrict ourselves to examining


borrowing responses to local unemployment shocks. Furthermore, in the credit panel,


we only observe a snapshot of credit card balances which we take as a measure of


rolled over consumer debt.   Clearly, snapshots of credit card statement balances are


an imperfect measure of the amount of credit card debt rolled over each period and


on which interest is owed, but are commonly used in the literature (see, e.g. Agarwal


et al., 2017; Braxton et al., 2018; Keys et al., 2017).   In fact, snapshots of balances


may not even be positively correlated with rolled-over consumer debt in the event


of unemployment. After all, we know that individuals cut consumption substantially


(Ganong and Noel, 2018, and shown in our analysis) which will reduce credit card


balances. However, if individuals cut consumption and, at the same time, increase their


rolled-over consumer debt, then the outcome that we study is negatively correlated with


the outcome that we are interested in. In contrast, the Icelandic data set overcomes


both of these challenges: we know what is the amount of rolled over interest-bearing


debt and we know who gets unemployed.




                                           19
5 Methodology

5.1 Individual-level analysis using nancial aggregator data
For the analysis using the nancial aggregator data, we estimate the eect of unem-


ployment by running the following regression




                    yi,t = 0 + 1 U nemploymenti,t + 2 Xi,t + t + i +             i,t                 (1)



where   yi,t   is the outcome under considerationspending, savings, or use of consumer


creditof individual      i   at time   t, U nemploymenti,t     is an indicator equal to     1   if   i   is


unemployed at time       t   and equal to   0   otherwise.   Xi,t   is a vector of controls,    t    are


month-by-year xed eects, and            i   is an individual xed eect.          The    1   coecient


thus measures by how much the individual outcome deviates when the individual is


unemployed. The individual xed eects control for all time invariant (un)observable


individual characteristics. It is important to note that when we estimate the responses


to unemployment in the months after losing a job and that we exclude observations in


the last three months prior to the onset of unemployment. In turn, the interpretation


of an unemployment estimate is relative to the individual outcome prior to receiving


the unemployment notice.


   Because economic models suggest that liquidity holdings are important for individ-


ual responses to transitory income shocks, we also modify our benchmark specication


and allow for interaction eects between unemployment and liquidity. The specication


is as follows:




           yi,t = 0 + 1 U nemploymenti,t + 2 U nemploymenti,t  liquidityi,t-4

                                + 3 liquidityi,t-4 + t + i +         i,t                             (2)




                                                  20
where   liquidityt-4   is the amount of liquidity, measured in number of average consump-


tion days, held by individual    i   four months prior to unemployment, to avoid problems


of reverse causality. The consumption days are individual specic: for instance, if an


individual spends $100 per day has liquidity of $1,000, he or she has 10 consumption


days of liquidity. The reason for using liquidity four months before the onset of unem-


ployment is that the vast majority of workers have a three months notice period and we


do not want to pick up liquidity increases in anticipation of unemployment for instance.




5.1.1 Dynamic responses

How strongly spending and borrowing respond to a transitory income shock depends


obviously on the time frame under consideration. The results above focus on the average


eect within any month of unemployment.              Of equal interest is how spending and


borrowing respond to unemployment over time.           We therefore also estimate impulse


responses over the four months after losing a job, conditional on being unemployed


for at least four months to make sure that the sample size for each of the coecient


estimates remains the same. We employ the following specication:




        yi,t+k = 0 + 1,k U nemploymenti,t + t+k + i +       i,t+k for   k = -3, -2, ..., 3   (3)




where the   1,k s   are the main coecients of interest. Each    1,k     represents the eect of


unemployment on the outcome under investigation in month                t + k.   It is important


to note that when we estimate the eect of a unemployment on the outcomes under


investigation in the months after the loss of a job we include observations up to 3


months before they lost their job, where most individuals receive their notice of layo,


so as to capture any potential announcement eects. The cumulative eect is given by




                                               21
the sum of the   1,k s.10


5.2 Analysis using the U.S. credit panel
For the analysis using U.S. data, our main specications regress dollar changes in credit


outcomes aggregated at the county level on percentage changes in unemployment rates


(results are similar using other measures of changes in employment conditions). While


our main analysis is at the county-level, our additional analyzes pursue individual-level


variation.


   As a source of plausibly exogenous variation in employment, we use a Bartik-


style shift-share instrument for employment shocks.                More specically, the change in


a county's employment is instrumented using the interaction of the pre-period industry


mix of employment in that local labor market with the national change in industry em-


ployment (exclusive of the given county). National increases in demand in some sectors


therefore result in plausibly exogenous changes in employment at the local level. Our


exclusion restriction for interpreting estimates as causal eects of consumer demand


is that the pre-period industrial mix interacted with the national industry trend does


not directly aect local credit card variables outside of its eect on local employment


(income).


   More formally, we consider the following regression:




                    yc,t =  U nemploymentc,t + Xc,t + t + c +                    c,t                  (4)

  10 The dierences between the cumulative eects here and the estimated eects in our main speci-
cation can be explained by the following: for the impulse responses we make restrictions 1) we use
the same individuals to estimate each of the   1,k s,   i.e., we restrict ourselves to individuals that we
do observe unemployed for at least 3 months prior to the onset of their unemployment and 2) we
only use individuals we observe unemployed for at least 4 consecutive months after that. In our main
specication we do not make this restriction and we also exclude the 3 months prior to unemployment
because we do not want to confound the anticipation eect of unemployment and the actual eect.




                                                  22
when the credit outcomes studied are aggregated from individual-level outcomes by


taking the mean in that county and time period.                         Before proceeding to quantile re-


gression analysis using individual-level observations, we also conrm our county-level


OLS ndings using individual observations that allow for individual-level xed-eects


regressions, to conrm the estimates are largely unchanged:




                            yi,t =  U nemploymentc,t + Xi,t + t + i +                    i,t                     (5)



where    yi/c,t   is the credit outcome of individual               i   or county   c   at date   t   and   i/c   is


an individual or county xed eect.                      The      coecients thus measure by how much


outcomes of individuals that live in counties that experience unemployment shocks


deviate. Fixed eects control for all (un)observable individual or county characteristics


and    Xi/c,t   controls for time-varying characteristics such as individuals' (or counties'


mean) credit scores. Furthermore,                  t   are time xed eects that capture any systemic


changes or shocks across counties at each individual point in time.


   To isolate a source of variation in                  U nemploymentc,t       we instrument it using a


measure of predicted unemployment, dened in the following way:




                                                   Employmenti,t
        U nemploymentc,t =                    (                   - 1)EmploymentSharei,t-1,c
                                          i
                                                  Employmenti,t-1

          Employmenti,t
where
         Employmenti,t-1
                                 -1   is the change in the national employment of industry                  i   from


time   t-1        to   t   and   EmploymentSharei,t,c          is the share of employment in industry              i
at time    t   in county     c.   As an employment outcome, for comparability to our Icelandic


analysis, we focus on changes in unemployment rates (results are qualitatively similar


when examining percentage changes in employment).                          We generate the above shocks


using quarterly census data (QCEW).



                                                          23
       The credit outcomes we consider are the change in credit card balances, the change


in credit card limits, the sum of changes in all revolving debts (including home equity),


the number of credit inquiries (from any lender or application), and the credit utilization


ratio. The credit utilization ratio is calculated by dividing the outstanding balance on


the category of revolving debt by the total appropriate credit limit. We report results


for both contemporaneous and delayed employment. For robustness, we report results


where we control for delayed credit score and also where we only consider specic,


shorter, time periods surrounding the nancial crisis (2008 to 2014). Standard errors


are clustered at the county level as the unemployment instrument is a county-level


source of variation.




Analysis of conditional distributions using quantile regressions

Whereas the above regressions estimate a conditional mean of an outcome variable


given certain values of predictor variables, a quantile regression aims at estimating any


point on the conditional distribution, such as the conditional median or other quantiles.


Recall that the     -quantile    of a distribution is the point on the support such that the


probability of observing values at that point or below is     %.   Quantile regressions allow


us to examine the data under the assumption that a particular quantile changes as a


linear function of some variables      x.
       A quantile regression diers from an ordinary least squares regression in two key re-


spects. First, the quantile regression minimizes the sum of absolute errors, rather than


the sum of squared errors. Second, it puts dierential weights on the errors depending


on whether an error term is above or below a quantile. In a quantile regression of      yi,t   on


xi,t   the regression slope      is chosen to minimize the quantile weighted absolute value


of errors. More specically, for a range of quantiles from 2 to 98, instead of    Q( )   being


xed at     Q( ) = a ,   we assume that:




                                               24
                                     Qyi,t (, xi,t ) = a + xi,t                            (6)



where     xi,t   includes any individual-level or time-varying controls in addition to county-


level unemployment shocks, our variable of interest.


      We use quantile regressions to examine heterogeneity in individual credit responses


to unemployment shocks.           The quantile regressions allow us, for instance, to investi-


gate whether any portion of the distribution responds as individuals who were using


credit cards for consumption smoothing would. While the average borrowing response


might be insensitive to unemployment shocks, there may be some borrowers responding


strongly to changes in county-level unemployment rates by borrowing. To investigate


this we can look at whether the upper quantiles of changes in credit card borrowing are


(inversely) sensitive to changes in unemployment. Quantile regressions thus give us a


more comprehensive analysis of the relationship between unemployment and borrowing


in the U.S. data.




6 Results using nancial aggregator data
Table 4 shows our estimates of the average eect of unemployment in Iceland, i.e.,


the   1   coecients of Equation 1 for the outcomes under consideration, both with and


without individual xed eects, and with and without interacting unemployment with


liquidity holdings prior to the onset of unemployment. We focus on the rst 4 months


of unemployment to maximize sample size, and restrict our sample to individuals that


are unemployed for at least 4 months. The reason we restrict our analysis to individuals


that are unemployed for at least 4 months is that we want to avoid including individuals


that are unemployed voluntarily for a short period of time in our analysis. Individuals


can leave their job and receive unemployment benets for a couple of months before



                                                 25
starting a new job.   For individuals that would like to take some time o between


starting a new job this might be an attractive option. However, these individuals are


not those of interest to us. Individuals that want to take some time o from work are


unlikely to do that for 4 months or longer and we therefore believe that by restricting


our analysis to these individuals we exclude individuals that voluntarily leave their jobs.


   The table shows the eect of unemployment on total discretionary spending as


well as "necessary" spending (groceries, fuel, and pharmacies) and "discretionary" en-


tertainment (alcohol, restaurants, other activities, lottery tickets, gambling, gaming,


bookstores, recreational sports, specialty stores, theaters, shows, and toys). It is im-


portant to note that we only consider discretionary spending and not consumption


commitments, i.e., recurring spending, such as rent, mortgage payments, and utilities.


Moreover, the table shows results for cash holdings (checking and savings account bal-


ances) as well as liquidity (checking and savings account balances plus credit limits


minus credit card balances).    We normalize cash holdings and liquidity by the daily


average discretionary spending of individuals, i.e., we measure cash and liquidity in


individual consumption days. Furthermore, we consider use of overdrafts, late fees, and


credit lines. Credit lines are measured as distance to credit limits and normalized by


average individual income. Table 5 shows results by income reduction terciles, Table


A.4 by initial liquidity, and Table 7 by whether or not an individuals hold an overdraft


most of the time.


                          [Tables 4, 5, A.4, and 7 about here]


   We nd that individuals decrease their spending considerably in response to unem-


ployment by about 8% per month. Cash holdings are insignicant and average around


zero and liquidity and credit lines are also insignicant and small. Furthermore, we nd


a very tightly estimated zero eect on the likelihood of overdrawing the checking ac-


count or the number of overdrawn checking accounts. It appears that individuals make


                                            26
a conscious decision to cut down their spending and try to restrict themselves rather


than entering high-interest cost territory to smooth their consumption. Furthermore,


we also obtain a tightly estimated insignicant coecient on overdraft interest. While


the likelihood to hold an overdraft is tightly estimated for all subgroups of individuals,


however, the overdraft interest is more noisily estimated for some splits. The noisiness is


partly due to the fact that interest rates and mark-ups vary over the sample period and


within individuals. For that reason, we consider the likelihood to have an overdraft as


the better outcome variable. That said, overdraft interest is never signicantly negative


for any subgroup of individuals split by income reduction, liquidity, or the frequency of


overdraft use.


   When we break the results up by income reduction terciles we nd that the reduction


in spending is largest among individuals whose income is reduced the most. However,


we do not nd a signicant increase in the probability of having an overdraft among any


of the groups. The coecients for the probability of an overdraft are tightly estimated


around zero and even in the 3rd income reduction tercile we can rule out an increase


in the probability of holding an overdraft that is greater than 5%.


   When we break the results up by initial liquidity, we nd that the reduction in


spending is largest among individuals who have less liquidity. However, we do not nd


a signicant increase in the probability of entering or rolling over an overdraft among


the two groups. The coecients for the probability of an overdraft is tightly estimated


around zero and we can rule out an increase in the probability of holding an overdraft


that is greater than 5%. That said, we do nd that individuals in the low liquidity group


decrease their cash holdings by using some of their initial savings to consume.       This


also reduces their liquidity signicantly. However, credit lines, i.e., how much borrowing


capacity individuals have until they would hit their overdraft and credit card limits, is


insignicant and small as before. Thus, individuals use cash that they have to smooth




                                            27
consumption but are not inclined to borrow any more.


   Given that on average individuals overdraw their checking accounts about half the


time, we thus nd that these overdrafts do not seem to be driven by unemployment. To


make that more clear, we also split the sample according to whether or not individuals


hold an overdraft most of the time in Table 7.      For both high-frequency and low-


frequency users of overdrafts, we nd similarly small and insignicant responses of


overdraft frequency to unemployment. Thus, unemployment does not seem to be the


main reason to holding overdrafts.


   Whether or not we control for individual xed eects has a large eect on the size


of the coecients and on the explanatory power. More specically, the inclusion of in-

                                                                                       2
dividual xed eects suppresses the regression coecients while greatly increasing R .


This underscores the importance of individual characteristics in the amount of borrow-


ing the individual engages in, highlighting potential selection problems and the need to


control for time-invariant characteristics (observable and unobservable). To the best of


our knowledge, the analysis of individual-level data using xed-eects regressions with


transaction-level, high-frequency data has not been undertaken before in this literature


and might explain why we conclude that borrowing is not used to smooth consumption


in contrast to some existing papers (Browning and Crossley, 2009; Gruber, 1997; Keys,


2010; Sullivan, 2008).


   In Figure 3 we show the impulse response of unemployment on spending controlling


for individual and month-by-year xed eects.       Estimated values are with respect to


4 months prior to job loss (period -4) since the standard notice period is 3 months.


Clearly, individuals cut their consumption considerably at the onset of unemployment


and then increase it gradually.


                                  [Figure 3 about here]


   In Figure 4 we look at the impulse response of the probability of holding an overdraft


                                           28
to unemployment controlling for individual and month-by-year xed eects. Estimated


values are with respect to 4 months prior to job loss (period -4) since the standard


notice period is 3 months.   We do not nd signicant results and all estimates and


standard errors are small.



                                 [Figure 4 about here]



   We thus document an obvious discrepancy between our theoretical and empirical


results.   In the event of an income shock calibrated to the Icelandic unemployment


replacement rate, the hyperbolic agents in the model, calibrated to match the real-


world borrowing on credit cards that we see, increase their amount borrowed by 319%,


the probability to borrow by 31%, and decrease their spending by 7%.         While the


spending responses matches the data quite well, the borrowing response is completely


o. Clearly, in the model, the reason to borrow is to smooth consumption in response


to transitory income shocks, however, we do not nd such behavior in the data.




6.1 Robustness Checks
In this section we examine potential explanations for the spending responses that we


observe during unemployment spells. Among the most plausible explanations for the


dierence between the predictions of the theoretical models and the empirical evidence


are binding liquidity constraints, changes in beliefs about permanent income, and shifts


from market goods to home production. In the following subsections we will assess the


empirical relevance of each of these potential explanations.   At the same time, these


additional results provide a number of robustness checks for our main ndings.




                                          29
6.1.1 Binding liquidity constraints

As can be seen in Table 4, interacting unemployment with liquidity does not change our


main ndings. Liquidity holdings do not appear to explain how individual spending and


consumer debt respond to unemployment. Furthermore, as can be seen in Table 2, both


employed and unemployed individuals have substantial liquidity or borrowing capacity,


i.e., cash holdings or space until they hit their credit and overdraft limits. Unemployed


individuals have on average more than $8,000 in liquidity left which translates into


more than 150 days or ve months of discretionary spending. The liquidity and credit


lines that individuals have and therefore their borrowing capacity does not decrease


upon getting unemployed. These ndings suggest that it is not liquidity constraints or


a decrease in credit supply that deter individuals from borrowing more.


   It is interesting to compare these regression results to those in Table A.4 where we


show results for individuals who have above and below median liquidity. The results in


Table A.4 show that the eect of unemployment on spending is much more pronounced


among individuals with low liquidity.    When we look at liquidity and credit lines in


this table, we see a signicant negative change in cash for low-liquidity individuals (i.e.,


a reduction in checking and savings account balances). A reduction in cash holdings


translates into a reduction in liquidity but we do not see decreases in credit lines or


borrowing capacity (which is insignicant and small). Most importantly, we do not see


any signicant eect on the likelihood to borrow and the zero eect is tightly estimated


for both low and high liquidity households.      Directionally, low liquidity households


have a positive but insignicant eect in overdraft debt and high liquidity households a


negative eect, therefore, if anything it appears as if low-liquidity households respond to


unemployment by borrowing more. That said, we observe a relatively noisy coecient


here. That is the reason we prefer the likelihood to borrow as the outcome variable. Our


zero coecient is very tightly estimated here for both high-liquidity and low-liquidity



                                            30
individuals.


   It is also important to note here that sorting based on an endogenous variable (liq-


uidity or income) and running separate regressions for each group is not inconsistent


with liquidity playing an important role.    However, such sorting does not provide a


strong test for the importance of liquidity in determining how spending and borrow-


ing respond to an adverse transitory income shock such as unemployment. After all,


individuals with high or low income or liquidity are very dierent on an uncountable


number of dimensions. Interacting unemployment with liquidity holdings prior to job


loss provides a more powerful within-individual test and suggests that limited liquidity


is not the reason for a lack of borrowing in response to unemployment.




6.1.2 Changes in beliefs about permanent income

The lack of a borrowing response could be explained by a permanent income shock in-


stead of a temporary shortfall. However, when we compare the incomes of individuals


before and after their job loss, we nd that their income is not permanently lower after


they lose their jobs. This can be seen in Figure 5 plotting the evolution of labor income


prior to and after the onset of unemployment, independent of the duration of the un-


employment spell. The share of the unemployed individuals thus decreases as we move


further away from the onset of unemployment and the average labor income increases.


Around 11 months after the onset of unemployment there is no statistically signicant


dierence in the average income of individuals who at some point lose their job from


their average income prior to the onset of unemployment. This shows that unemploy-


ment is indeed a transitory income shock in the setting of our paper.      As discussed


earlier, throughout the sample period, the Icelandic economy was growing substantially


and unemployment was consistently low throughout so that unemployment shocks are


transitory income shocks. As mentioned earlier, unused holidays are paid out with the




                                            31
last salary payments for individuals who are asked to leave their jobs. This explains


why we see an income increase in the months prior to the start of an unemployment


spell.



                                 [Figure 5 about here]



   It could be the case that individuals are uncertain about whether the unemploy-


ment shock is permanent or transitory, or could even hold systematically biased beliefs


about the severity of the shock, and therefore be reluctant to borrow more. Rozsypal


and Schlafmann (2017) show that there is over-persistence bias in individual income


expectations although Druedahl and Jørgensen (2018) show that people seem to be


able to distinguish between permanent and transitory income shocks.        Furthermore,


there is a study by Spinnewijn (2015) on individual beliefs about the duration of unem-


ployment showing that people underestimate the length of unemployment spells. The


eects of misguided beliefs about shock persistence is outlined in a general-equilibrium


model in Kozlowski et al. (2016). But even in models such as the one in Rozsypal and


Schlafmann (2017), any agent with a concave utility function would borrow more in the


event of adverse transitory income shocks. As discussed, we argue that the Icelandic


situation makes it unlikely that people think their income is permanently aected. But


even if some individuals have wrong beliefs about the temporary nature of the unem-


ployment shock, we should see that some individuals respond with borrowing instead


of estimating a tight zero. Moreover, almost all individuals regularly hold high-interest


consumer debt, they must build up this debt in some instances but unemployment does


not appear to be a reason. Thus, in summary, even though unemployment probably


constitutes the largest transitory income shocks individuals typically face, we do not


nd a borrowing response that would explain why our individuals hold so much debt


on a regular basis.




                                           32
6.1.3 Substitution from market goods towards home production and non-
            separabilities between consumption and leisure

Theory predicts that if preferences over consumption and leisure are non-separable


then individuals will smooth their marginal utility from consumption and adjustments


in leisure time can therefore lead to changes in consumption. Furthermore, having more


time on their hands implies that the opportunity cost of home production is reduced


so the unemployed are likely to substitute market goods with home produced goods,


causing a decline in spending. Such time allocation response is plausible but is often


dicult to verify empirically due to data limitations. Unemployed workers may also be


able to forgo work-related expenses like commuting. However, at the same time many


workers receive either subsidized or free meals during working hours and are able to


combine their work commute with other activities such as bringing children to school

              11
or daycare.        Other research (see, e.g., Gruber, 1997; Guler and Taskin, 2013) that has


focused on this question has found signicant declines in actual expenditures among


the unemployed but smaller declines in proxies for consumption or utility.                  However,


because there are arguments for both increases (e.g, no more free meals) and decreases


(less commuting costs) in expenditure in relation to being unemployed, it is not clear


whether the ndings of previous studies that are conducted in a particular setting can


necessarily be applied to other settings. This is therefore an empirical question that


needs to be investigated in each setting.


    We use the richness of our data to look for direct evidence of changes in home


production and leisure spending.         We re-estimate our main specication for dierent

  11 Daycare in Iceland is highly subsidized and is provided for children from the age of 6 months.
However, getting a spot often requires some waiting and if parents take their children out of the
daycare facility during unemployment spells they can in general not get the same slot again once
they return to work.    Taking children out of daycare in order to reduce expenses during periods of
unemployment is therefore highly unlikely. Children start elementary school at the age of 6 and schools
are free.




                                                  33
spending categories and the results are shown in Figure 6. If unemployed individuals


are substituting from market goods towards more home production, this would be


evident through relatively greater decreases in spending on items such as restaurants


and relatively smaller decreases or even increases in spending in grocery stores for


instance. However, as can be seen in 6, the reduction in restaurant and grocery store


spending is remarkably similar. Furthermore, other expenditures that serve as proxies


for work related expenses, e.g., fuel spending, is reduced by about as much as proxies for


leisure expenses, e.g., recreation. These nding suggest that substitution from market


goods to home production as an explanation for the drop in spending upon job loss


does not seem to be empirically relevant in the setting of this study.


   One potential explanation for a drop in spending during a transitory income decline


is that individuals simply consume previously-purchased nonperishables while their


spending on perishables remains the same. We can test for this directly by comparing


spending in consumption categories which can be labeled as durables and nondurables.


Figure 6 shows that we we nd a statistically signicant reduction in all main consump-


tion categories except for alcohol and that the response of some perishable spending


categories, e.g, ready-made-food spending, and some nonperishable spending categories,


e.g., home improvement, are similar. This suggests that the perishability of goods that


spent on cannot explain our ndings.


   While Figure 6 shows the average coecients for the entire unemployment spell,


Appendix Figures A.1 and A.2 show the responses over time.


   To summarize, our ndings based on the nancial aggregator data suggest that


individuals smooth their consumer credit usage during adverse transitory income shocks


while they let consumption adjust by spending less in all categories.       Furthermore,


even if individuals are able to make up for their reduction in salary income by home


production, the question remains: why do we observe such large consumer debt positions




                                           34
in the rst place? If large transitory income shocks, such as unemployment, are not the


reason as our models predict, then what are the reasons?




6.1.4 Other types of high-interest borrowing
                                                                              12
We also do not see an eect of unemployment on the use of payday loans.             Furthermore,


as can be seen in Figure 7, when investigating the use of payday loans more generally,


we can see that a substantial fraction of borrowers are able to borrow money less


expensively. The gure shows the distribution of individual liquidity, i.e., space that


individuals have until they reach their credit limits, net the amount of the payday loan.


For 65% of individuals, this amount is negative, but 35% of individuals could have


tapped their existing credit instead of borrowing using a payday loan.


   Furthermore, Table 8 analyzes the consumption categories on days in which indi-


viduals take out a payday loan versus other days. It can be seen that individuals do


not only spend on necessities on days with payday loans but seem to increase spending


on discreationary goods and services even more. This supports that high-interest unse-


cured consumer loans are in most cases not used in response to rainy days and suggests


that self-control or poor information are proximate causes of payday borrowing, rather


than liquidity constraints. The fact that individuals tend to borrow in response to good


news rather than bad news is also documented in Olafsson and Pagel (2019). In this


paper, it is shown that the average individual borrows more in response to small income


windfalls in the form of lottery payments.



                             [Figure 7 and Table 8 about here]



   Overall, however, our individuals do not use payday loans frequently.             Overdrafts


are the most common way to utilize high-interest unsecured consumer debt.

  12 Payday loans in Iceland are not contingent on income from paychecks and unemployment benets
provide predictable and regular income payments.



                                               35
7 Results using the U.S. credit panel
Figure 8 shows the mean changes in credit card balances by quantiles of Bartik unem-


ployment variation. We see that in terms of raw correlations, the largest average changes


in total revolving credit card balances (of around $50 to $100) are in the lowest deciles


of unemployment shocks (i.e.        positive employment shocks).          Overall, better county


employment outcomes are correlated with more, rather than less, borrowing.               Figure


8 also breaks down the estimation sample by individuals with or without credit card


borrowing slack, taking a rst step at distinguishing demand from supply. The more


constrained sample has a borrowing response that is only half of the less constrained


sample. However, even unconstrained individuals in counties with an unfavorable em-


ployment shock do not appear to increase their borrowing. We do not observe a positive


relationship between unemployment and borrowing in these gures.



                                     [Figure 8 about here]



   Table 9 reports our main regression results based on the CCP, with changes in re-


volving credit card balances as the outcome variable, and focusing on short horizons


of the same period and one quarter from the shock. We rst run our regressions with

                                               13
outcomes aggregated to the county level.            The estimated average borrowing responses


to unemployment are inconsistently signed and statistically insignicant.             The range


in estimates varies from a -$62 to $115 increase in credit card balances for a one per-


centage point (approximately 1 standard deviation) increase in the total unemployment


rate. Looking at the mean borrowing response to employment shocks tends to reject


consumption smoothing as a consistent driver of unsecured borrowing. Analysis using


alternative measures of employment (percentage changes in employment or changes in


logs) provide similar statistically insignicant results.

 13 The rst stage F-statistics indicate robust identication (F-statistic > 30).



                                                36
   While we have already controlled for what is likely to be the main determinant of


supply-side constraints over this period (lagged credit scores), we also nd similar re-


sults when only looking at changes in credit card balances amongst those individuals


with slack in their utilization ratio as can be seen in Table 10. In addition, when inter-


acting employment shocks with lagged utilization ratios in Table 10, we nd a positive


coecient estimate that (if it were statistically signicant) would be inconsistent with


increases in credit card borrowing by individuals with low utilization ratios and far from


their borrowing limits. This further supports an argument that supply-side constraints


do not seem to be driving results. We also nd that the size of the borrowing response


is negatively related to baseline income, i.e., lower income individuals tend to respond


to unemployment shocks with more positive changes in borrowing, which would also


appear to argue against supply-side constraints.    In summary, the lack of a robustly


positive relationship between borrowing and unemployment in the U.S. data does not


appear to be driven by limited access to credit. Later in this section, we will present


additional evidence from changes in credit limits and new inquiries (applications for


new credit) that is also inconsistent with an access-to-credit story.



                              [Tables 9 and 10 about here]



   We next rerun our main regression with changes in credit card balances at longer


horizons.   Standard errors are clustered at the county level.    The estimates are not


majorly aected as can be seen in Table 11. Many estimated coecients are approaching


statistical precision with relatively tightly estimated standard errors, indicating 95%


condence intervals of +/- $100 in credit card balances for a 1% (approximately one


standard deviation) change in unemployment rate. Most point estimates fall inside of


this range and are statistically insignicant.



                                 [Table 11 about here]


                                           37
    Our results thus dier from the ones in Keys et al. (2017), who exploit a similar


source of instrumental variation in employment and nd a consistently positive relation-


ship between unemployment and borrowing. When we try to replicate their analysis


as closely as possible, we note two main dierences.               First, our results are based on


individual-level observations rather than card-level observations aggregated up to the


county-level and weighted by the number of credit cards in a county.                    If individuals


with dierent number of cards behave dierently (which seems plausible), a dierent


relationship should be reected in dierent estimates from aggregating individual-level


rather than card-level data.        Second, Keys et al. (2017) focus on the cross-sectional


variation of the Bartik employment shock in the rst quarter of 2008, examining vari-


ous longer horizon outcomes in response to that shock, while we focus on shorter-run


responses to employment shocks, pursuing a panel analysis of shocks over the period

                14
2000 to 2016.


    Table 12 collapses the results of various additional regressions examining additional


credit outcomes. As can be seen, the supply of credit does not appear to respond to


the cross section of Bartik shocks, as we estimate insignicant coecients close to zero


on changes in total credit card limits. Again, the coecients appear tightly estimated


with larger estimates when examining shocks arising in the previous period. Two more


credit outcomes speak to the demand versus supply of credit: the credit utilization ratio


and new inquiries. For credit utilization we again estimate an economically insignicant


relationship, with coecients which we would describe as precise zeros (for utilization at


the end of the same quarter as the shock, coecients of less than 0.3%). For inquiries,

  14 If we discard these two dierences we can reproduce similarly, economically and statistically signif-
icant point estimates using a tradeline data set recently available for the CCP sample. This replication
does not exclude other potential factors, such as a dierent sample. The Consumer Financial Protec-
tion Bureau (CFPB)-derived sample of credit card tradeline data is a much larger sample of slightly
fewer issuers, and has approximately 90% similar issuer coverage to start with for the period 2008-2014.
Keys et al. (2017) eliminate cards from any issuers not observed over the entire period to generate a
balanced sample for their analysis, which could lead to larger dierences between samples.




                                                  38
we estimate small (while sometimes positive and sometimes negative) coecients for the


whole sample period (and the crisis period from 2008 to 2014), with absolute magnitudes


less than 0.01, as shown in Table 12. Again, it does not appear as if individuals are being


denied access to credit from existing lenders, at least not as captured by applications


for new lines of credit.


   When we look at total revolving credit, which includes instruments such as home


equity loans, we estimate again economically insignicant coecients for changes in un-


employment as instrumented by Bartik shocks. The coecients are all small (less than


$15 for a one percentage point increase in unemployment rate), with standard errors


of approximately the same magnitude. Finally, looking at delinquencies or non-current


balances that predict default, it does not appear as if the source of variation in unem-


ployment we use is statistically related to falling behind on payments. The condence


intervals are wider (95% condence intervals of +/- $200 for a one percentage point


increase in unemployment rate) and the signs of the point estimates are inconsistent


when estimating the relationship of delinquency in the same or the next quarter from


the unemployment shock.



                                  [Table 12 about here]



   Finally, we examine the conditional distribution of borrowing at the individual level


with Bartik-unemployment shocks as the forcing variable. What would we expect to


see in the data if individuals use credit cards primarily to smooth consumption in re-


sponse to industry-predicted employment shocks? We would expect to see at least the


upper tail of the distribution in individual borrowing respond positively and strongly.


Table 13 therefore reports estimation results based on quantile regressions that examine


whether the results vary along the conditional distribution. Across the distribution, we


estimate either statistically insignicant borrowing responses or statistically signicant,




                                            39
but "wrongly" signed (compared to what consumption smoothing would predict) re-


sponses of credit card borrowing to unemployment. The upper end of the conditional


distribution of changes in credit card borrowing, if anything, appears to be negatively


related to employment conditions. Across the distribution, the only large or statisti-


cally signicant point estimates we see are negative to unemployment. Focusing on the


top half of the conditional distribution, the 75th quantile is estimated with statistically


signicant precision and indicates a less than $1 increase in response to one standard de-


viation in the Bartik shock (these shocks are approximately mean 0, standard deviation

         15
2.5%).


    The largest increases in borrowing (the upper quantiles) appear to occur regardless


of the size of unemployment shock. In a world where credit card borrowing is primarily


for consumption smoothing, we would expect to see the upper tail of the distribution


meaningfully and positively respond to an increase in unemployment.                  The fact that


we do not suggests that the largest changes in credit card borrowing are for non-


consumption smoothing purposes. Instead of a positive relationship to unemployment,


we nd consistent negative estimates across the distribution. We thus conclude that


the primary usage of credit cards is not in response to unemployment.



                                      [Table 13 about here]



    To verify the robustness of our results, we conduct two additional checks (results in


Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2.). First, we rerun our regressions examining changes in


borrowing weighting our regressions with the number of people in a county. Second, we


rerun our regressions at the individual level with individual xed eects (see Equation


5) . When using analytical weights by the population in a county, the point estimates

  15 The quantile regressions are estimated in reduced form, without an instrumented second stage,
and with non-robust/unclustered standard errors, which we expect to be non-conservative to statistical
signicance. Their intent is to illustrate the shape and size of conditional distribution to underlying
instrumental variation.



                                                 40
tend to move closer to zero but are now statistically signicant, with a percentage point


increase in the total unemployment rate associated with a $30 average increase in credit


card balances. Controlling for individual and time xed eects as well as lagged risk


scores and age, we estimate some statistically signicant, but all economically small,


coecients of $20-$30 increases in credit card borrowing for a one percentage change in


the county unemployment rate as instrumented for with Bartik shocks, as can be seen


in Table A.2. To interpret the magnitudes of these coecients, note that the standard


deviation in the unemployment rate is less than 1%. The estimates also do not greatly


vary depending on the choice of time period (the entire sample available, versus 2008


to 2014 only).




8 Conclusion
Economists believe that high-interest, unsecured, short-term borrowing, for instance via


credit cards and overdrafts, can help individuals to smooth consumption in the event


of transitory income shocks (Browning and Crossley, 2009; Gruber, 1997; Keys, 2010;


Sullivan, 2008). After analyzing two very high-quality data sets, however, we conclude


that individuals do not appear to use such credit to smooth consumption through large


transitory income shocks due to unemployment. In contrast, it appears as if individuals


smooth their debt balances rather than their consumption.


   We document this lack of borrowing in response to unemployment directly using


a longitudinal data set containing detailed information on consumption, income, and


account balances as well as limits from a nancial aggregator platform in Iceland. We


then turn to U.S. credit card data to replicate the lack of a borrowing response to


unemployment shocks using a Bartik (1991) style methodology.


   By comparing our empirical results to the theoretical predictions of a state-of-the-




                                          41
art model to explain the amount of borrowing we see in the data, we document a


striking discrepancy: in the model, agents increase their likelihood to borrow by 31%


and their amount borrowed by 319% and decrease their consumption by 7% in response


to a negative income shock calibrated to an unemployment event. While the spending


response in the model is a bit smaller but roughly matches the empirical nding, the


borrowing response clearly does not. In the model, the reason to borrow is to smooth


consumption in response to transitory income shocks, however, we do not nd such


behavior in the data.


   Our ndings are dicult to reconcile with theories of consumption smoothing that


predict that credit demand should be countercyclical and lean against changes in credit


supply.   On the contrary, our ndings show that consumers appear to smooth their


unsecured debt burdens rather than their consumption responses. Such behavior could


lead to greater consumption volatility than would be observed otherwise.




                                          42
References
Adelino, M., A. Schoar, and F. Severino (2016). Loan originations and defaults in the
  mortgage crisis: The role of the middle class. The Review of Financial Studies 29 (7),
  16351670.
Agarwal, S., S. Chomsisengphet, N. Mahoney, and J. Stroebel (2017). Do banks pass
  through credit expansions to consumers who want to borrow? The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 133 (1), 129190.

Aizer, A. (2010). The gender wage gap and domestic violence. The American economic
  review 100 (4), 1847.

Baker, S. R. and C. Yannelis (2017). Income changes and consumption: Evidence from
  the 2013 federal government shutdown. Review of Economic Dynamics 23, 99  124.
Bartik, T. J. (1991). Boon or boondoggle? the debate over state and local economic
  development policies.
Blanchard, O. J., L. F. Katz, R. E. Hall, and B. Eichengreen (1992). Regional evolutions.
  Brookings papers on economic activity 1992 (1), 175.

Braxton, J. C., K. Herkenho, and G. Phillips (2018). Can the unemployed borrow?
  implications for public insurance. Working paper.
Browning, M. and T. F. Crossley (2009, December). Shocks, stocks, and socks: Smooth-
  ing consumption over a temporary income loss. Journal of the European Economic
  Association 7 (6), 11691192.

Chodorow-Reich, G., L. Feiveson, Z. Liscow, and W. G. Woolston (2012). Does state
  scal relief during recessions increase employment? evidence from the american re-
  covery and reinvestment act. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (3),
  118145.
DellaVigna, S. (2009). Psychology and economics: Evidence from the eld. Journal of
  Economic literature 47 (2), 315372.

Druedahl, J. and T. Jørgensen (2018).      Can consumers distinguish persistent from
  transitory income shocks?
Fuster, A., G. Kaplan, and B. Zafar (2018). What would you do with $500? spending
  responses to gains, losses, news and loans.
Ganong, P. and P. Noel (2018). Consumer spending during unemployment: Positive
  and normative implications. American Economic Review (forthcoming).
Gelman, M., S. Kariv, M. D. Shapiro, D. Silverman, and S. Tadelis (2015, March). How
  individuals smooth spending: Evidence from the 2013 government shutdown using
  account data. Working Paper 21025, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gould, E. D., B. A. Weinberg, and D. B. Mustard (2002). Crime rates and local labor
  market opportunities in the united states: 19791997. The Review of Economics and
  Statistics 84 (1), 4561.

Gruber, J. (1997). The consumption smoothing benets of unemployment insurance.
  The American Economic Review 87 (1), pp. 192205.

Guler, B. and T. Taskin (2013). Does unemployment insurance crowd out home pro-
  duction? European Economic Review 62 (C), 116.



                                           43
Hundtofte, S. (2017). Credit aversion. Working paper.
Kahneman, D., J. Knetsch, and R. Thaler (1990). Experimental Tests of the Endow-
  ment Eect and the Coase Theorem. Journal of Political Economy 98 (6), 13251348.
Kaplan, G. and G. Violante (2014).     A model of the consumption response to scal
  stimulus payments. Econometrica 82, 11991239.
Keys, B., J. Tobacman, and J. Wang (2017). Rainy day credit? unsecured credit and
  local employment shocks. Working Paper .
Keys, B. J. (2010). The credit market consequences of job displacement. The Review
  of Economics and Statistics 0 (ja), null.

Kozlowski, J., L. Veldkamp, and V. Venkateswaran (2016).      The tail that wags the
  economy: Belief-driven business cycles and persistent stagnation.
Kuchler, T. and M. Pagel (2015). Sticking To Your Plan: Empirical Evidence on the
  Role of Present Bias for Credit Card Debt Paydown. Working Paper .
Laibson, D. (1997). Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 112 (2), 443477.

Laibson, D., P. Maxted, A. Repetto, and J. Tobacman (2017).        Estimating discount
  functions with consumption choices over the lifecycle.
Laibson, D., A. Repetto, and J. Tobacman (2003). A Debt Puzzle. in Philippe Aghion,
  Roman Frydman, Joseph Stiglitz, and Michael Woodford, eds., Knowledge, Infor-

  mation, and Expectations in Modern Economics:      In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps,

  Princeton: Princeton University Press .

Lee, D. and W. Van der Klaauw (2010). An introduction to the frbny consumer credit
  panel.
Maestas, N., K. J. Mullen, and D. Powell (2016).    The eect of population aging on
  economic growth, the labor force and productivity. Technical report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.
Mian, A., K. Rao, and A. Su (2013). Household balance sheets, consumption, and the
  economic slump. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (4), 16871726.
Mian, A. and A. Su (2009). The consequences of mortgage credit expansion: Evidence
  from the us mortgage default crisis.   The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4),

  14491496.
Müller, K. (2018).   Credit markets around the world, 1910-2014.      Available at SSRN

  3259636 .

Nguyen, H.-L., M. Greenstone, and A. Mas (2015). Essays on Banking and Local Credit
  Markets. Ph. D. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

O'Donoghue, T. and M. Rabin (1999). Doing it Now or Later. American Economic
  Review 89 (1), 103124.

Olafsson, A. and M. Pagel (2017, October). The ostrich in us: Selective attention to
  nancial accounts, income, spending, and liquidity. Working Paper 23945, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.
Olafsson, A. and M. Pagel (2018a). The liquid hand-to-mouth: Evidence from personal
  nance management software. Review of Financial Studies .
Olafsson, A. and M. Pagel (2018b, March). The retirement-consumption puzzle: New



                                              44
  evidence from personal nances. Working Paper 24405, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Olafsson, A. and M. Pagel (2019). Borrowing in response to windfalls. Working Paper .
Rozsypal, F. and K. Schlafmann (2017).     Overpersistence bias in individual income
  expectations and its aggregate implications.
Shapiro, M. D. and J. Slemrod (1995, March). Consumer response to the timing of in-
  come: Evidence from a change in tax withholding. American Economic Review 85 (1),
  27483.
Spinnewijn, J. (2015).   Unemployed but optimistic:   Optimal insurance design with
  biased beliefs. Journal of the European Economic Association 13 (1), 130167.
Sullivan, J. X. (2008). Borrowing during unemployment unsecured debt as a safety net.
  Journal of human resources 43 (2), 383412.




                                         45
Figures and tables

Table 1: The Eect of Low Income on Borrowing and Consumption in the Model of
Laibson et al. (2017)



                                                 (1)                   (2)                   (3)

                                            Log of total          Indicator for         Log of total
                                             borrowing             borrowing              spending


  Hyperbolic-discounting agent:
  Income below 67th percentile               3.1926***             0.3126***             -0.0673***
                                              (0.0061)              (0.0006)              (0.0019)


  Standard agent:
  Income below 67th percentile               0.0213***             0.0026***             -0.0301***
                                              (0.0005)              (0.0001)              (0.0009)


  #   of Observations                          71,000                71,000                71,000
  Age Fixed Eects


   This table shows the estimated eect of an income realization below the 67th percentile in the
  simulated data of the model in Laibson et al. (2017), featuring an illiquid asset, credit card bor-
  rowing, liquidity constraints, and stochastic labor income.    The hyperbolic discounting agent
  borrows on average 35% of the time and the standard agent 0.15% of the time. Standard errors
  are within parentheses. Each entry is a separate regression.




                                                  46
                       Table 2: Summary Statistics for Aggregator Dataset


                                                 Employed                         Unemployed

                                        Mean            St. Dev.          Mean            St. Dev.


Demographics:
Age                                     38.6                 11.0          39.2                11.4
Female                                  0.58                 0.49          0.60                0.49


Spending:
Total Spending                         165,066          157,037          150,965          130,038


Income:
Total Income                           348,674          486,943          207,778          323,831
Regular Income                         333,980          469,847          191,147          279,576
Irregular Income                       14,694           115,388           16,631          161,957
Salary                                 301,352          446,575           63,692          231,674
Unemployment Benets                     2,346               17,242        97,767           94,925


Balances (ISK):
Checking Account Balance               191,412          1,051,303        145,159          640,524
Savings Account Balance                199,108          1,093,441        216,563          1,786,336
Cash                                   390,520          1,521,741        361,722          1,914,925
Liquidity                              936,815          1,800,455        831,921          2,030,023


Balances (average consumption days):a
Cash                                    65.9                223.4          61.1            218.9
Liquidity                               162.5               352.5         152.2            247.0


Overdrafts and credit lines:
Credit Lines
               b                        2.253               5.033         2.369            3.081
Overdraft Indicator                     0.424               0.494         0.428            0.495
#   of Overdrafts                       0.486               0.622         0.473            0.589


Other short-term debt:
Payday Loan                              84                 2,444           76             2,083
Payday Loan Uptake                     0.20%                4.60%         0.20%            4.50%




This table contains simple raw data sample means and standard deviations comparing individuals
that are unemployed versus those who are employed. All numbers are in Icelandic krona where ap-
plicable. 1 USD        100 ISK.
Notes:
            a Measured in days of average spending.    b Measured in months of average income.




                                                  47
Figure 1: Income and unemployment benets in the months around job loss, raw data
averages.




                                      48
Figure 2: Duration of unemployment in months, raw data.




                          49
                    Table 3: Summary Statistics for U.S. Credit Panel


Variable                                   Observations     Mean     St. Dev      Min        Max



Balances, limits, utilization ratios, credit score, and inquiries:
Change in credit card balance                   16M          35.4    1,661.4     -8,137     7,318
Change in credit card limits                    16M          105.1   3,341.0    -15,700     15,000
Change in credit card utilization ratio        10.3M        0.0026   0.1638      -0.69       0.62
Utilization ratio (credit card)                10.4M        0.4548   13.2874       0        20,083
Credit Score                                   14.8M         690.9    105.2       416        828
Number of inquires within 3 months             15.4M        0.4106   0.8315        0          4


Revolving balances, limits, and non-current balances:
Change in any revolving balance                 16M          19.4     636.2      -2,695     4,409
Change in revolving limits                      16M          21.3    1,108.7     -5,416     6,050
Utilization ratio (all revolving)              11.6M        0.4818   59.6042       0        83,550
Change total debt balance                      12.7M         693.2   24,352.4   -119,967   151,625
Total debt balance                             13.1M        77,777   154,683       0       9,999,999
Change in non-current balances                 11.7M         53.4    2,752.9    -15,002     18,129


Unemployment and demographics:
Change in unemployment rate                    15.7M        0.0003   0.7581      -2.13       2.60
Bartik Employment Shock                        15.2M        0.0050   0.0210      -0.17       0.29
Age                                            12.7M         50.8      18.1       20          93
Per-capita Income                               16M         30,543    8,532     16,659      60,755



Notes: This table contains simple raw data sample means and standard deviations. All statistics
generated using individual-quarter observations in the FRBNY/Equifax Consumer Credit Panel
(CCP) for the period 2000-2016, other than county-level Bartik Employment Shock (Quarterly
Census data) and per-capita income (BEA).




                                                  50
                            Table 4: The Eects of Unemployment on Consumption and Consumer Credit Usage



                               (1)         (2)             (3)               (4)         (5)             (6)        (7)          (8)         (9)       (10)

                              Total     Necessities   Discretionary                                Overdraft       #   of     Overdraft               Credit
                                                                            Cash      Liquidity                                           Late Fees
                            Spending                  Entertainment                                Indicator     Overdrafts   Interest                 Lines


                                                                    With individual xed eects:
     Unemployed             -0.079***     -0.052        -0.118***          -0.015       0.013           0.005      -0.002       0.006      -0.012     -0.017
                             (0.018)     (0.042)         (0.038)           (0.066)     (0.048)         (0.010)    (0.012)      (0.083)     (0.066)    (0.022)

     R2                       0.084       0.024           0.041            0.019        0.039           0.002      0.002        0.001       0.007      0.026


                                                                   Including liquidity interactions:
     Unemployed             -0.070***     -0.024        -0.109**           -0.138       -0.063          0.006      0.000        0.007      -0.068     -0.024
                             (0.021)     (0.050)         (0.046)           (0.110)     (0.091)         (0.012)    (0.013)      (0.097)     (0.076)    (0.037)
     Unemployed     ×         -0.009      -0.029         -0.007            0.042*       0.022          -0.002      -0.003      -0.014       0.025      0.003
     Liquidityt-4            (0.009)     (0.020)         (0.016)           (0.025)     (0.018)         (0.004)    (0.005)      (0.031)     (0.027)    (0.008)
51




     Liquidityt-4             0.004       0.010          -0.001            -0.016       0.015           0.002      0.001        0.027     0.041**     -0.001
                             (0.005)     (0.012)         (0.011)           (0.016)     (0.013)         (0.003)    (0.004)      (0.026)     (0.019)    (0.006)

     R2                       0.084       0.024           0.041            0.019        0.040           0.002      0.002        0.001       0.007      0.026


                                                                  Without individual xed eects:
     Unemployed             -0.274***   -0.259***       -0.310***        -0.487***    -0.308***        -0.002      -0.023      -0.024     0.404***    -0.054
                             (0.024)     (0.049)         (0.047)           (0.109)     (0.074)         (0.016)    (0.019)      (0.138)     (0.095)    (0.042)

     R2                       0.044       0.013           0.028            0.005        0.012           0.007      0.006        0.005       0.007      0.003


     #    of Observations    649,372     649,372         649,372          308,110      308,110         621,221    621,221      621,221    621,221     309,039
     #    of Individuals     10,856       10,856         10,856            10,856       10,856         10,856      10,856      10,856      10,856     10,856


     Month-by-Year
     Fixed Eects

     Individual
     Fixed Eects



     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01         This table shows the estimated eect of being unemployed. Standard errors are clustered at the individual
     level and are within parentheses. Each entry is a separate regression. Cash holdings are checking and savings account balances and liquidity is
     checking and savings account balances plus overdraft limits and credit limits minus credit card balances. Cash and liquidity are measured in days
     of average spending by individuals. Credit lines are measured as distance to credit limits and normalized by average individual income.
                                       Table 5: The Eects of Unemployment by Income Reduction Terciles



                               (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)        (5)             (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)       (10)

                             Total       Necessities   Discretionary                            Overdraft         #   of     Overdraft               Credit
                                                                           Cash     Liquidity                                            Late Fees
                            Spending                   Entertainment                                Indicator   Overdrafts   Interest                Lines



                                                                    1st income reduction tercile:
     Unemployed               0.038        0.134**        -0.003           0.090      -0.040         -0.016       -0.034      -0.185       0.034     -0.041
                             (0.027)       (0.060)        (0.058)         (0.103)    (0.084)         (0.017)     (0.021)      (0.145)     (0.106)    (0.039)

     R2                       0.098         0.035          0.044           0.009      0.039          0.007        0.007        0.009       0.012     0.035

     #    of Observations    15,873        15,873         15,873           7,845      7,845          15,281       15,281      15,281      15,281     7,863
     #    of Individuals      345           345            345              345        345            345          345         345         345        345


                                                                   2nd income reduction tercile:
     Unemployed             -0.064**       -0.033         -0.059           -0.147     -0.020         0.025        0.014        0.157       0.043     -0.006
52




                             (0.030)       (0.074)        (0.063)         (0.112)    (0.078)         (0.016)     (0.019)      (0.132)     (0.115)    (0.033)

     R2                       0.093         0.036          0.056           0.024      0.047          0.005        0.004        0.005       0.010     0.036

     #    of Observations    16,882        16,882         16,882           7,946      7,946          16,313       16,313      16,313      16,313     7,962
     #    of Individuals      345           345            345              345        345            345          345         345         345        345


                                                                   3rd income reduction tercile:
     Unemployed             -0.227***     -0.260***      -0.314***         -0.025     0.077          0.021        0.032        0.174      -0.028     -0.007
                             (0.040)       (0.093)        (0.087)         (0.129)    (0.093)         (0.019)     (0.021)      (0.156)     (0.121)    (0.041)

     R2                       0.103         0.041          0.053           0.036      0.050          0.005        0.006        0.003       0.012     0.024

     #    of Observations    15,563        15,563         15,563           7,835      7,835          15,121       15,121      15,121      15,121     7,863
     #    of Individuals      346           346            346              346        346            346          346         346         346        346


     Month-by-Year
     Fixed Eects

     Individual
     Fixed Eects



     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01         This table shows the estimated eect of being unemployed. Standard errors are clustered at the individual
     level and are within parentheses. Each entry is a separate regression. Cash holdings are checking and savings account balances and liquidity is
     checking and savings account balances plus overdraft limits and credit limits minus credit card balances. Cash and liquidity are measured in
     days of average spending by individuals. Credit lines are measured as distance to credit limits and normalized by average individual income.
                                    Table 6: Eects of Unemployment by Liquidity at the Time of Job Loss



                              (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)       (10)

                             Total      Necessities   Discretionary                          Overdraft     #   of     Overdraft               Credit
                                                                       Cash      Liquidity                                        Late Fees
                            Spending                  Entertainment                          Indicator   Overdrafts   Interest                Lines


                                                                       Below median:
     Unemployed             -0.065**      -0.057         -0.066       -0.188**    -0.066       0.021       0.010        0.134       0.060     -0.005
                            (0.033)      (0.080)         (0.062)      (0.092)     (0.068)     (0.024)     (0.026)      (0.191)     (0.189)    (0.027)

     R2                      0.046        0.023           0.022        0.022      0.096        0.023       0.023        0.028       0.023     0.108

     #    of Observations    3,459        3,459           3,459        3,181      3,181        3,451       3,451        3,451       3,451     3,186
     #    of Individuals      283          283            283           283        283         283          283         283         283        283


                                                                       Above median:
53




     Unemployed              -0.072       -0.076         -0.105       0.225*      0.090       -0.021       -0.037      -0.179      -0.093     -0.012
                            (0.057)      (0.135)         (0.098)      (0.129)     (0.061)     (0.022)     (0.034)      (0.182)     (0.170)    (0.037)

     R2                      0.059        0.020           0.035        0.027      0.029        0.024       0.033        0.029       0.018     0.021

     #    of Observations    3,440        3,440           3,440        3,169      3,169        3,434       3,434        3,434       3,434     3,174
     #    of Individuals      279          279            279           279        279         279          279         279         279        279


     Month-by-Year
     Fixed Eects

     Individual
     Fixed Eects



     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01         This table shows the estimated eect of being unemployed. Standard errors are clustered at the individual
     level and are within parentheses. Each entry is a separate regression. Cash holdings are checking and savings account balances and liquidity is
     checking and savings account balances plus overdraft limits and credit limits minus credit card balances. Cash and liquidity are measured in
     days of average spending by individuals. Credit lines are measured as distance to credit limits and normalized by average individual income.
                            Table 7: The Eects of Unemployment by Low and High Frequency Users of Overdrafts



                                 (1)         (2)             (3)            (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)       (10)

                               Total      Necessities   Discretionary                           Overdraft     #   of     Overdraft               Credit
                                                                           Cash     Liquidity                                        Late Fees
                              Spending                  Entertainment                           Indicator   Overdrafts   Interest                Lines


                                                                        Low frequency users:
     Unemployed               -0.077***     -0.052         -0.094*         0.075      0.040       0.006       0.008        0.048      -0.166*    -0.015
                               (0.025)     (0.061)         (0.054)        (0.081)    (0.058)     (0.011)     (0.012)      (0.089)     (0.087)    (0.020)

     R2                         0.083       0.030           0.042          0.017      0.028       0.014       0.015        0.013       0.012     0.036

     #    of Observations      18,971       18,971         18,971          10,420    10,420      18,332       18,332      18,332      18,332     10,450
     #    of Individuals        647          647            647             647        647        647          647         647         647        647


                                                                        High frequency users:
54




     Unemployed               -0.067***     0.003          -0.100*         -0.109     -0.055      0.004       -0.007      -0.023       0.089     -0.016
                               (0.025)     (0.062)         (0.052)        (0.099)    (0.073)     (0.013)     (0.017)      (0.115)     (0.089)    (0.035)

     R2                         0.075       0.025           0.036          0.022      0.062       0.003       0.004        0.005       0.012     0.047
     # of   Observations       21,871       21,871         21,871          11,616    11,616      21,937       21,937      21,937      21,937     11,643
     # of   Individuals         703          703            703             703        703        703          703         703         703        703


     Month-by-Year
     Fixed Eects

     Individual
     Fixed Eects



     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01          This table shows the estimated eect of being unemployed. Standard errors are clustered at the individual
     level and are within parentheses. Each entry is a separate regression. Cash holdings are checking and savings account balances and liquidity is
     checking and savings account balances plus overdraft limits and credit limits minus credit card balances. Cash and liquidity are measured in
     days of average spending by individuals. Credit lines are measured as distance to credit limits and normalized by average individual income.
                  Figure 3: The impulse response of expenditure to unemployment
Notes: Regression coecients and 95% condence intervals for each month before and after unemployment with

individual and month-by-year xed eects, estimated with respect to all months prior to 3 months before start of

job loss.




                Figure 4: The impulse response of overdraft usage to unemployment
Notes: Regression coecients and 95% condence intervals for each month before and after unemployment with

individual and month-by-year xed eects, estimated with respect to all months prior to 3 months before start of

job loss.




                                                     55
                 Figure 5: Labor income prior to and after onset of unemployment
Notes: Regression coecients and standard error bars for labor income calculated in constant prices regressed on

     each month before and after unemployment controlling for individual and month-by-year xed eects.




                       Figure 6: Spending responses by consumption category
 Notes: Regression coecients and standard error bars for each consumption category controlling for individual

                                       and month-by-year xed eects.




                                                      56
 Figure 7: Distribution of liquidity net of the amount of payday loan




          Table 8: Daily Expenditures by Payday Loan Users


                           Days Receiving Loans Days Without Loans
                                                                     % Increase
                           Mean    St. Dev.    Mean    St. Dev.


Total Expenditures         62.3      75.7       29.3     99.5          113%
Groceries                  23.2      40.6       10.6     30.3          120%
Fuel                       13.0      30.1        5.4     20.6          140%
Alcohol                     3.8      14.0        1.4      9.8          162%
Ready-Made-Food            12.3      24.2       5.1      16.5          139%
Home Improvement            2.6      17.3        2.0     27.8           28%
Transportation             2.4       17.6       1.4      73.2           67%
Clothing and Accessories    2.2      18.5        1.4     17.2           55%
Sports and Activities       1.2      12.0        0.8     12.9           46%
Pharmacies                  1.5       8.1        0.9      7.2           61%


Note: All numbers are in U.S. dollars.




                                         57
                 60




                                                                                                                               100
 mean of change in CC Balance ($)




                                                                                                mean of change in CC Balance ($)
               20          40




                                                                                                           50
    0            -20




                                                                                                                 0
                                    1   2    3     4     5      6     7     8     9   10                                             1   2    3     4     5      6     7     8     9   10
                                            Decile of Bartik Unemployment Shock                                                              Decile of Bartik Unemployment Shock



                Figure 8: Mean changes in credit card balances by unemployment shock decile in U.S. data.
Notes: The observations underlying this gure are at the individual-quarter level, from a 0.1% representative sample

of U.S. credit reporting from the FRBNY/Equifax CCP. Mean changes in credit card balances are arranged by decile

of county-level Bartik unemployment shock experienced (decile 10 represents the largest unemployment shock). The

gure on the left is generated for the whole sample, while the gure on the right is only for individuals with credit

card slack, where slack is dened as having a utilization ratio on their credit cards in the previous quarter of less

than 0.9.




                          




                                                                                           58
   Table 9: Unemployment Shocks and Changes in County-Level Credit Card Balances

                                                             Credit Card Balance


   Unemployment                          57.9                 -62.4

                                        (48.2)               (53.4)

                                                                    
Age                                    -4.60                -5.93

                                        (0.59)               (1.18)


Lagged                                                           
                                        2.06                 2.71
Risk Score
                                        (0.13)               (0.24)

Lagged                                                                               
                                                                             114.8             28.6
Unemployment
                                                                              (54.2)          (60.8)

                                                                                                    
Lagged Age                                                                   -3.77           -5.68

                                                                              (0.66)          (1.31)

2×Lagged                                                                                         
                                                                             1.68            2.25
Risk Score
                                                                              (0.14)          (0.27)


First-stage/Kleibergen-Paap
                                         31.37                31.37           31.37           31.37
F-stat

Time and County
Fixed Eects

Time Period                           2000-2016             2008-2014       2000-2016       2008-2014
# of   Observations                    178,114               84,485          178,057          84,439
R2                                       0.025                0.058           0.002           0.064



* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Notes: This table presents the second stage of 2SLS estimates as detailed in section 3.2, with county-
quarter observations of the mean change in credit card balances from the FRBNY/Equifax CCP. Un-
employment refers to total unemployment rate (in %) at the county-level. Risk Score is an Equifax
credit score similar to FICO in construction and scale. The change in the (lagged) county unemployment
rate is instrumented for with the Bartik employment shock at the county level. Controls for county and
time (month-by-year) xed eects as well as age and lagged risk scores are included. Standard errors are
clustered at the county level and are within parentheses.




                                                   59
        Table 10:    Change in County-Level Credit Card Balances by Ex-Ante Borrowing Constraints


                                                                                               Credit Card Balance
                                                             Credit Card Balance
                                                                                          (if slack in utilization ratio)


                                                                                 
        Unemployment                                  18.9               116.8                         10.9
                                                     (38.0)               (35.2)                     (602.6)

                                                         
        Unemployment x Utilization Ratio             93.7
                                                     (29.3)

                                                                                   
        Unemployment x Income                                          -0.000024
                                                                        (0.0000092)

                                                            
     Utilization Ratio                              -343.8
                                                     (18.0)
                                                                                                            
     Age                                            -4.40                -4.60                       -6.88
                                                     (0.63)               (0.59)                      (1.02)

                                                                                                          
     Lagged Risk Score                               1.17                 2.08                       2.89
                                                     (0.13)               (0.13)                      (0.20)
60




     Time and County Fixed Eects



     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
     Notes: This Table regresses mean changes in credit card borrowing at the county-level on the (lagged) county un-
     employment rate, as instrumented by the Bartik employment shock, interacted with the average lagged utilization
     ratio (balances divided by credit limit) and income (BEA, 2000) for that county, with controlling time and county
     xed eects as well as age and lagged risk scores. Standard errors are clustered at the county level and are within
     parentheses.
                      Table 11: Longer-Horizon Changes in Credit Card Borrowing


# of Lags                                                      Credit Card Balance


    2   ×   Lagged
                             -70.3
Unemployment
                            (47.0)

    3   ×   Lagged                              
                                           -88.3
Unemployment
                                           (52.5)

    4   ×   Lagged
                                                        60.7
Unemployment
                                                       (48.3)

    5   ×   Lagged                                                        
                                                                     150.3
Unemployment
                                                                      (56.6)

    6   ×   Lagged
                                                                                      45.6
Unemployment
                                                                                     (49.2)

    7   ×   Lagged
                                                                                                  -43.8
Unemployment
                                                                                                 (59.2)

    8   ×   Lagged
                                                                                                                38.2
Unemployment
                                                                                                               (52.2)
Age and Risk Score
Same    ×    Lagged
Time and County
Fixed Eects
#   of Observations        178,000         177,956     177,919       174,843         171,774    168,713       165,648



* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Notes: This table presents results of estimating linear regressions of the change in county-level credit card balances
on (lagged) changes in county unemployment rates as instrumented by Bartik employment shocks at the county
level, controlling for time xed eects as well as age and lagged risk scores. Standard errors are clustered at the
county level and are within parentheses.




                                                       61
                    Table 12:       Other Credit Outcomes on Unemployment Shocks



Outcome                                       Estimated Coecients on           Predicted Unemployment Rate


   Credit Limits                             -17.1                35.0                   84.7                -37.0
                                            (105.7)             (111.8)                 (89.4)           (98.1)

   Utilization ratio on credit cards         0.0034             -0.0057                -0.00076          -0.010
                                            (0.0063)            (0.0075)               (0.0062)         (0.0072)

                                                                         
Credit Inquiries                             -0.011             -0.020                 0.0051            -0.0062
                                            (0.0093)            (0.012)                (0.0093)          (0.012)

   Total revolving acct. balances             8.7                 -6.1                   9.7                 15.0
                                              (13)                (15)                   (13)                (16)

   Non-current Balances                       59.4               116.2                  -12.4                -47.2
                                             (83.8)              (98.9)                 (85.1)           (98.6)


Time Period:                              2000 to 2016       2008 to 2014            2000 to 2016     2008 to 2014

   Unemployment Quarter:                     Same                Same                 Previous          Previous



* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01 Notes: This table summarizes the results of separate regressions of various credit
outcomes on the (lagged) county unemployment rate instrumented by the Bartik employment shock, with controls
for individual and time xed eects as well as age and individual lagged credit scores. Standard errors are clustered
at the county level and are within parentheses.




                                                       62
                   Table 13:   Quantile Regressions of Changes in Credit Card Balances on Bartik Unemployment Shock

     Percentile:                 2nd           5th          10th          25th           50th       75th        90th          95th          98th

                                                                          Credit Card Balance

                                                                                                        
     Bartik                      -38.5        -26.3         -17.1      -720.7          -3.52        -16.0      -888.8       -2,522.2      -3,926.7
     Unemployment              (7,376.9)    (2,382.3)      (978.4)      (196.8)          (0.31)     (6.96)     (922.7)     (2,767.7)      (5,652.1)


     Time and County
     Fixed Eects

     #   of Observations                                                        13,866,844



     * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
     Notes: this table presents estimates of quantile regressions using individual-quarter observations, with Bartik employment shocks (reversed in
     polarity to represent unemployment) at the county-level and with individual and time-period xed eects.
63
A Appendix

        Table A.1:      WLS estimates of Main Borrowing Relationship


                                                       Credit Card Balance

                                                  (1)                  (2)


                                                    
             Unemployment                       31.9
                                                (8.98)

                                                       
         Age                                   -3.95
                                                (0.30)

                                                    
                                                1.73
         Lagged Risk Score
                                                (0.056)

                                                                         
                                                                     28.3
         Lagged      Unemployment
                                                                     (8.61)

                                                                            
                                                                    -3.53
         Lagged Age
                                                                     (0.31)

                                                                         
                                                                     1.53
         2×Lagged    Risk Score
                                                                     (0.058)


         Time and County
         Fixed Eects

         # of   Observations                   178,114              178,057
         R2                                     0.115                0.119



         * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
         Notes:   This table presents WLS estimates of regressions of the
         change in county-level credit card balances on (lagged) county un-
         employment rate as instrumented by the Bartik employment shock.
         Weights are the number of sampled individuals at the county-level.
         Controls for time xed eects as well as age and lagged risk scores.
         Standard errors are clustered at the county level and are within
         parentheses.




                                        64
                  Table A.2: Changes in Credit Card Borrowing - Individual-Level

Variable                                                          Credit Card Balance


                                         
    Unemployment                     31.9                   20.3
                                      (11.0)               (12.9)

                                                                  
Age                                  -25.0                -15.7
                                      (1.43)               (2.34)

                                                               
                                     4.95                  5.92
Lagged Risk Score
                                     (0.043)               (0.059)

                                                                                                           
                                                                                 15.7                18.9
Lagged      Unemployment
                                                                                 (9.64)             (10.7)

                                                                                     
                                                                                -20.1                -3.39
Lagged Age
                                                                                 (1.27)             (2.18)

                                                                                                        
                                                                                4.27                5.13
2×   Lagged Risk Score
                                                                                (0.037)             (0.057)


Individual and Time
Fixed Eects

Time Period                       2000 to 2016         2008 to 2014           2000 to 2016       2008 to 2014
#   of Observations                10,629,462             4,834,367            10,598,148          4,811,285



* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
Notes: Linear regression of the change in individual total credit card limits on the (lagged) county unemploy-
ment rate instrumented by the Bartik employment shock at the county level controlling for individual and time
xed eects as well as age and individual lagged risk scores. Standard errors are clustered at the county level
and are within parentheses.




                                                     65
                           Table A.3: The Eect of Unemployment Interacted With Reduction in Monthly Income


                              (1)         (2)             (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)        (10)

                             Total     Necessities   Discretionary                         Overdraft       #   of    Overdraft                 Credit
                                                                      Cash     Liquidity                                          Late Fees
                           Spending                  Entertainment                         Indicator    Overdrafts    Interest                 Lines


     Unemployed              0.022       0.090          -0.023        0.171      -0.034      -0.015       -0.028       -0.185      -0.007      -0.053
                            (0.027)     (0.064)         (0.061)      (0.110)    (0.089)     (0.017)      (0.021)      (0.144)      (0.110)    (0.040)
     Unemployed    ×       -0.261***   -0.378***       -0.299***     -0.277*     0.144       0.037        0.056*       0.346        0.014      0.062
     H. red.                (0.049)     (0.111)         (0.105)      (0.163)    (0.117)     (0.025)      (0.030)      (0.211)      (0.167)    (0.054)
     Unemployed    ×        -0.082**     -0.112         -0.042       -0.289*     0.020       0.027        0.028        0.263       -0.024      0.050
     M. red.                (0.039)     (0.093)         (0.083)      (0.155)    (0.121)     (0.023)      (0.028)      (0.198)      (0.155)    (0.053)

     R2                      0.084       0.024           0.041        0.019      0.040       0.002        0.002        0.001        0.007      0.026
     # of   Observations    649,372     649,372         649,372      308,110    308,110     621,221      621,221      621,221      621,221    309,039
     # of   Individuals     11,545       11,545         11,545       11,545     11,545       11,545       11,545       11,545      11,545      11,545


     Month-by-Year
     Fixed Eects

     Individual
     Fixed Eects
66




     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
     This table shows the estimated eect of being unemployed. Standard errors are within parentheses. Each entry is a separate regression. Cash
     holdings are checking and savings account balances and liquidity is checking and savings account balances plus overdraft limits and credit limits
     minus credit card balances. Cash and liquidity are measured in days of average spending by individuals. Credit lines are measured as distance
     to credit limits and normalized by average individual income.
                               Table A.4: Eects of Unemployment by Cash Holdings at the Time of Job Loss


                              (1)         (2)             (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)          (9)       (10)

                             Total     Necessities   Discretionary                         Overdraft     #   of     Overdraft                Credit
                                                                      Cash     Liquidity                                        Late Fees
                            Spending                 Entertainment                         Indicator   Overdrafts    Interest                Lines


                                                                     Below median:
     Unemployed             -0.065*      0.011          -0.122*      -0.060     0.063        0.018       0.006        0.149       -0.034     0.024
                            (0.036)     (0.083)         (0.070)      (0.102)    (0.060)     (0.019)     (0.031)      (0.176)     (0.178)    (0.035)

     R2                      0.048       0.018           0.024       0.069      0.100        0.019       0.024        0.021       0.023      0.047

     #    of Observations    3,447       3,447           3,447       3,179      3,179        3,449       3,449        3,449       3,449      3,186
     #    of Individuals      283         283            283          283        283         283          283          283         283        283


                                                                     Above median:
67




     Unemployed              -0.076      -0.142         -0.053       0.123      -0.035      -0.016       -0.027       -0.183      0.036      -0.046
                            (0.058)     (0.142)         (0.096)      (0.118)    (0.071)     (0.027)     (0.030)      (0.199)     (0.179)    (0.029)

     R2                      0.056       0.024           0.030       0.016      0.021        0.013       0.013        0.014       0.014      0.045

     #    of Observations    3,452       3,452           3,452       3,171      3,171        3,436       3,436        3,435       3,436      3,174
     #    of Individuals      279         279            279          279        279         279          279          279         279        279


     Month-by-Year
     Fixed Eects

     Individual
     Fixed Eects



     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01       This table shows the estimated eect of being unemployed. Standard errors are clustered at the individual
     level and are within parentheses. Each entry is a separate regression. Cash holdings are checking and savings account balances and liquidity is
     checking and savings account balances plus overdraft limits and credit limits minus credit card balances. Cash and liquidity are measured in
     days of average spending by individuals. Credit lines are measured as distance to credit limits and normalized by average individual income.
                                                              Discreationary Entertainment                      Necessary Expenditures
                   Total Expenditure
68




                                                                    #   of Overdrafts
                  Overdraft Indicator                                                                                 Late Fees




                                                Figure A.1: Dynamic Responses to Unemployment
     Notes:  Controls include time-xed and individual-xed eects. The lines represent 95 percent condence intervals using standard errors clustered
     at the individual level.
                                                     Total Expenditure - Medium Income Reduction       Total Expenditure - Low Income Reduction
       Total Expenditure - High Income Reduction
69




                                                     Overdraft Indicator- Medium Income Reduction
       Overdraft Indicator- High Income Reduction                                                    Overdraft Indicator- Medium Income Reduction




                                Figure A.2: Expenditure and Borrowing Dynamics by Income Reduction Terciles
     Notes:  Controls include time-xed and individual-xed eects. The lines represent 95 percent condence intervals using standard errors clustered
     at the individual level.
