                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




HOUSEHOLD LABOR SEARCH, SPOUSAL INSURANCE, AND HEALTH CARE REFORM

                                        Hanming Fang
                                      Andrew J. Shephard

                                      Working Paper 26350
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26350


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2019




An earlier version of this paper was circulated as "Household Labour Supply and Health Care
Reform". We thank Naoki Aizawa, Luca Flabbi, Christopher Flinn, Jonathan Kolstad, Casey
Mulligan, and numerous seminar and conference participants for useful comments. We
acknowledge financial support from the NSF under grant number SES-1459353. Qing Gong
provided excellent research assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.¸

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Hanming Fang and Andrew J. Shephard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Household Labor Search, Spousal Insurance, and Health Care Reform
Hanming Fang and Andrew J. Shephard
NBER Working Paper No. 26350
October 2019
JEL No. G22,I11,I13,J32

                                         ABSTRACT

Health insurance in the United States for the working age population has traditionally been
provided in the form of employer-sponsored health insurance (ESHI). If employers offered ESHI
to their employees, they also typically extended coverage to their spouse and dependents.
Provisions in the Affordable Care Act (ACA) significantly alter the incentive for firms to offer
insurance to the spouses of employees. We evaluate the long-run impact of ACA on firms'
insurance offerings and on household outcomes by developing and estimating an equilibrium job
search model in which multiple household members are searching for jobs. The distribution of
job offers is determined endogenously, with compensation packages consisting of a wage and
menu of insurance offerings (premiums and coverage) that workers select from. Using our
estimated model we find that households' valuation of employer-sponsored spousal health
insurance is significantly reduced under ACA, and with an "employee-only" health insurance
contract emerging among low productivity firms. We relate these outcomes to the specific
provisions in the ACA.


Hanming Fang
Department of Economics
Ronald O. Perelman Center
for Political Science and Economics
133 South 36th Street
Suite 150
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
hanming.fang@econ.upenn.edu

Andrew J. Shephard
Department of Economics
Ronald O. Perelman Center
for Political Science and Economics
133 South 36th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
asheph@econ.upenn.edu
1     Introduction
     Employer-sponsored health insurance (ESHI) is the most important source of health insurance
coverage for the working age population in the United States. An under-explored aspect of
this system is that employers typically offer health insurance not only to their own employees,
but also to the spouses (and dependents) of their employees. Indeed, spousal health insurance
benefits are heavily used by married couples,1 and these features create important links between
health, health insurance, the household, and the labor market.
     We re-examine these interactions in the context of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act of 2010 (hereafter, ACA), which comprises multiple provisions that seek, amongst other
things, to improve the health insurance coverage of Americans. Most of the major components of
the ACA took effect in 2014, and include a combination of individual and firm mandates, health
insurance exchanges, and subsidies. First, the individual mandate stipulates that all individuals be
covered by a qualified health insurance plan or face an income-contingent tax penalty.2 Second,
the employer mandate requires that firms with 50 or more full-time employees provide health
insurance to workers and their dependents or pay a fine.3 Third, the establishment of state-based
health insurance exchanges allows individuals without ESHI options to purchase community-rated
health insurance. Fourth, individuals who do not have access to employer-sponsored health
insurance, either from their own or their spouses' employers, are eligible for income-contingent
premium subsidies that can be applied to the purchase of insurance from the exchanges.
     Such a significant reform to the US health insurance system is likely to have important equi-
librium effects on the labor market in many dimensions. In particular, the provisions in ACA
significantly alter employers' incentives to offer health insurance benefits to the spouses of em-
ployees for several reasons. First, the definition of "dependents" under ACA, as is relevant
for the employer mandate, includes children up to age 26 but does not include an employee's
spouse. This means that firms (even large firms) will not face any tax penalty if they were not
to offer spousal health insurance. Second, and as noted above, households are categorically in-
eligible to receive subsidies for the purchase of health insurance from their state's exchange if
    1 Tothe best of our understanding, the spousal health insurance benefit was and is still not required by any existing
law. Based on the 2004 Panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation, which comprises the pre-ACA
data in our empirical application, we find that if both spouses are employed and offered health insurance by their
employers, about 55 percent of spouses choose to obtain insurance from one of the employers, and only about 23
percent choose to obtain insurance from their employers separately. Furthermore, if only one spouse is employed and
offered health insurance, over 90 percent of the insured couples obtain health insurance offered by the employer of
the employed spouse. Identical patterns are observed in the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey data.
   2 In 2014 and 2015, the individual mandate penalties were partially implemented: in 2014, the penalty was 1 percent

of family income or $95; in 2015, it was 2 percent or $325, whichever is higher. Between 2016 and 2018, the penalty
is 2.5 percent of family income or $695, whichever is higher. The Tax Cut and Jobs Act of 2017 would eliminate
the individual mandate penalty from 2019, though the Act did not change the legal requirement to hold minimum
essential health insurance coverage.
   3 The implementation of the employer mandate was delayed till January 1, 2015, and was partially enforced until

2016. It is fully enforced since 2017.


                                                           2
they have access to employer-sponsored health insurance, either from their own or their spouses'
employers. Thus, lower income households may prefer employers not to offer spousal insurance
benefits, and the same could also be true for the employees themselves. Third, the availability
of health insurance from a regulated health insurance exchange reduces households' valuation
of spousal insurance. As a consequence, providing spousal health insurance benefits becomes
a less effective instrument in the hiring and retention of workers than it was prior to the ACA,
when the individual private insurance market was dysfunctional due to adverse selection. And
while firms benefit from improving the health of their employees because healthy workers are
more productive, they do not directly benefit from the improved health of the spouses of their
employees, especially if the mobility decisions of their employees are now less dependent on
whether spousal health insurance benefits are offered or not.
    To explore the role of spousal health insurance, and how it is affected by ACA, we develop
a model based on the canonical framework of Burdett and Mortensen (1998) in which non-
employed and employed workers search for jobs, and firms commit to wage offers to all potential
and current employees. This frictional labor market setting not only provides a coherent notion
of firm size, but can reproduce many well-documented relationships between firm sizes, wages,
health insurance offerings, and worker turnover. All of these are central outcomes of interest.
For our purpose, we integrate a multi-person household search model (e.g., Dey and Flinn, 2008
and Guler, Guvenen and Violante, 2012) into such an equilibrium framework. A key outcome of
interest in our later analysis is the extent to which various provisions in the ACA affect whether
firms offer health insurance to their employees, and if such health insurance coverage would also
be extended to the spouses and dependents of the employees. To this end, we characterise jobs
by an endogenously determined wage and menu of health insurance contracts, with the menu
specifying the level of coverage (none, employee-only, employee and spouse) and the associated
premiums. Upon accepting an offer, households then select a particular health insurance cover-
age option from those available.4 Importantly, any job acceptance and insurance take-up decision
will depend upon the labor market status of all household members. Health insurance is valu-
able to households, who are risk averse and ex-ante heterogeneous with respect to their marital
status, presence of children, and valuations of leisure, because it insures them against medical
expenditure risk and affects the dynamics of health. Similarly, health insurance is valuable to
firms as it improves both hiring and retention prospects, and through its beneficial impact on
workers' health, it also acts as a productivity factor. In addition, we incorporate many detailed
institutional features, including the tax exemption of ESHI premiums, and the qualifying event
restrictions on households' choice of health insurance.
    We develop a multi-step estimation procedure that extends the approach pioneered by Bon-
   4 Specifyingjobs in this way contrasts with other studies (e.g., Dizioli and Pinheiro, 2016, Aizawa and Fang, 2018,
Aizawa, 2019) that incorporate employer-provided health insurance in extended Burdett and Mortensen (1998) frame-
works. In these papers firms either offer insurance or do not, and there is no household insurance take-up decision.


                                                          3
temps, Robin and Van den Berg (1999, 2000), and empirically implement our model using data
from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, the
Kaiser Family Foundation Survey, and the Commonwealth Fund Biennial Health Insurance Sur-
vey. We show that our estimated model is able to replicate important joint household outcomes
from the data, including that a large fraction of both working and non-working individuals are
insured through their spouses' employers. Further, we are able to reproduce salient patterns
concerning labor market and health dynamics, wages, medical expenditure, and the insurance
distributions of employer sizes. We proceed to incorporate detailed institutional features of the
ACA in our framework, and use our estimated model to evaluate the long-run equilibrium labor
market responses to the ACA.
    Consistent with early survey evidence, our simulations imply that while the provisions in the
ACA are successful in reducing the uninsured rate and improving health outcomes, there are
significant changes in firms' insurance offering decisions.5 First, we find that the overall health
insurance offering rate of firms declines. Second, an "employee-only" health insurance contract,
which is largely impertinent in the pre-ACA equilibrium, emerges amongst low productivity
firms. We show that these equilibrium responses are closely related to the availability of non-
employer sponsored insurance from the marketplace exchange, and the specific eligibility rules
of the associated premium subsidies. Indeed, if individuals' access to health insurance through
their spouses' employers did not render households categorically ineligible for the premium sub-
sidies, then the incidence of employee-only insurance is considerably muted. We further use our
model to examine how the ACA affects job mobility, and show it to reduce the extent to which job
transition events depend upon the insurance coverage status of an individual and their spouse.
We also use our model to calculate households' valuation of spousal health insurance both before
and after the ACA reform, and we show that the ACA considerably reduces this value.


Related literature. Our paper firstly relates to the literature, surveyed by Currie and Madrian
(1999), Gruber (2000), and Gruber and Madrian (2004), which examines the interactions between
health, health insurance, and labor market outcomes. The structural empirical literature that has
examined these joint phenomenon is much smaller, with contributions including Rust and Phelan
(1997) and De Nardi, French and Jones (2016). Equilibrium analysis, that seeks to understand
the determinants of wages and the provision of health insurance, is presented in Dey and Flinn
(2005), Aizawa and Fang (2018) and Aizawa (2019). As in our study, these papers develop models
that are cast in equilibrium labor market search environments. Such an environment provides
   5A  survey conducted by Towers Watson National Business Group on Health (Employer Survey on Purchasing Value
in Health Care, 2013) suggests important changes in spousal insurance benefits: 18% of surveyed firms stated that
they either have already or are planning to require spouses to purchase health insurance through their employer plan
before enrolling in their health plan; 12% of the respondent firms either have already or are planning to exclude
spouses from enrolling in their health plan when similar coverage is available through their own employer; and 5%
are planning to completely eliminate spousal coverage.


                                                         4
a coherent framework to jointly study job mobility, wage formation, wage dynamics, and the
sorting patterns between firms and workers. The empirical analyses in Aizawa and Fang (2018)
and Aizawa (2019) center on the labor market impact of ACA, but as they consider single agent
models, they are limited in their ability to examine issues related to household labor supply and
spousal health insurance, as we focus upon in this paper.
    Second, the paper relates to the literature on household labor supply in a frictional labor mar-
ket. Burdett and Mortensen (1978) were the first to develop and analyze a two-person household
search model. Guler, Guvenen and Violante (2012) provide a theoretical characterisation of the
joint search problem of couples in an otherwise standard sequential job search model. They show
that if the household utility function is linear in income, then the spouses' reservation wages in
the joint search problem coincide with those of an individual search problem. However, if the
couples are risk averse, then the behavioral (reservation wage) implications of the single-agent
and joint search models are no longer equivalent, and richer household dynamics (such as the
breadwinner cycle) emerge. Empirical household search models are developed and estimated
in Dey and Flinn (2008), Gemici (2011), and Flabbi and Mabli (2018). Importantly, all these
household search papers are partial equilibrium models, in which the distribution of job offers
is exogenous. We extend these models to an environment where the distribution of job offers
is endogenous, thereby allowing us to study potentially important equilibrium effects following
large reforms such as the ACA.6 Most closely related to our study is Dey and Flinn (2008), which
considers a model where jobs are characterized by a wage and whether health insurance is of-
fered. They highlight the potential dependence of couples' labor market decisions in the context
of health benefits,7 but several modelling choices in their paper are not desirable to analyze the
potential impact of the ACA on firms' decisions regarding whether to offer health insurance,
and whether to extend coverage to employees' spouses. Firstly, as noted above, it is a partial
equilibrium model which immediately limits the scope of the model for evaluating large-scale
policy reforms; second, they assume that any insurance offered automatically covers employees
and spouses; third, they do not model workers' health status and health expenditures.
    Thirdly, by introducing the household in an empirical equilibrium search environment, we
also relate to the existing literature that has developed and estimated (single agent) equilibrium
labor market search models with wage posting. This literature also includes van den Berg and
Ridder (1998), Bontemps, Robin and Van den Berg (1999, 2000), Meghir, Narita and Robin (2015),
and Shephard (2017). Indeed, we demonstrate how many of the common solution and estima-
  6 Common     with the aforementioned household search papers, we do not consider household formation decisions.
In recent work, Flabbi and Flinn (2015) and Pilossoph and Wee (2019a) consider household search models with
marriage and pre-market schooling investments. In Flabbi and Flinn (2015) there is simultaneous search in the
marriage and labor market, with household decisions made non-cooperatively. In contrast, Pilossoph and Wee (2019a)
present a model where marriage matching occurs in an initial (frictionless) stage.
   7 See also, Wellington and Cobb-Clark (2000), whose empirical estimates suggest that a husband having health

insurance coverage in his job reduces his wife's employment probability by around 20%.



                                                        5
tion techniques that have helped make these models popular in empirical work, can be suitably
extended to account for the multi-searcher households, as we consider here.
    Fourth, we relate to the broader literature that has studied the impact of the ACA. This in-
cludes descriptive analysis that has examined the impact that the ACA has on insurance coverage
(e.g., Long et al., 2014, and Courtemanche, Marton and Yelowitz, 2016), and the analysis of spe-
cific provisions in the ACA, such as the dependent coverage mandate that took effect in late 2010
(e.g., Dillender, Heinrich and Houseman, 2016). The implications that the ACA has for labor mar-
ket incentives is detailed in Mulligan (2015a,b), while Heim, Lurie and Simon (2015) and Duggan,
Goda and Jackson (2019) provide an early assessment of the labor market impacts. Meanwhile,
quantitative macroeconomic evaluations of the labor market impact include Pashchenko and Po-
rapakkarm (2013) and Nakajima and Tuzemen
                                   ¨      (2017). Also related is the literature that analysed
the preceding the Massachusetts Health Reform of 2006, which shares features with the ACA
(see, Kolstad and Kowalski, 2012, 2016, Courtemanche and Zapata, 2014, and Hackmann, Kol-
stad and Kowalski, 2015).


Outline. The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we present the details
of our theoretical model. In Section 3 we proceed to describe the empirical implementation
of our model, including our data, identification, estimation procedure, and estimation results.
In Section 4 we describe how we incorporate the main components of ACA in our theoretical
model, while in Section 5 we present results from our counterfactual experiments, and show
how a range of outcomes, including firms' health insurance offering decision and the value of
employer-sponsored spousal health insurance, is affected by the provisions in ACA. In Section 6
we conclude and discuss directions for future research.


2    The Model
    We begin by presenting the model under the pre-ACA economic environment. The economy
consists of a continuum of stable households with a population size that we denote by N . Time
is continuous, and all households are infinitely lived with the common discount rate  > 0.
Households differ in a number of dimensions. First, they differ in terms of their observable
characteristics x, which include the presence of children and marital status. Second, as in Al-
brecht and Axell (1984), households also differ in their unobserved value of leisure , which is
continuous on its support. Both x and  are considered persistent household characteristics,8
   8 The ACA affects the incentives for marriage in two main ways. Firstly, many of the components of the ACA

are based on household income which therefore acts to introduce an implicit marriage penalty. Secondly, since most
employers do not extend health insurance coverage to unmarried partners, the availability of non-employer provided
health insurance reduces an important economic benefit from marriage. Both of these considerations suggest that
the ACA may reduce the economic incentives for marriage and a full quantitative assessment of this impact is left
for future work. See Abramowitz (2016) and Barkowski and McLaughlin (2018) for evidence on how specific ACA


                                                        6
with the joint cumulative distribution function of household types denoted by B (, x).9 Second,
households differ in terms of the health status h of its members, which evolves according to a
law of motion that we describe below.
    The economy consists of both married couple households and single individual households.
The single households' problem is relatively standard and can be incorporated as a special case of
the couple's problem (see Section 2.6). For conciseness, we focus our description of the household
problem on couple households, which comprise two household members, who have preferences
represented by a household utility function. In such households, members are indexed by j 
{1, 2}, with the convention that adult 1 is the male, and adult 2 is the female. Individuals may
be in the state of non-employment or employment, with jobs characterized by a wage rate w,
and a menu of health insurance offerings I . We consider a frictional labor market, with workers
                                                        j                                    j
sequentially sampling job offers from F (w, I ) at rate u (x) when non-employed and rate e (x)
when employed. Upon accepting an offer, workers select a particular health insurance coverage
option i  I , with each option associated with a distinct insurance premium r (i; w, I ). The
purchase of health insurance protects individuals against medical expenditure risk. Firms offer
one of three different types of insurance:

   1. No health insurance ( I = 0). Workers receive pre-tax monetary compensation equal to the
       wage w. Such a worker may still be insured if they are covered by their spouse's insurance.

   2. Employee only insurance ( I = 1). Insurance is offered, but it does not extend coverage to
       spouses. Workers decide whether to decline insurance (i = 0) and receive pre-tax monetary
       compensation w (since r (0; w, I ) = 0), or to purchase insurance (i = 1) at the premium
       r (1; w, 1), which is a pre-tax deduction.

   3. Employee and spouse insurance ( I = 2). Insurance is offered, and made available to both the
       employee and their spouse. Again, workers decide whether to decline insurance (i = 0)
       and receive w, to purchase insurance for the employee only (i = 1) at premium r (1; w, 2),
       or to purchase insurance for the employee and their spouse (i = 2) at premium r (2; w, 2).

    For convenience, we will often refer to the insurance contract offering decision of the firm I to
be the sector of the firm, with the set of possible sectors choice denoted I = {0, 1, 2}.10 The condi-
tional, or sector-specific, wage offer distributions are denoted FI (w). For single person households,
provisions have affected marriage rates.
    9 The same heterogeneity structure is considered in Shephard (2017) in a single agent model. Heterogeneity in

leisure flows enriches the model's ability to capture diverse labor market histories. As we discuss later, it also provides
a way to smooth the labor supply function faced by the firms, where it would otherwise exhibit discontinuities.
   10 Most families in the U.S. receive health insurance for their children through employer sponsored plans. We assume

that if firms provide any form of health insurance ( I = 1, 2) then they also extend coverage to the dependent children
of their employees, and that employees who purchase insurance always purchase for their children. While we omit
these details from the presentation of our model, in our empirical implementation we explicitly model a distribution
of medical expenditure for children (parametrized the same way as for adults, as detailed in Section 2.3) but do not
incorporate child health status as a state variable. Given the absence of variation in child medical expenditure risks


                                                            7
individual insurance choice and individual insurance coverage are synonyms. This is not true in
couple households, since individuals may be insured through their spouse. In what follows we
use q j (i) to denote the indicator function for spouse j being insured, given the insurance choices
of both adults i = (i1 , i2 ). We set i j = 0 if spouse j is non-employed.
      Employees are not able to change insurance coverage options freely during a job spell. In
particular, workers are not allowed to change coverage in response to changes in health status.
There are two ways that coverage may be changed. Firstly, it may be changed in response to a
qualifying event, which given the absence of family transitions in our model, is associated with
either adult starting a new job, or entering the non-employment pool.11 Secondly, coverage may
be changed when an open enrollment event occurs. We model an open enrollment event by
assuming it takes place at some exogenous rate  > 0,12 which then allows the household to
re-optimize over the set of available insurance options.
      Employed individuals face a constant risk of entering non-employment, with exogenous job
destruction events occurring at rate j (x). As we explain below, there may also be endogenous
transitions to non-employment following changes in health status, or in the labor market position
of their spouse.


2.1    Preferences

      For couples, we consider a unitary model of the household, with preferences assumed con-
stant absolute risk aversion (CARA)

                      U (c, P1 , P2 ; , x) = 1 (1 - P1 ) + 2 (1 - P2 ) - exp(-(x) · c),                          (1)

where (x) > 0 is the coefficient of absolute risk aversion, c is household consumption, and Pj
is spouse j's employment indicator. Households are taxed on total family earnings; and given
the absence of any saving or borrowing technology, they consume their net income, less any
out-of-pocket medical expenditure costs.13 The couple's budget constraint is therefore given by

             c = y ( P1 (w1 - r1 (i1 ; w1 , I1 )) + P2 (w2 - r2 (i2 ; w2 , I2 )) + (2 - P1 - P2 )bU I ; x)
                 - o (m1 |q1 (i)) - o (m2 |q2 (i)),                                                              (2)

across firms, the child coverage premium is also necessarily constant across all firms and so households will also be
indifferent with respect to the source of any employer provided child coverage.
  11 Termination of employment for any reason (voluntary or involuntary) other than gross misconduct is a qualifying

event. See, e.g., http://www.dol.gov/ebsa/faqs/faq-consumer-cobra.html. Our treatment of what constitutes a
qualifying event is a slight simplification as we do not consider whether there is an associated loss of coverage.
  12 Modelling open enrollment as a stochastic process allows us to capture the idea that workers have the ability

to change their coverage absent a qualifying event by waiting, in a tractable way that does not require explicit non-
stationarities to be introduced. We calibrate  so that an open enrollment event occurs, on average, every year.
  13 See Garc´ia-P´
                  erez and Rendon (2016) and Wang (2019) for non-equilibrium household search models with savings.




                                                          8
where y(·; x) is the after-tax income function that subsumes the tax schedule, bU I is unemploy-
ment insurance, and o (m j |q j ) gives the out-of-pocket expenditure given medical cost m j , and
individual insurance coverage q j . Note that the after-tax income function depends upon the
demographic conditioning vector x. This reflects the differential treatment of single and mar-
ried households in the U.S. tax system, together with any variation caused by the presence of
dependent children.


2.2     Health

      Current health status is measured by the scalar h. There are H discrete health statuses, or-
dered h1 < h2 < . . . < h H , with the maximal value h H corresponding to most healthy. Health
status is dynamic and evolves stochastically. We denote spouse j's health status by h j . The
Poisson rate at which spouse j with insurance status q j experiences a change in health status
from h j to h j is given by j (h j |h j , q j , x). The total rate at which health status changes is given by
 j (h j , q j , x) = h j =h j j (h j |h j , q j , x). Following any health shock, either (or both) individual may
decide to exit employment, in which case the couple may re-optimize over any available health
insurance options. Health insurance is valuable to couples both because it insures household
members against medical expenditure shocks, and because health insurance, via both preventa-
tive and curative care, influences the health transition function j (h j |h j , q j , x).


2.3     Medical expenditure

      Individuals are subject to a new health expenditure shock whenever they experience a change
in either their health status or insurance coverage. The distribution of medical expenditure is
modelled as a mixture distribution.14 There is a probability mass at zero expenditure, with this
probability given by M0
                      j ( h j , q j , x ). Conditional on a positive medical expenditure realization,
the cumulative distribution function of medical expenditures is M+
                                                                 j ( ·| h j , q j , x ). Note that both
current health h j , and individual health insurance status, q j , may affect the distribution of medical
expenditure. Let the resultant unconditional distribution be denoted M j (·|h j , q j , x).
      An important simplifying assumption in our analysis, is that medical expenditure realizations
are unobserved to the household (at least, currently) and so are not state variables. This implies
that the flow benefit to the household comprises expected flow utility, where the expectation
is over the distribution of family medical expenditure shocks conditional on current household
health status and insurance coverage. Given our flow utility specification in equation (1) we
obtain convenient forms for expected utility. Consider the case where adult 1 is uninsured so
that o (m1 |q1 = 0) = m1 , while adult 2 is fully insured with o (m2 |q2 = 1) = 0. In this case,
  14 The use of mixture distributions is a common way to parametrically approximate the empirical medical expendi-
ture distributions, which are typically both positively skewed, and with a mass at zero expenditure. See, for example,
Einav et al. (2013).


                                                          9
expected flow utility is given by

                U (y - o (m1 |q1 ) - o (m2 |q2 ), P1 , P2 ; , x) d M1 (m1 |h1 , q1 , x) d M2 (m2 |h2 , q2 , x)

                  = 1 (1 - P1 ) + 2 (1 - P2 ) - exp(-(x)y)
                       0                     0                                         +
                    × M1 (h1 , 0, x) + (1 - M1 (h1 , 0, x)) ·           exp((x)m1 ) d M1 (m1 |h1 , 0, x) ,           (3)

                                                      R1 ((x),h1 ,0, M1 (·|h1 ,0,x))


where R j (, h j , q j , M j ) is the risk adjustment factor for spouse j, given risk aversion , health
status h j , insurance coverage q j , and expenditure distribution M j . In our empirical application we
impose distributional assumptions on M+
                                      j ( ·| h j , q j , x ) that imply that this risk adjustment factor
both exists and may be analytically characterized. See Section 3.2.


2.4    Worker value functions

      We formalize our description of the household labor market and health insurance choice
problem using value functions. We denote the value in the joint non-employment as Vuu (h; , x).
When only adult 1 (the male) is employed, the value function conditional on the current insur-
ance choice i1 (and other household state variables) is denoted by Veu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h; , x), while the
maximal value over the set of all available insurance choices is defined as V eu (w1 , I1 , h; , x) =
max{Veu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h; , x) : i1  I1 }. It is necessary to define both of these value functions, as
restrictions in the ability of the household to change insurance coverage mean that the current
insurance choice i1 is not necessarily the most preferred from the set I1 . Similarly, we define
Vue (w2 , i2 , I2 , h; , x) and V ue (w2 , I2 , h; , x) to be the value functions when only the female is em-
ployed, and with Vee (w, i, I, h; , x) and V ee (w, I, h; , x) defining the respective value functions
in the joint employment state.
    Here, for conciseness, we only describe the value functions in the male single-earner (eu) state,
with the recursive definitions of all other value functions provided in Appendix A. To proceed
we define the expected flow utility when only the male is working as ueu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h; , x).15 In
describing the value function we note that the following events may happen. First, either adult
may experience a health transition, which occurs at rate  j (h j , q j ) for spouse j. In this event,
either the husband continues to be employed, or he endogenously quits to non-employment.
Note that health transitions themselves do not allow individuals to re-optimize over the set of
insurance offerings by their employers. Second, either adult may receive a job offer (at rate 1           e (x)
                                       2
for the husband, and at rate u (x) for the wife). If the non-employed wife were to accept a job,
  15 This is obtained by integrating the flow utility function (equation (1)) over the distribution of all medical expen-

diture shocks. We obtain an analytical characterisation for the expected utility, using the risk adjustment factors that
we derive and present in Appendix D.




                                                            10
then the husband may either remain employed or endogenously exit to non-employment.16 The
latter is possible since the reservation wage of any adult, as detailed in Dey and Flinn (2008),
Guler, Guvenen and Violante (2012), and Flabbi and Mabli (2018), is in general a function of
their spouse's state. In both cases, optimization over the set of insurance options is permitted.
Third, there may be an exogenous job destruction event for the husband, occurring at rate 1 (x).
Fourth, at rate  there is an open enrollment event which allows re-optimization over the set
of insurance options, absent a job change, and therefore allows value V eu (w1 , I1 , h; , x) to be
attained. Suppressing the conditioning of both the value functions and worker parameters on
leisure values and the vector of demographic characteristics ( and x), it then follows that the
Bellman (1957) equation is given by

 Deu (i1 , h)Veu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h) = ueu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h)
                                       + h 1 (h1 |h1 , q1 (i1 )) max{Veu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h1 , h2 ), Vuu (h1 , h2 )}
                                              1

                                       + h 2 (h2 |h2 , q2 (i1 )) max{Veu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h1 , h2 ), Vuu (h1 , h2 )}
                                              2

                                       + 1
                                         e        max{V eu (w1 , I1 , h), Veu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h)} d F (w1 , I1 )

                                       + 2
                                         u        max{V ee (w, I, h), V ue (w2 , I2 , h), Veu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h)} d F (w2 , I2 )

                                       + 1 Vuu (h) +  V eu (w1 , I1 , h),

where Deu (i1 , h)   + 1 (h1 , q1 (i1 )) + 2 (h2 , q2 (i1 )) + 1   2
                                                               e + u + 1 +  .


2.5     Steady state flows

      We consider the steady state of the labor market. In describing this steady state we derive
flow equations for all the joint labor market states. These equations embody a rich set of dynam-
ics, and are also necessary to characterize the subsequent decision problem of the firm. As in
the above, our discussion here considers the single earner state, where adult 1 (the male) is em-
ployed, and adult 2 (the female) is not, and we denote the corresponding measure of households
as geu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h; , x). This state will be exited if: i) adult 1 experiences an exogenous job de-
struction event; ii) either adult experiences a health transition; iii) adult 1 accepts a higher value
job; iv) adult 2 accepts a job (since we are characterizing the joint states, this is true regardless
of whether adult 1 endogenously quits his job or not); v) there is an open enrollment event.17
  16 We  do not allow for job acceptance decisions that are only used to trigger qualifying events and would be followed
by an immediate quit. For example, suppose that the employed husband is uninsured at a firm that offers ESHI, but
would prefer to be insured. In this case, the wife would always be willing to accept any job offer if instantaneous
quits are allowed as this would allow the household to re-optimize over the husband's available insurance options at
no cost.
  17 Our formulation allows for an outflow at an open enrollment event even when current choice i  I is optimal
                                                                                                        1   1
given (w1 , I1 , h). However, the outflow will be completely offset by an accompanying inflow that we detail below.



                                                                11
Again suppressing the conditioning on the persistent household characteristics (, x), the total
outflows from this state are therefore given by


  geu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h) · 1 + 1 (h1 |q1 (i1 )) + 2 (h2 |q2 (i1 )) + 1                   2
                                                                     e d F ( w1 , I1 ) + u d F ( w2 , I2 ) +  , (4)
                                                                                          -                                  -
                                                                                        1
                                                                                        eu ( w1 ,i1 , I1 ,h )              2
                                                                                                                           eu ( w1 ,i1 , I1 ,h )


                                                                       -
with the conditional outflow set for adult 1's job offers defined as 1
                                                                     eu ( w1 , i1 , I1 , h ) = { ( w1 , I1 ) :
V eu (w1 , I1 , h) > Veu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h)} and with the corresponding set for adult 2's offers given by
    -
2 eu ( w1 , i1 , I1 , h ) = { ( w2 , I2 ) : max{V ee ( w1 , w2 , I1 , I2 , h ), V ue ( w2 , I2 , h ) } > Veu ( w1 , i1 , I1 , h ) }.
     Now consider the inflows into this state (conditional on Veu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h) > Vuu (h)), and let
veu (w, i, I , h) = 1[Veu (w, i, I , h) = V eu (w, I , h)] denote the indicator function for the insurance
  

choice i  I being optimal. Firstly, consider those inflows that result from a male job acceptance
event. This could be from an initial state of joint non-employment, from a lower value job in the
eu state, from the ue state (with adult 2 endogenously quitting upon job acceptance), or from the
joint employment ee state (again, with adult 2 endogenously quitting). These inflows are


   f (w1 , I1 ) · v                                u guu ( h ) + e 
                                                   1                                    
                                                                 1
                   eu ( w1 , i1 , I1 , h ) ·                                                     geu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h) dw1
                                                                                  I1 i1  I1     +
                                                 adult 1 accepts                              1
                                                                                              eu ( w1 ,i1 , I1 , I1 ,h )
                                                  job from uu
                                                                                   adult 1 accepts higher value job


                                     u
                                   + 1                                                     e 
                                                              gue (w2 , i2 , I2 , h) dw2 + 1                                   gee (w , i , I , h) dw , (5)
                                               I2 i2  I2     +                                                I i I           +
                                                           2
                                                           ue ( w1 ,i2 , I1 , I2 ,h )                                       3
                                                                                                                            ue ( w1 ,i   , I1 ,I ,h)

                                        adult 1 accepts job, adult 2 quits from ue                       adult 1 accepts job, adult 2 quits from ee


where we use the same notational convention when defining the measures for the alternative joint
states, and where the inflow set 1 +
                                 eu ( w1 , i1 , I1 , I1 , h ) = { w1 : V eu ( w1 , I1 , h ) > Veu ( w1 , i1 , I1 , h ) }
defines the set of wages that the currently employed (single earner) male would quit his job
from, 2 +
      ue ( w1 , i2 , I1 , I2 , h ) = { w2 : V eu ( w1 , I1 , h ) > max{V ee ( w1 , w2 , I1 , I2 , h ), Vue ( w2 , i2 , I2 , h ) }}
gives the wages that the currently employed (single earner) female would quit her job from
with the male accepting (w1 , I1 ), and finally the set 3 +
                                                        ue ( w1 , i , I1 , I , h ) = { w : V eu ( w1 , I1 , h ) >
max{V ee (w1 , w2 , I1 , I2 , h), Vee (w , i , I , h)}} defines the male and female wages that is dominated
by the single earner state (w1 , I1 , h).
    Second, we have a job destruction induced inflow from the joint employment state, with
adult 1 employed at a type-(w1 , I1 ) job, and when adult 2 exogenously loses her job at rate 2 .
The measure of such inflows is given by

                            2 · veu ( w1 , i1 , I1 , h ) ·                               gee (w1 , w2 , i , I1 , I2 , h) dw2 .                          (6)
                                                                  I2 i2  I2 i1  I1



                                                                                 12
Third, we have inflows due to health transitions from either adult. These could be from an initial
single earner state, where total health induced inflows are given by

               1 (h1 |h1 , q1 (i1 )) geu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h1 , h2 ) +  2 (h2 |h2 , q2 (i1 )) geu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h1 , h2 ).                  (7)
               h1                                                                     h2


Note that the health inflows above are not multiplied by the indicator veu ( w1 , i1 , I1 , h ) since
changes in health by itself do not constitute a qualifying event. Inflows may also arise from
a joint employment state where the health transition (of either adult) induces adult 2 to endoge-
nously enter the non-employment pool. Here the endogenous quit triggers a qualifying event so
that inflows are given by


  veu ( w1 , i1 , I1 , h ) ·                             1 (h1 |h1 , q1 (i )) gee (w1 , w2 , i , I1 , I2 , h1 , h2 ) dw2
                               h1 I2 i2  I2 i1  I1      +
                                                      5
                                                      eu ( w1 ,i   , I1 , I2 ,h)

                                                     adult 1 health transition from ee, adult 2 quits


                                        +                                  2 (h2 |h2 , q2 (i )) gee (w1 , w2 , i , I1 , I2 , h1 , h2 ) dw2 , (8)
                                            h2 I2 i2  I2 i1  I1          +
                                                                       5
                                                                       eu ( w1 ,i       , I1 , I2 ,h)

                                                                    adult 2 health transition from ee, adult 2 quits


and with the inflow set in equation (8) given by 5 +
                                                 eu ( w1 , i , I1 , I2 , h ) = { w2 : V eu ( w1 , I1 , h ) >
max{Vee (w1 , w2 , i , I1 , I2 , h), V ue (w2 , I2 , h)}}.
      Finally, we also have inflows when an open enrollment event occurs (at rate  ) and with the
insurance choice i1  I1 optimal. The measure of open enrollment inflows is

                                          veu ( w1 , i1 , I1 , h ) ·  ·                     geu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h).                         (9)
                                                                                   i1  I1


      The steady state requirement can therefore be stated as (4) = (5) + (6) + (7) + (8) + (9). The
flow equations in the single earner state when adult 2 (the female) is employed is symmetric to
the above and may be similarly derived. Flow equations for the other joint states are presented
in Appendix B.


2.6     Single households

      We have described the worker side of the economy for households that comprise two adults.
In our application, we consider a labor market that is composed of both single and couple house-
holds, with family status a persistent characteristic and contained in our demographic condition-
ing vector x. The decision problem for single households is, unsurprisingly, much simpler. To
simplify our exposition of the firm side as much as possible, we note that formally the single

                                                                              13
person household model can be considered as a special case of the general two person model
presented here where the arrival rate of spousal job offers and the value of spousal leisure is
restricted to be zero. This allows us to consistently maintain the joint state notation, with differ-
ences in worker parameters, as well as differences in the tax treatment of singles and couples, all
incorporated through the demographic conditioning vector.


2.7     Firms

      Firms are risk neutral and are heterogeneous with respect to their productivity p, and their
cost of providing health insurance. The underlying distribution of productivity in the population
of firms is given by the cumulative distribution function (·), with the corresponding PDF (·),
on the support [ p, p]  (0, ). We allow health to directly affect the productivity of the worker
(as in Dey and Flinn, 2005, Fang and Gavazza, 2011, Dizioli and Pinheiro, 2016, and Aizawa and
Fang, 2018, amongst others), with firm productivity here corresponding to the flow marginal
product of a worker with maximal health status h H . The marginal product of a worker with
health status h is then given by p × a(h)  p, where a(h)  1 captures the impact of health on
worker productivity.
      We assume that there is compensation package posting: employers post a contract (w, I ) that
specifies a wage and the type of insurance offering prior to forming matches with potential
employees, who can then either accept or reject the offer.18 Associated with each insurance choice
i  I is the insurance premium r (i; w, I ). We restrict the contract space of firms by the requirement
that within each choice, insurance premiums are equal to the expected medical expenditure as
faced by the firm. In particular, this assumption rules out any cross-subsidization within the
firm, and conditional on the insurance provision decision I , restricts the problem of the firm to
be one-dimensional (i.e. the choice of a wage). Note that there are several reasons why firms
may wish to provide health insurance benefits. First, absent the availability of non-employer
sponsored insurance, the risk aversion of households and risk neutrality of firms introduces a
risk sharing motive. Second, health insurance plan premiums are a pre-tax deduction.19 Third,
health is a productivity factor, whose transition is affected by the provision of health insurance.
While the first two points imply a direct incentive to provide insurance to both employees and
their spouses, the latter point only concerns firms' employees.
      The decision problem of the firm is the choice of compensation package (w, I ) to maximize
profits, taking the optimal strategies of workers (job acceptance, mobility, and selection from
  18 An alternative empirical framework would be a model with bargaining, as in the Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides
framework, for example. Our choice of the BM framework is motivated by its coherent notion of firm size (as is
relevant for the ACA employer mandate), and because the bargained wage in a bargaining framework would depend
on household characteristics including marital status, and spousal wage/employment outcomes, which is unlawful
under various anti-discrimination laws, such as the Equal Pay Act.
  19 The tax exclusion for employer-sponsored health insurance premium was authorized by Congress in 1954. See

IRS Section 106(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.


                                                      14
the insurance offerings), and the aggregate compensation distribution F (w, I ) as given. We now
describe this problem.


2.7.1      Firm size

     To characterize firm size it is first necessary to derive the objects related to firm size in the
steady state of the labor market using the worker flows as presented in Section 2.5 and Ap-
pendix B. The measure of male workers from a type-(, x) household that is working in a firm
with wage w, insurance choice i, insurance offerings I , and joint family health status h is given
by

                                         1
     1 ( w, i ,   I , h; , x ) =                geu (w, i, I , h; , x) +                         gee (w, w2 , i, i2 , I , I2 , h; , x) dw2 . (10)
                                     f ( w, I )                          I i I    2     2   2



The analogous object for female workers                              2 ( w, i ,   I , h; , x) is defined symmetrically. The total
measure of gender j workers in a firm with compensation package (w, I ), who self-select into
contract i  I , and with family health status h is obtained by integrating over the distribution of
family types
                                             j ( w, i ,   I , h) =     j ( w, i ,     I , h; , x ) d B ( , x ),                                  (11)

so that the total firm size for a firm with compensation package (w, I ) is given by

                                            ( w, I ) =   [ 1 ( w, i , I , h ) +                 2 ( w, i ,   I , h)].                            (12)
                                                             h i I


2.7.2      Average worker productivity

     Recall that health is a productivity factor, with the flow marginal product of a worker with
health status h at a productivity p firm given by p × a(h). The expected flow marginal product
at a productivity p firm with compensating package (w, I ) is given by A(w, I ; p) = p × A(w, I ),
where we define

                                          1
                       A ( w, I ) =
                                        ( w, I )
                                                 ×          [ a ( h1 ) ·     1 ( w, i ,     I , h ) + a ( h2 ) ·        2 ( w, i ,   I , h)] ,   (13)
                                                           h i I


and with           j ( w, i ,   I , h) and (w, I ) as given in equations (11) and (12).


2.7.3      Insurance premiums

     As noted above, the contract space of firms is restricted such that the insurance premium
is equal to the expected medical expenditure conditional on worker insurance choice i (that is,



                                                                          15
there is no cross-subsidization within the firm by contract choice). Letting E[m j |h, q, x] denote the
mean medical expenditure for adult j given health status h, insurance status q, and demographics
x, these insurance premiums may be written as

                        1
  r ( i ; w, I ) =
                     ( w, i , I )
                                  ×                  j ( w, i ,   I , h; , x )
                                        j    h


                                            · · · × qe (i ) · E[m j |h j , 1, x] + qs (i ) · E[m3- j |h3- j , 1, x] d B(, x) , (14)


where qe (i ) is an indicator for whether the employee is insured by the firm at choice i  I , and
where qs (i ) similarly indicators whether their spouse is insured by the firm at this choice. Since
individuals may potentially be insured by both their own and their spouses employer, these are
distinct from the individual insurance indicator functions, q j (i). Note that equation (14) implies
that r (0; w, I ) = 0.


2.7.4    Firms' flow profits

    Given that the reduction in wages for any insurance choice i  I is exactly offset by the
expected medical expenditure, insurance premiums and medical expenditure do not directly enter
the expression for steady state profit flows for the firm. However, they do so indirectly through
the value that households place on the different employment options, and therefore upon firm
size. Excluding any fixed sector specific flow costs (see below), the steady state profit flows for a
productivity p firm offering compensation package (w, I ) are therefore given by

                                              ( w, I ; p ) = [ A ( w, I ; p ) - w ] × ( w, I ).                               (15)

Relative to existing (single agent) implementations of the Burdett and Mortensen (1998, hereafter
BM) model, the main complication in extending the framework to a joint-search environment
is that the labor supply function (w, I ) is derived from a more complicated decision problem.
However, to the extent that we may characterise and solve the steady state worker flow equa-
tions (see Appendix B) we may obtain this numerically, and then extend the solution techniques
employed in simpler versions of the BM model with continuous productivity. Further details
are provided in Appendix E. This maximization problem yields the sector-specific wage policy
functions w I ( p). With maximized profits, conditional on insurance offerings I , given by

                                       I ( p) = [ A(w I ( p), I ; p) - w I ( p)] × (w I ( p), I ).                            (16)




                                                                          16
2.7.5    Firms' insurance offering decision

     The insurance offering decision (or sector) is endogenous. Firms select into whichever sector
generates the highest expected flow profits. These profits consist of the sum of maximized steady
state variable profit flows, as given by equation (16), and the fixed and time invariant flow cost
 I   associated with each insurance offering choice I . The insurance offering decision conditional
on firm productivity p and the vector of fixed costs                    is therefore

                                       I ( p; ) = arg max{ I ( p) -              I }.                    (17)
                                                       I I

     As in Aizawa and Fang (2018), we smooth the firm offering decision by assuming that the
fixed flow costs are heterogeneous across firms of a given productivity, and are of the form
 I = I -  I , where I is common to all firms in sector I with 0 = 0 and 1 = 2 = . We extend
their specification by assuming a generalized extreme value distribution for  I which allows us
to introduce correlation in the unobserved value for providing the different types of insurance
coverage. This yields the nested Logit specification for the conditional choice probabilities
                
                          exp[0 ( p)]
                                                                                             if I = 0
                
                 exp[0 ( p)] + exp[ 12 · IV12 ( p)]
                
     ( I ; p) =                                                                                          (18)
                     exp[ 12 · IV12 ( p)]              exp[( I ( p) - )/ 12 ]
                                                    ×                                        if I > 0,
                
                 exp[0 ( p)] + exp[ 12 · IV12 ( p)]  I >0 exp[( I ( p) - )/ 12 ]
                

where  is a scale parameter,  12 measures the degree of independence in the unobserved value
of providing different insurance types, and IV12 = log  I >0 exp[( I - )/ 12 ] is the inclusive
value of offering some form of health insurance. The total sector size is then given by

                                                       p
                                           I =              ( I ; p ) d ( p ).                           (19)
                                                   p


2.7.6    Market equilibrium

Definition 1 A market equilibrium is defined by a set of wage offer distributions FI (w) in each sector
I  I , and a sector choice probability function ( I ; p) such that simultaneously:

     1. The distribution of wage offers in sector I is given by

                                                  1
                                       FI (w) =                          ( I ; p) d ( p) .
                                                  I         w I ( p)w


     2. The strategy of a productivity p firm, conditional on sector choice I, is the wage policy function
        w I ( p), which maximizes equation (15) given the labor supply function (w, I ) defined in equa-
        tion (12). Given a vector of choice specific costs , the insurance offering decision of a productivity


                                                            17
        p firm solves equation (17).

    3. Conditional on the firm productivity level p, the proportion of firms with insurance offerings I is
        given by ( I ; p), as defined in equation (18).

    4. Insurance premiums at a productivity p firm, with insurance offerings I, and wage policy w I ( p),
        are equal to expected medical expenditure conditional upon worker choice i  I, and are given by
        r (i; w I ( p), I ) as defined in equation (14).

    5. The expected flow marginal product at a productivity p firm with wage policy w I ( p), insurance
        offering I, and insurance premiums {r (i; w I ( p), I )}i I is given by equation (13).

    6. The behaviour of type-(, x) households is as described by the household value functions presented
        in Section 2.4 and Appendix A.

      In BM workers are homogeneous, and the competition between identical firms results in a
continuous, non-degenerate distribution of wage offers. These results are extended in Bontemps,
Robin and Van den Berg (2000), where firms are heterogeneous with respect to their produc-
tivity. An important property of these models, which facilitates the theoretical characterization
of the properties of the wage policy function, is that the job acceptance decision of a worker
is completely determined by their current wage. Such a property clearly does not hold in our
setting. Moreover, note that if the leisure distribution were degenerate, then there would exist
several mass points in the distribution of reservation wages,20 and by consequence, there would
be discontinuities in firms' labor supply function above the lowest wage. Our approach to cir-
cumventing this issue has been to introduce a continuous distribution of heterogeneity through
the leisure values, and while we do not present a formal characterization of the equilibrium
properties of our model, the resulting wage offer distributions are taken to be continuous with
no mass points.


3     Data, identification and estimation
3.1    Data

      Our primary data source is the 2004 Panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participa-
tion (SIPP), which interviews U.S. individuals and households every four months up to twelve
times. In each interview wave SIPP collects detailed monthly information regarding individu-
als' demographic characteristics and labor force activity, including their earnings, measures of
labor supply, and whether the individual changed jobs within an employment spell. In addition,
  20 This results from the discreteness in state variables such as health, the different (single and married) demographic

types, and through household search.



                                                           18
each wave contains information on both individual health insurance coverage and the source
of insurance (i.e. whether it is the individual's own or spousal employment-based insurance, a
private individual insurance plan, or public insurance). The SIPP also comprises periodic topical
modules. In waves 3 and 6 of the 2004 SIPP panel, a topical health module provides information
that includes each individual's self-reported health status (categorized as being "poor", "fair",
"good", "very good" and "excellent"),21 and both out-of-pocket and total medical expenditures.
In addition, wave 5 contains a topical module that provides detailed information about the avail-
ability and coverage of employer-sponsored health insurance.
    As we describe in more detail in Section 3.3, we do not construct detailed individual event
histories using SIPP, but rather rely on point-in-time sampling.22 For each household, single or
married, our main SIPP data set comprises two observations that are spaced 12 months apart.
These correspond to observations from the reference month in waves 3 and 6 when health status
information is available.23 We restrict our sample to include individuals aged between 26 and 50
in our sample window, not self-employed, not employed in the public sector, and not currently
serving in the military. We also exclude individuals with either public or non-employer provided
health insurance. For individuals in couples, we select those households where both spouses
satisfy these requirements over the sample period. Additionally, given that we do not model
either marriage formation and dissolution or fertility, we exclude households that experience
either a change in marital status, or changes in the presence of dependent children. We only use
wage information for non-proxy respondents, and treat wages as being unobserved if in the top
or bottom 1.5% percentile of the distribution. To the extent possible, we apply these same sample
selection restrictions to our additional data sources.
    We supplement SIPP with three additional data sources. Firstly, we use pooled data from
the 2003­2006 full-year consolidated Household Component (HC) data files of the Medical Ex-
penditure Panel Survey (MEPS). This provides information including medical expenditure, self-
reported health status, insurance coverage, income, and demographic characteristics.24 Second,
we use data from the 2006 Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF) Employer Health Benefit Annual
Survey. KFF is an annual survey of private and public employers with three or more workers,
  21 This  same categorization is used in the supplemental data sources that contain health measures.
  22 See  Dey and Flinn (2008) and Flabbi and Mabli (2018) for a similar strategy.
   23 The reference month is the month that the interview took place. The variables in the topical module correspond

to the reference month.
   24 MEPS is a set of large-scale surveys administered by Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. It provides

nationally representative estimates of health expenditure, utilization, payment sources, health status, and health in-
surance coverage for the U.S. civilian non-institutionalized population. MEPS-HC, which began in 1996, collects
detailed semi-annual information (for up to 5 rounds) on individual demographic characteristics, health conditions,
health status, use of medical services, charges and source of payments, access to care, satisfaction with care, health
insurance coverage, income, and employment. The second MEPS component is the Insurance Component (IC), which
is an establishment survey of characteristics of employer sponsored health insurance. The collected data include the
number and types of private insurance plans offered (if any), premiums, contributions by employers and employees,
eligibility requirements, benefits associated with these plans, and employer characteristics. Unfortunately, a public
use microdata sample for MEPS-IC is not available.


                                                         19
and provides information on employer-sponsored health insurance offering (if any), plan choices,
premiums, enrollment patterns, as well as firm characteristics, including firm size.25 Third, we
use the 2003 Commonwealth Fund Biennial Health Insurance Survey, a nationally representative
sample of over 4,000 adults ages 19 and older living in the United States. In addition to providing
information on demographics, health insurance coverage and access, it collects information on
current self-reported health status and non-productive work time.26


3.2     Empirical specification

      In our empirical analysis, there are five broad demographic groups that constitute household
types: single men, single women with children, single women without children, married couples
with children, and married couples without children. These comprise the elements of our demo-
graphic conditioning variable x. We allow for two health states ( H = 2), with the health status h1
(which we refer to as unhealthy) corresponding to the poor/fair health categories, and the health
status h2 (henceforth referred to as healthy) corresponding to good/very good/excellent health.
      We parametrize the conditional medical expenditure distribution M+
                                                                       j as truncated Gamma-
Gompertz (Bemmaor and Glady, 2012), a three parameter distribution that provides an excellent
fit to empirical medical expenditure distributions.27 As we show in Appendix D, this distribu-
tional assumption implies that          E[m j |h j , q j , x] (the mean medical expenditure for adult j given
health status h j , insurance status q j , and demographics x), may be written in terms of the Gaus-
sian hypergeometric function (see Abramowitz and Stegun, 1964). In the same appendix we also
demonstrate that these distributional assumptions allow us to derive an analytic characterization
of the expected utility risk adjustment factor, as discussed in Section 2.3.28
      We calculate tax schedules (defined as piecewise linear functions of household earnings) prior
  25 The   response rate for firms in the full KFF survey is much lower for firms that do not offer health benefits. All
firms that declined to participate were asked a single question: "Does your company offer or contribute to a health
insurance program as a benefit to your employees?" The response rate to this question was 72% in 2006.
   26 Information is reported on both work days missed due to both sickness and tooth problems (lost productivity),

as well as time at work where individuals could not fully concentrate due to feeling unwell (partial productivity). In
calculating the total number of unproductive days over the year, we apply weight 0.5 to the partially productive days.
MEPS-HC also collects information on missing workdays due to illness. We use data from the Commonwealth Fund
Health Insurance Survey data as it provides a broader measure. See Dizioli and Pinheiro (2016) for an analysis of the
impact of health insurance on productivity using MEPS-HC data in the context of a single-agent BM model.
   27 We set the truncation point at expenditure (in annual terms in 2006 prices) equal to $50,000. The CDF of the

untruncated Gamma-Gompertz distribution is 1 -         s
                                                         /[  - 1 + exp(b m)]s , where b , s ,   > 0, with m  [0, ).
The parameter b is a scale parameter; s and   are shape parameters.
   28 Since we consider a truncated distribution, this risk adjustment factor is necessarily finite. If the support of the

distribution is unbounded from above, then the risk adjustment term is finite whenever (x) < s (h, q, x) · b (h, q, x),
which places a restriction on how risk averse households may be. Again, see Appendix D. Note that with CARA
preferences, a finite risk adjustment factor is synonymous with the existence of the moment generating function asso-
ciated with a given out-of-pocket medical expenditure distribution. An alternative would be an exogenous consump-
tion floor, which is equivalent to the truncation point (and so risk adjustment factor) being a function of household
income. In practice, medical debt is most prevalent in low and moderate income households (Collins et al., 2008), and
such a formulation would provide little incentive for low income households to purchase health insurance.


                                                           20
to estimation using the National Bureau of Economic Research TAXSIM calculator (see Feenberg
and Coutts, 1993). Our measure of net taxes includes federal income taxes and Earned Income
Tax Credit, but does not include state taxes and other non-income taxes. These taxes vary across
demographic groups; and for families with dependent children, both taxes and tax credits are
calculated as if there were two children. For individuals who are non-employed, we impute a
value of unemployment insurance (UI) that is equal to the average UI payment in 2006, multiplied
by an estimate of the UI recipiency rate. Note that while unemployment insurance is taxed, it
is taxed differently from labor earnings as it is an unearned income source. We account for
this differential tax treatment in our empirical implementation. The modified marginal tax rate
schedule is replaced by a differentiable function using the method proposed by MaCurdy, Green
and Paarsch (1990), which smoothes the tax schedule in the neighborhood of any marginal rate
changes. Further details of our tax schedule implementation, and our smoothing procedure, are
provided in Appendix C.
   In addition to taxes, our empirical implementation allows a number of model parameters to
vary with demographic characteristics. The coefficient of absolute risk aversion (x) varies with
all the broad demographic groups x that define a household type. The job-offer arrival rates (for
both employed and non-employed individuals), and job destruction rates vary with household
type and gender. However, for married men, we do not allow these parameters to vary by the
presence of dependent children, while for single individuals without children, they do not vary
with gender. The distribution of leisure flow values  is assumed to be Gaussian, with the mean
of the distribution a log-linear function of household demographics and gender (specifically:
marital status, gender, children status and an interaction between gender and children status). In
couple households, we assume that the leisure flows of the husband and the wife are statistically
independent.
   Health status is dynamic and evolves stochastically, and we similarly allow this transition
process to be a function of demographics. The Poisson rate at which an individual health status
improves from unhealthy to healthy is a log-linear function of indicator variables for marital
status, gender, and insurance coverage. The Poisson rate at which an individual health status
deteriorates from healthy to unhealthy is parametrized symmetrically. Similar index restrictions
are used in our parametrization of the medical expenditure distributions: the probability mass at
zero expenditure is a (logistic) function of health status, gender and insurance coverage; the shape
and scale parameters of the (Gamma-Gompertz) conditional medical expenditure distribution are
log-linear functions of these same variables. Finally, recalling that child health status is not a state
variable of our model, the parameters of the child medical expenditure distribution only depend
upon insurance coverage.
   All households, regardless of their type, sample from the same joint compensation package
distribution. The sector-specific wage offer distributions are parametrized as a non-standard Beta



                                                  21
distribution. For each sector (defined by health insurance offering), we estimate the parameters
of the support of the distribution, as well as the two shape parameters. Additionally, we specify
a measurement error term for log-wages, whose variance is assumed to be common across jobs
with different insurance offerings.29

3.3    Estimation

      The estimation procedure we develop is an extension of the multi-step estimation procedure
that has been used in other empirical applications of the BM model with continuous produc-
tivity distributions (Bontemps, Robin and Van den Berg, 1999, 2000; Shephard, 2017). Crucially,
our procedure does not require us to solve the equilibrium of the model, and therefore offers
important computational advantages. It proceeds as follows:

   1. While the distributions of job offers are complicated equilibrium objects from the compen-
        sation package posting game, we nonetheless impose a parametric form on these distri-
                                                                                         I
        butions, with the (conditional) cumulative distribution functions denoted FI (w; F ). The
                          I
        parameter vectors F and aggregate sector sizes  I are then included (along with all other
        parameters that are relevant for the household decision problem) in the first-step estimation
        parameter vector . The first stage of our estimation, which we describe in more detail in
        Section 3.3.1 below, concerns the choice of  to minimize some criterion function.30

   2. Given the first stage parameter estimates, we recover an estimate of a(h) using data on
        non-productive time (which we obtain from the Commonwealth Fund Biennial Health In-
        surance Survey) and the estimated transition processes.31 , 32 We then solve for the steady
        state worker flows (as described in Section 2.5 and Appendix B) to obtain the implied firm
        size objects using equations (10), (11), and (12). Given a(h) is known we may obtain A(w, I )
        and calculate the implied firm flow marginal product using the firms' first order conditions.
        That is
                                                             w ( w, I ) + ( w, I )
                                 p  w- 1
                                     I (w) =                                                    ,                  (20)
                                                    A ( w, I ) ( w, I ) + ( w, I ) A ( w, I )
  29 We construct certain moments using a steady state transition function, which correspond to annual transitions.

We assume that the measurement error terms associated with the cross-section and the transition are independent.
  30 The continuous time discount rate  and the open-enrollment rate  are both exogenously fixed.
  31 The impact of health on productivity is non-parametrically non-identified using worker and firm size data alone.

Here we follow an approach similar to Dizioli and Pinheiro (2016) by using a direct measure of non-productive time.
  32 Since the empirical measure of subjective health is a point-in-time measure, while the productivity outcomes are

retrospective, this only provides us with a temporally aggregated measure. We recover the analogue of our theoretical
measure a(h) by using the transition processes implied by the estimated model. Let a(h) denote the empirical fraction
of non-productive days given current health h, and let (h |h) be the fraction of time that employed individuals had
health status h over the past year, given that their current health status is h. We obtain this through simulation. Thus
for all h we have
                                                 a ( h ) =  a ( h )  ( h | h ),
                                                        h

which is a linear system. Once we have recovered a(·) we normalize the measures such that a(h) = 1.


                                                            22
       where all partial derivatives are evaluated with respect to the wage rate. This therefore
       establishes identification of the wage policy function w I ( p), together with firm flow profits
        I ( p) (which we recall are defined excluding any fixed sector-specific costs).

   3. The firm productivity distribution is identified by noting that the (conditional) wage offer
       distributions must satisfy

                                                                 1       p
                                           FI (w I ( p)) =                    ( I ; p ) d ( p ).                     (21)
                                                                 I   p


       Applying Leibniz's rule and summing over the set of alternatives I  I , we then achieve
       identification of the marginal productivity distribution


                                     ( p)   ( p) =          I × f I (w I ( p)) × w I ( p),
                                                             I

       since by definition  I ( I ; p) = 1.

   4. Non-parametric estimates of the sector choice probabilities are given by

                                                         I × f I (w I ( p)) × w I ( p)
                                           ( I ; p) =                                  ,                             (22)
                                                                   ( p)

       where all right hand side quantities are estimated from the previous step. Without further
       restrictions, this does not identify the sector specific cost distribution itself. Imposing dis-
       tributional assumptions, as described in Section 2.7.5, allows us to obtain estimates of the
       sector specific cost distributions by finding the parameter values that minimize the distance
       between ( I ; p) and ( I ; p) from equation (18), given steady state flow profit  I ( p).

    We note some important practical issues. Firstly, since we are using a parametric form for the
sector specific cost distribution, we are not able to exactly induce our non-parametric estimates
( I ; p). This necessarily means that the equilibrium joint distribution of compensation packages
will also not exactly induce those obtained from the first stage of our estimation exercise.33
Second, an important feature of the labor market prior to the introduction of the ACA, is that
if firms offer health insurance, they almost always offer it to both employees and their spouses.
  33 Empirical  applications of the BM model which implement a multi-step estimator typically use a non-parametric
estimator of the wage offer distribution. This estimator is obtained by inverting steady state flow equations that relate
the unknown distribution of wage offers to the known distribution of cross-sectional earnings. Such an inversion is
not feasible in our application, and the use of a parametrically specified offer distributions removes the inversion step.
However, conditional on the estimate of F, this procedure is equivalent to the implementation in Bontemps, Robin
and Van den Berg (1999, 2000) in the single sector case. In practice, we calculate equation (20) by first replacing both
A(w, I ) and (w, I ) for each I by a polynomial approximation using the method described in Murray, Muller      ¨     and
Turlach (2016). This allows us to directly calculate the derivative of these functions with respect to wages, and to also
obtain the slope of the wage policy function, w I ( p).


                                                             23
In performing our estimation, we will therefore be ignoring the employee-only health insurance
option by restricting the corresponding sector size to be zero. We will then show that such
insurance offerings are indeed "small" in equilibrium, given a suitable choice of the parameter
 12 that measures the degree of independence in the unobserved value of providing different
insurance types.


3.3.1      First-step estimation

    For reasons as discussed in Dey and Flinn (2008) we do not use likelihood based estimation.34
Instead, we estimate the vector of worker-side model parameters  (including the parametrized
wage offer distribution) using a rich set of moments computed from the stationary distribution
of labor market outcomes and the associated steady state transition functions. Our first step
estimation procedure is then formally described as

                             = arg min[msim () - mdata ] W[msim () - mdata ],
                                      


where mdata is a vector of empirical moments, and msim () = S       s          1
                                                               s=1 msim ( ) is the model mo-
                                                                               S
ment vector given  calculated on each of S simulated datasets, and W is a positive-definite
weighting matrix. Given the problems associated with the use of the optimal weighting matrix
(Altonji and Segal, 1996) we choose W to be a diagonal matrix, whose element is proportional to
the inverse of the diagonal variance-covariance matrix of the empirical moments.35
    In our implementation we use a rich set of moments that are informative about the parame-
ters of our model. Firstly, we construct moments that provide a description of the cross-sectional
distribution of outcomes. Using SIPP data we construct moments that describe conditional out-
comes including the distribution of wages, health status, employment, health insurance coverage,
and health insurance take-up. Many of these moments relate to joint household outcomes. Us-
ing MEPS-HC data, we construct moments that describe the annual conditional distributions of
  34 One of the difficulties in implementing a likelihood based estimator in a continuous time multi-person sequential
search model is that some events may induce simultaneous changes (e.g. the wife may voluntarily quit her job when
her husband accepts a high wage offer). An alternative, also discussed by Dey and Flinn (2008), would be a discrete
time framework. As they discuss, this introduces a number of conceptual and data issues, and would complicate the
analysis as it would be necessary to consider many simultaneous events in the decision period.
  35 We construct S = 20 simulated datasets. The variance matrix of our estimator is given by


                                      S+1                   -1                            -1
                          Var() =             × Dm WDm           Dm WW Dm Dm WDm               ,
                                       S

where  is the block-diagonal covariance matrix of the empirical moments, and Dm = msim ()/|= is the deriva-
tive matrix of the moment conditions with respect to the model parameters at  = . Since we have discrete depen-
dents, any attempt to approximate the derivative vector Dm by finite differences may be sensitive to the chosen step
size. We therefore calculate the derivative by first approximating the function by a low-order polynomial function as
we vary each parameter locally. See, e.g. Lise and Robin (2017), for a similar strategy. In our application we vary each
parameter by ±10% on a uniformly spaced grid with 21 points, and fit a fourth order polynomial.



                                                          24
medical expenditure by gender, health status, and insurance coverage.36 Second, we construct
moments that are related to the household dynamics. Using SIPP data we construct measures
of annual health transitions, by health status and insurance coverage. We also construct annual
employment transitions for workers (to non-employment, and to jobs with differing insurance
coverage) and for non-workers (to employment with differing insurance coverage). Third, we
construct moments that are related to the firm-side (firm size distribution, and the health insur-
ance offering decision by firms) using KFF data. We discuss these moments further when we
discuss model fit in Section 3.5. A complete list of moments is presented in Appendix F.
      We construct the theoretical analogue to these empirical moments through a simulation proce-
dure. Conditional on a candidate parameter vector  and a guess of the (endogenous) insurance
premiums, this involves solving for the household value functions using value function iteration,
and then constructing S datasets derived from a sequence of continuous time event histories. The
simulated stationary distribution of outcomes is then used to provide an update for the insurance
premiums, and we then repeat this procedure. In constructing our simulated moments msim (),
we mimic any temporal aggregation to reflect the construction of the empirical moments.37


3.4     Identification

      As part of our discussion of our multi-step estimation procedure in Section 3.3, we described
how knowledge of the parameters that are relevant to the household decision problem, together
with the structure of the model, allow us to identify the primitives of the firms' problem. Our
discussion here focuses on the identification of the worker-side parameters. We ignore any
temporal aggregation issues and also assume knowledge of the discount rate  and the open-
enrollment rate  . Given these, note that the health transition rates j (·|h j , q j , x) are in principle
directly observed, as are the job-destruction rates (x),38 and the medical expenditure distribu-
tions M j (·|h j , q j , x). Under the maintained assumption of steady state behavior, knowledge of the
medical expenditure distribution, together with the joint distribution of labor market states and
health insurance take-up, allows the insurance premiums r (i; w, I ) to be identified.
      One of the main complications in establishing identification is the presence of reservation wage
heterogeneity, which is due to differences in health status, spousal state, and the household un-
observed values for leisure. Such heterogeneity implies that common identification arguments
  36 The  empirical distribution obtained from MEPS-HC are used to construct estimation moments, rather than to
provide direct estimates of the medical expenditure distributions M j (·|h j , q j , x). Obtaining a direct empirical analogue
is not possible as we only have point-in-time measures of the conditioning variables. Our estimation will reflect how
health status and insurance coverage changes over the course of a year.
   37 Estimation is performed using MIDACO, a distributed global optimization algorithm that is based on the Ant

colony metaheuristic. It is well suited to applications that may involve non-smooth objective functions, as frequently
occur in simulation based estimation. Moreover, the solver can easily be parallelized. See Schlueter et al. (2013).
   38 Since changes in the household state vector may induce an endogenous quit, this must be calculated conditional

on the state remaining fixed over some time interval.



                                                             25
do not apply as the distribution of accepted wages out of non-employment will no longer coin-
cide with the wage offer distribution. To understand identification here, consider for example,
a couple in the eu state where the husband is employed at a low-wage in sector I , i.e. with
w  w I . As the husband would be willing to accept essentially any wage from the same sector,
the within-sector distribution of accepted wages by individuals currently employed at low wages
will identify FI (w). By the same token, the rate at which a low-wage sector I worker will accept
                                                j                                                                       j
a job in the same sector identifies e (x) ·  I . Summing across all sectors identifies both e (x)
and  I .
      Consider now individuals that are non-employed. Let GU
                                                           j ( w; I , z ) denote the cumulative
distribution function of wages accepted out of non-employment into sector I given the current
observed household state z (which includes, at the time of job acceptance, the joint health status,
employment and wage of spouse, and household health insurance coverage). Given that the
behavior of individuals can be characterized by a reservation wage property it follows that

                          w                                                     w   FI (w) - FI (w )
      GU
       j ( w; I , z ) =       Pr(WI < w|WI > w ) d RU
                                                    j (w ; I , z) =                                  d RU
                                                                                                        j (w ; I , z)
                          -                                                     -        F I (w )
                                                    w d RU ( w   ; I , z)
                                                         j
                    = RU
                       j ( w; I , z ) - F I ( w )                           ,                                           (23)
                                                    -     F I (w )

where RU
       j ( w; I , z ) is the distribution of reservation wages among the non-employed. It follows
from equation (23) that RU                  U                             U
                         j ( w; I , z ) = G j ( w; I , z ) + F I ( w ) · g j ( w; I , z ) / f I ( w ) and hence, this dis-
tribution is identified on the support of wages given the identified wage offer distribution and
                                                                                         j
the distribution of accepted wages. Given these, identification of u (x) then follows from the
transition rate of the non-employed into employment.
      Finally, we turn to identifying the coefficient of absolute risk aversion, (x). Given an initial
job without health insurance, this is closely related to the lowest wage that the household would
be willing to accept for a job with ESHI (holding all other household state variables fixed).
Indeed, given such a wage differential, the risk aversion coefficient is the only unknown variable
that enters the between the expected utility functions associated with these two jobs.39


3.5     Model fit and parameter estimates

      We present parameter estimates, together with accompanying standard errors, in Appendix H.
Here, we comment on some of the main features, together with the implications that they have
for household outcomes and dynamics. Firstly, we note that our parameter estimates reveal much
  39 Thisis similar to the approach used by Dey and Flinn (2008) to identify the value of additive value of ESHI, which
is a primitive in their model. In our context, this approach (here to identify the risk aversion coefficient) is not exact
as the raw wage differential reflects both the insurance value of health insurance (entering expected utility functions
as described above), and the effect that insurance has on the evolution of future health status within the household
(and so also entering value functions). Similar arguments are also used in Aizawa and Fang (2018).


                                                           26
heterogeneity across demographic groups, and this is reflected in the model's ability to replicate
the diverse patterns that we see in the data. In Figure 1 we consider the fit of the model to the
cross-sectional distribution of wages, for different family types and by insurance coverage status.
In general, we provide an excellent fit to these distributions, and are able to well capture both
how wages differ by insurance coverage (wages are much lower and less dispersed for individ-
uals without insurance coverage), and how they differ across these broad family types. Recall
that the offer distribution of compensation packages F (w, I ), which we find is characterized by a
greater concentration of low wages for jobs without health insurance, is common to workers of
all types. As such, any differences across these groups, including the so-called marital wage pre-
mium and gender wage gap, must be explained by differences in objects such as job and health
transition rates, and leisure values, as well as the behavioral mechanisms of the model. We now
describe these differences.40
    The job offer arrival rates for the non-employed are highest for married men and singles with-
                          j
out children, where u (x)  1.5 (recall that a unit-of-time is a year). The rate is lowest for single
                                   j
women with children with u (x) = 0.73. For all demographic groups, we obtain correspondingly
                                                                                                         j    j
lower estimates for the employed job offer arrival rate, with the relative arrival rate (u /e )  (x)
varying between around 2 and 7. That job offers accrue less frequently for employed workers is
a common empirical finding (see, for example, van den Berg and Ridder, 1998). The estimated
exogenous job destruction rates are lowest for married men, j (x) = 0.05, and highest for mar-
ried women with children, where j (x) = 0.15. In Table 1 we show the ability of the model to fit
annual transition rates from positions of employment and non-employment for married individ-
uals. (The corresponding table for single individuals is presented in the Appendix.) In addition
to the variation across groups that the model well reproduces, the estimates imply an important
role for health insurance. In particular, if employed individuals experience a job mobility event,
they are much more likely to transition to a job with health insurance.41
    Health and health insurance both play an important role in our analysis. Firstly, we estimate
that unhealthy workers are less productive than healthy workers, with the relative productivity
of an unhealthy worker estimated as a(h1 ) = 0.88. Health insurance is valuable to households
because it insures them from their medical expenditure risks, and reduces their probability of
being unhealthy. In terms of the medical expenditure parameters, health insurance is estimated to
  40 While the empirical wage differentials between single and married men is well-documented (see, e.g., Korenman

and Neumark, 1991), there is somewhat less agreement regarding the source of these differences. The potential role
of household search and search differences in explaining the marital wage premium is analysed in Pilossoph and
Wee (2019b) in a model with endogenous search intensity. Relatedly, Flabbi and Mabli (2018), estimate gender-specific
wage offer distributions under alternative models that assume either individual or household search, and find that
the estimated differences in the wage distributions across genders is much smaller under household search.
  41 It is also true that individuals with health insurance are less likely to change employer. In constructing Table 1

note that we are only comparing point-in-time employment states spaced one-year apart, and there may be additional
transitions over this period. For example, an employed person whose job was destroyed and who then accepted a job
from non-employment (in the space of a year) would be classified as an annual job-to-job transition.



                                                          27
                     0.15

           Density   0.10

                     0.05

                     0.00
                            0          20       40          60      0        20         40       60
                            (a) Married women, children           (b) Married women, no children
                     0.15

                     0.10
           Density




                     0.05

                     0.00
                            0          20       40          60      0        20         40       60
                                (c) Married men, children           (d) Married men, no children
                     0.15

                     0.10
           Density




                     0.05

                     0.00
                            0          20       40          60      0        20         40       60
                            (e) Single women, children              (f) Single women, no children
                     0.15
                                                                          Insured, empirical
                     0.10
           Density




                                                                          Insured, simulated
                                                                          Uninsured, empirical
                     0.05
                                                                          Uninsured, simulated
                     0.00
                            0          20       40          60
                            (g) Single men, no children
                                                      Hourly wage

Figure 1: Simulated and empirical wage earnings by group. Horizontal axis refers to hourly
wage rate in 2006 prices; Vertical axis refers to wage density. Simulated wages include wage
measurement error. Empirical and simulated distributions are calculated using a Gaussian kernel
with a bandwidth of 2. Empirical distributions are calculated using SIPP data.




                                                             28
                                     Table 1: Annual Employment Transitions

                                             Married Women                                    Married Men
                                    Children             No Children               Children              No Children
                             Data    Model     S.E.   Data   Model   S.E.   Data    Model      S.E.   Data Model    S.E.

  Transitions from employment
    . . . to non-emp.        0.08     0.12     0.01   0.03   0.06    0.01   0.02     0.03      0.00   0.04   0.03   0.01
    . . . to emp. (ins.)     0.08     0.17     0.01   0.11   0.13    0.02   0.07     0.06      0.01   0.09   0.07   0.02
    . . . to emp. (unins.)   0.02     0.03     0.00   0.01   0.01    0.01   0.03     0.02      0.00   0.03   0.01   0.01
  Transitions from non-employment
    . . . to emp. (ins.)     0.11     0.16     0.01   0.19   0.17    0.04   0.25     0.20      0.03   0.16   0.13   0.05
    . . . to emp. (unins.)   0.06     0.06     0.01   0.04   0.04    0.02   0.17     0.13      0.03   0.04   0.05   0.03

 Notes: Table shows annual transitions from employment and non-employment for married individuals to different
 labor market states. In parentheses, ins. (respectively unins.) refer to transitions to a job with (without) health in-
 surance. S.E. refers to the standard deviation of the empirical moment. Empirical moments are calculated using
 SIPP data.


have an important impact both on the probability of experiencing a positive medical expenditure
shock, and on the conditional medical expenditure realization (both the probability and the
conditional expected value increase with insurance coverage). In Figure 2 we show the fit of the
model to the medical expenditure distribution (presented as cumulative distribution functions)
over the duration of a year, conditional on having incurred positive medical expenditure in that
year. The fit here is generally excellent. Our estimated model is able to capture the fact that
healthy individuals have lower total expenditure than unhealthy ones, and that those with health
insurance coverage have greater expenditure than those without insurance. Underlying this
figure are the dynamics of both insurance coverage and health status. The parameters related
to health transitions show that health insurance coverage simultaneously improves the chances
of transitioning from unhealthy to healthy, and decreases the transition rate from healthy to
unhealthy. For example, our estimated model implies an annual unhealthy-to-healthy transition
rate for married men without insurance equal to 1 (h2 |h1 , q1 = 0) = 0.41, whilst with insurance
coverage we have 1 (h2 |h1 , q1 = 0) = 0.65. As we document in Table 2, which presents the
fit to annual health transition rates for married individuals conditional on gender, health, and
insurance coverage, these simulated rates closely match their empirical counterparts. (Again, the
corresponding table for single individuals is presented in the Appendix.)
   There are several features of our model that generate heterogeneity in job acceptance behav-
ior, both within and across demographic groups, and which imply that not all job offers are
acceptable to all workers. These sources of heterogeneity include differences in health status, la-
bor market transition parameters, the value of leisure, and risk preferences. While risk preference
estimates are somewhat context dependent, the estimated coefficients of absolute risk aversion
that we obtain are in the range of values from the literature (accounting for the fact that here

                                                             29
                          1.00

                          0.75
            Probability




                          0.50

                          0.25

                          0.00
                                 0   5000   10000    15000   20000     0     5000      10000   15000    20000
                                     (a) Women, healthy                    (b) Women, unhealthy
                          1.00

                          0.75
            Probability




                          0.50

                          0.25

                          0.00
                                 0   5000   10000    15000   20000     0     5000      10000   15000    20000
                                      (c) Men, healthy                      (d) Men, unhealthy
                          1.00

                          0.75                                                   Insured, empirical
            Probability




                                                                                 Insured, simulated
                          0.50
                                                                                 Uninsured, empirical
                          0.25                                                   Uninsured, simulated
                          0.00
                                 0   5000   10000    15000   20000
                                        (e) Children
                                                    Annual Medical Expenditure

Figure 2: Simulated and empirical medical expenditure. The figure panels show the conditional
cumulative distribution function of annual medical expenditure (in 2006 prices, and truncated at
$20,000) for women, men, and children, respectively (by health and insurance coverage status).
Health status and insurance status are measured at the start-of-year (point-in-time measures).
The empirical distributions are calculated using MEPS-HC data. The simulated (empirical) zero-
expenditure probabilities with insurance for groups (a)­(e) are 0.09, 0.01, 0.17, 0.03, and 0.09
(0.08, 0.06, 0.21, 0.13, and 0.07). With no insurance these are respectively 0.46, 0.17, 0.58, 0.25, and
0.09 (0.37, 0.22, 0.59, 0.37, and 0.15).




                                                                30
                                         Table 2: Annual Health Transitions

                                         Married Men                                       Married Women
                               Insured                  Uninsured                 Insured                  Uninsured
                        Data   Model      S.E.   Data     Model     S.E.   Data   Model      S.E.   Data     Model     S.E.

 Transitions from healthy
   . . . to healthy     0.98     0.97     0.00   0.92      0.88     0.01   0.97     0.98     0.00   0.92      0.87     0.01
   . . . to unhealthy   0.02     0.03     0.00   0.08      0.12     0.01   0.03     0.02     0.00   0.08      0.13     0.01
 Transitions from unhealthy
   . . . to healthy     0.65     0.60     0.04   0.41      0.32     0.05   0.56     0.65     0.04   0.45      0.33     0.06
   . . . to unhealthy   0.35     0.40     0.04   0.59      0.68     0.05   0.44     0.35     0.04   0.55      0.67     0.06

Notes: Table shows annual health transitions for married individuals conditional on health and insurance coverage
status at the start of the year. S.E. refers to the standard deviation of the empirical moment. Empirical moments cal-
culated using SIPP data.


consumption is measured in tens of thousands of dollars). To provide a more interpretable met-
ric and to facilitate comparison, we calculate the amount of income such that a household is just
indifferent between the status quo and participating in a lottery in which they win $1000 or lose
$X with equal probability. Depending on the household type, we obtain values of $X between
$870 and $900. These are between the values implied by the median estimates reported in Cohen
and Einav (2007) [$970] and Handel (2013) [$730].
    Our estimates imply that the mean value of leisure is higher for single compared to married
individuals, and is higher for women, particularly mothers. Moreover, as we described in Sec-
tion 2, the reservation wage of a married individual depends upon the state of their spouse. To
illustrate the importance of this, consider a married man with a working spouse. If his spouse is
working at a job without employer sponsored health insurance, then our estimates imply the ac-
ceptance rate for the lowest paying job with (without) health insurance is 63% (49%). In contrast,
if his spouse is working in a firm that provides health insurance, then he is more selective and
these rates fall to 46% (29%). These behavioral channels have important implications for joint
outcomes within the household. In Table 3 we show the fit of the model to the within-household
distribution of employment and insurance coverage. The model is successful in replicating sev-
eral prominent feature in the data, including that a large fraction (25%) of married women with
children do not work, yet they are insured on the spousal insurance option from their husband's
job. The fit of the model to a range of other joint outcomes is presented in the Appendix.
    Finally, in Table 4 we present the fit of our model to the size distribution of firms (as measured
by the number of workers), together with the relationship between firm size and the probability
of health insurance offering. Our model estimates reproduce the salient empirical patterns that
larger firms are more likely to offer health insurance, and that a large majority of firms (around
80%) have fewer than 25 workers. The underlying distributions of firm productivity that is


                                                            31
                               Table 3: Joint Employment Status and Insurance Coverage

                                                                                     Female
                                     (e2 , q2 ) = (1, 1)       (e2 , q2 ) = (1, 0)            (e2 , q2 ) = (0, 1)       (e2 , q2 ) = (0, 0)
                                   Data   Model       S.E.   Data   Model       S.E.    Data       Model       S.E.   Data Model         S.E.

    Married with children
             (e1 , q1 ) = (1, 1)   0.50     0.51     0.01    0.01     0.01     0.00      0.24        0.25     0.01    0.02     0.01     0.00
      Male




             (e1 , q1 ) = (1, 0)   0.01     0.03     0.00    0.06     0.05     0.00                                   0.09     0.06     0.01
             (e1 , q1 ) = (0, 1)   0.03     0.04     0.00
             (e1 , q1 ) = (0, 0)   0.01     0.01     0.00    0.01     0.02     0.00                                   0.03     0.02     0.00
    Married no children
             (e1 , q1 ) = (1, 1)   0.68     0.60     0.02    0.01     0.01     0.00      0.12        0.17     0.01    0.02     0.01     0.01
      Male




             (e1 , q1 ) = (1, 0)   0.01     0.01     0.00    0.04     0.02     0.01                                   0.02     0.03     0.01
             (e1 , q1 ) = (0, 1)   0.05     0.10     0.01
             (e1 , q1 ) = (0, 0)   0.01     0.01     0.00    0.02     0.02     0.00                                   0.03     0.02     0.01

 Notes: Table shows the cross-sectional joint distribution of insurance coverage and employment status for married
 individuals. Employment is denoted e j (1 is employed, 0 non-employed). Insurance coverage is denoted q j (1 is
 insured, 0 uninsured). S.E. refers to the standard deviation of the empirical moment. Empirical moments are cal-
 culated using SIPP data.


recovered from our estimation is shown in Figure 3a, with the distribution seen to be heavily
skewed to the right.42 Figure 3b plots the associated insurance offering probability, ( I ; p).
As firm productivity increases, the fraction of firms offering employee and spousal coverage
increases from around a third for the least productive firm to close to 100%. The incidence of
employee-only insurance is our benchmark pre-ACA economy is negligible, with 2 = 0.010.


4     Implementing ACA
     We seek to examine the impact of the Affordable Care Act, its various components, and
alternative policy designs. In implementing the ACA, we consider a stylized version which
incorporates its main components as discussed in Section 1: first, all individuals are required
to have health insurance or must pay a tax penalty; second, large employers are required to
offer health insurance to employees and dependents, or have to pay a penalty; third, we introduce
a health insurance exchange where individuals can purchase health insurance at a community
rated premium; fourth, the participants in health insurance exchange can obtain income-based
subsidies, if they do not have access to employer-sponsored health insurance either from their
own or their spouse's employers.
  42 In log-coordinates the relationship is approximately linear over much of the support, meaning that the distribution

of firm productivity is approximately Pareto. These objects are calculated with  12 = 0.05. The exact value of  12 is
not very important in what follows, provided it is not too high.




                                                                     32
                              Table 4: Firm Size and Health Insurance Offering Rate

                                                        Firm Size                             Offer ESHI
                                             Data        Model      S.E.               Data     Model      S.E.

                                    0­10         0.65      0.59     0.02               0.49         0.35   0.03
                                    10­25        0.21      0.21     0.02               0.78         0.73   0.03
                                    25­50        0.08      0.11     0.01               0.87         0.95   0.03
                                    50­100       0.03      0.07     0.00               0.90         1.00   0.02
                                    100+         0.04      0.02     0.00               0.98         1.00   0.01

                                  Notes: Table shows the fraction of firms of different em-
                                  ployee sizes, and the probability of offering ESHI condi-
                                  tional on firm size. S.E. refers to the standard deviation of
                                  the empirical moment. Empirical moments are calculated
                                  using KFF data.




             0.20                                                                      1.00
                                                                                                                                 No ins.
             0.15                                                                      0.75                                      Emp. ins.
                                                                         Probability
   Density




                                                                                                                                 Emp/sp. ins.
             0.10                                                                      0.50

             0.05                                                                      0.25

             0.00                                                                      0.00
                    10       20       30           40         50                               10          20         30          40         50

                                  Productivity                                                                    Productivity

                    (a) Productivity distribution                                         (b) Insurance offering probability

Figure 3: Productivity distribution and insurance offering probability. Panel a shows the exoge-
nous productivity distribution ( p) that is calculated as part of our multi-step estimation proce-
dure. Panel b presents the endogenous insurance offering probability ( I ; p). See Section 3.3 for
details regarding their calculation. Productivity corresponds to the hourly flow marginal prod-
uct for a worker with maximal health status. Figures have been truncated at productivity levels
exceeding $50 in 2006 prices.




                                                                    33
4.1       Health Insurance Exchange

      The introduction of a health insurance exchange, which provides a pooling mechanism for
insurance purchase outside of the work-place, represents a substantial departure from our bench-
mark model. As in the case of employer sponsored health insurance, health insurance from the
exchange marketplace may be purchased either when there is an open-enrollment period, or
when there is a qualifying event. We assume the same Poisson arrival rate  > 0 as in the bench-
mark economy, and that when faced with an open-enrollment event, households may optimize
over any available employer provided options, together with marketplace health insurance. Im-
portantly, these open-enrollment events now apply to both employed and non-employed house-
holds. Insurance purchased from the exchange is considered an imperfect substitute to those
offered by employers. While we assume that it has the same impact on health (i.e., only insur-
ance coverage status matter, not the source of insurance), it provides less than full insurance,
insuring fraction  of medical expenditure.43 This therefore affects the budget constraint and by
consequence the associated risk adjustment factor R j , whose definition is naturally extended.
      For conciseness of notation, we introduce the availability of non-employer sponsored health
insurance by extending the definition of the offering choice set: for any insurance menu I 
I households always have the option (at open-enrollment or following a qualifying event) to
purchase insurance from the exchange at the pre-subsidy price r H IX , and with this choice denoted
i = -1 for the individual.44 Using this notation, both the household value functions and steady
state flow equations take an almost identical form to those presented in Section 2 and so we do
not present them here. The only differences are: i) there is now an open-enrollment event in the
joint non-employed state; ii) in any joint state, any non-employed individual has the insurance
set I = 0, which now allows the individual to choose i = 0 (decline insurance) or i = -1
(purchase insurance from the exchange); iii) household flow payoffs are modified to incorporate
the financial incentives under ACA and reflect marketplace premiums, premium tax credits, and
tax penalties (see below).
  43 In practice, there is significant variation in copays and coinsurance rates across the metal tiers (bronze, silver,
gold, and platinum) of the exchange plans. Enrollment is largest in the bronze and silver exchange policies (lower
monthly payments, but higher out-of-pocket costs), while the average employer-sponsored plan is closer to the gold
and platinum exchange policies (Maher, 2017). Exchange plans also have more restrictive provider networks compared
to most employer-sponsored plans. Based upon this, we set  = 0.75.
   44 The choice set for a non-employed individual is given by I = 0. Thus, when an individual is either non-employed

or working for an employer that does not provide ESHI ( I = 0) the options are to decline insurance (i = 0) or
to purchase individual insurance from the insurance exchange market (i = -1). As in the case of the pre-ACA
environment, individuals may still be insured when i = 0 if they are covered through the insurance policy of their
spouse. Similarly, if employer sponsored health insurance is available to the employee only, workers may decide not to
purchase insurance from their employer or the marketplace (i = 0), purchase individual insurance from their employer
(i = 1), or to purchase individual insurance from the insurance exchange (i = -1). Finally, if employer sponsored
health insurance is made available to both the employee and their spouse ( I = 2), workers may either decline both
insurance types (i = 0), purchase employee only insurance from their employer (i = 1), purchase employee and
spouse insurance from their employer (i = 2), or purchase individual insurance from the exchange (i = -1).



                                                          34
      The household decision of whether to purchase plans from the exchange will depend on the
value of the endogenously determined exchange insurance premium r H IX . This is determined by
the expected medical expenditure of all individuals who choose to purchase insurance from the
exchange in equilibrium, multiplied by 1 +  where  > 0 is the loading factor.45 To derive this,
first denote as g1
                 H IX ( h1 ; , x ) the total measure of men with health status h1 who, conditional on
persistent household type (, x), purchase marketplace insurance (i1 = -1). This is given by,


  g1
   H IX ( h1 ; , x ) =     guu ([-1, i2 ], 0, h; , x) +                                            geu (w1 , [-1, i2 ], [ I1 , 0], h; , x) dw1
                         h2 i2 0                                         h2 I1 i2 0

 +                   gue (w2 , [-1, i2 ], [0, I2 ], h; , x) dw2 +                                     gee (w, [-1, i2 ], I, h; , x) dw, (24)
      h2 I2 i2  I2                                                             h2       I i2  I2


and we analogously define g2
                           H IX ( h2 ; , x ) for women. Then, the equilibrium marketplace insur-
ance premium r H IX for an individual must satisfy46


                                                         gH IX (h j ; , x) · E[m j |h j , 1, x] dB(, x)
                                                                 j

                                                        j   hj
                     r H IX =  × (1 +  ) ×                                                                                   .               (25)
                                                                   gH IX (h j ; , x) dB(, x)
                                                                                    j

                                                                     j    hj


4.2     Household flow payoffs under the ACA

      Household flow payoffs are affected by the ACA provisions regarding income-based pre-
mium subsidies and individual mandate tax penalties if uninsured. Both of these depend upon
household income. First, we note that the household is only categorically eligible to receive a tax
credit subsidy for adult j if they: i) purchase insurance from the exchange; and ii) do not have
access to affordable employer-sponsored health insurance, either from their own or their spouse's
employer, or another government program. Thus, the premium subsidy eligibility indicator for
adult j is given by                               
                                                  1   if i j = -1 and Ij = 0, and I3- j = 2,
                               j (i j , I )   =
                                                  0   otherwise,

where Ij = 0 indicates that j's own employer does not offer ESHI, and I3- j = 2 indicates that
j's spouse is not offered ESHI with spousal insurance benefits. The amount of any marketplace
  45 We calibrate  based on the requirement in ACA that the medical loss ratio for all insurance sold in the exchange

must be at least 80%. This implies that   0.25.
  46 These are the marketplace insurance premiums for adults. The marketplace insurance premium for children is

equal to the expected child medical expenditure, multiplied by 1 +  . Note that families with children always purchase
dependent coverage if at least one adult is insured from any source, with insurance assumed to be purchased from
the exchange when no adult is insured through an employer. To simplify the exposition, we do not include children
when describing the premium subsidies and mandate penalties.



                                                                     35
subsidy received depends upon the equilibrium marketplace insurance premium r H IX , the num-
ber of household members eligible for the subsidy, household modified adjusted gross income
(MAGI), and household structure (through the demographic conditioning vector x). Our defi-
nition of MAGI includes labor market earnings, less any employer-sponsored health insurance
premiums, together with any unemployment compensation. We write this as

            z(w, i, I, P)  P1 (w1 - r1 (i1 ; w1 , I1 )) + P2 (w2 - r2 (i2 ; w2 , I2 )) + (2 - P1 - P2 )bU I .    (26)

The details of how we parameterize the ACA rules regarding the income-based premium sub-
sidy eligibility are described in Appendix G. These rules map into the function S(z, r H IX ×
 j j (i j , I); x), which describes the amount of subsidy that the household receives when pur-
chasing from the marketplace exchange, given modified adjusted gross income z, and the total
household marketplace premium for eligible adults. Thus, we may write the household after-
subsidy price for marketplace insurance as

                     r H IX (z, i, I; x) = r H IX ×  1[i j = -1] - S(z, r H IX ×        j ( i j , I ); x ),      (27)
                                                   j                                j


and where we note that by construction r H IX (·) = 0 whenever  j 1[i j = -1] = 0.
   Household members who are not insured from any source face a tax penalty that is the
maximum of a per-person penalty, and an income-based penalty that depends upon household
modified adjusted gross income (less the applicable household tax filing threshold). Again, see
Appendix G for details. We denote this tax penalty function as  (z, i; x), which we note is zero
whenever all household members are insured, i.e. when min{q1 (i), q2 (i)} = 1. It follows that the
modified household budget constraint under our extended model is given by

      c ACA = y[z(w, i, I, P)] - r H IX (z(w, i, I, P), i, I; x) -  (z(w, i, I, P), i; x) -  o (m j |q j (i)),   (28)
                                                                                                 j


and where modified adjusted gross income z(w, i, I, P) is defined in equation (26).


4.3     Firms' flow profits under the ACA

      Under the ACA, large firms now face a penalty if they do not offer health insurance to their
employees (and their dependents). Employers do not face a penalty under the ACA if they do
not offer coverage to the spouse of an employee. In the context of the model presented here,
this means that a penalty will only potentially apply if the firm chooses I = 0. More generally,
given a firm size , a firm with insurance offering I is subject to a penalty amount given by the




                                                           36
function   ( , I ), whose calculation is described in Appendix G.47 Profit flows under the ACA are
therefore written as

                         ACA (w, I ; p) = [ A(w, I ; p) - w] × (w, I ) - ( (w, I ), I ).                           (29)

Subject to this modified profit definition, the insurance offering decision and wage offer are as
described in our benchmark pre-ACA economy.


5      The labor market impact of the ACA
      We now present simulation results that pertain to the long-run impact of the ACA. There are
several stages to our analysis here. First, we describe how firms' insurance offering decisions, and
households' insurance take-up decisions, together with other outcomes, are affected by the ACA.
Second, we compare some of these long-run predictions to the short-run impacts observed in the
data. Third, we use our model to calculate households' valuation of spousal health insurance
and show this changes under the ACA. Fourth, we examine how the ACA affects job mobility.


5.1     Firm and household behavior under the ACA

      We proceed to calculate the new equilibrium of our model with the major provisions of the
ACA implemented as described in Section 4 above. Of particular interest is the impact that the
ACA has upon firms' insurance offering probabilities, which we illustrate in Figure 4. We note
the following features. First, recall that in the pre-ACA equilibrium (see Figure 4a, which re-
produces Figure 3b from earlier), that the health insurance offering probability among the least
productive firms is around one third, with the probability of employee and spouse insurance
( I = 2) approaching one as firms' productivity increases, and with the incidence of employee-
only insurance ( I = 1) essentially negligible. In the post-ACA equilibrium there are important
changes in these offering probabilities (see Figure 4b). In particular, given the availability of
community-rated health insurance from the exchange, the overall employer-sponsored health in-
surance probability declines over much of the productivity distribution: the fraction of firms that
offer health benefits declines by 15%. Moreover, the employee-only insurance option emerges
as a non-negligible alternative for less productive firms. Indeed, the offering rate is approxi-
mately 20% for the least productive firms, while across the distribution of firms the overall rate
    47 Notethat the employer penalty taxes are non-deductible for the purposes of calculating businesses' income tax
liability. Accordingly, we scale the dollar employer responsibility penalties by [(1 - b )(1 + s )]-1 , where b reflects
combined federal and state business income tax, and s is the employer payroll tax rate. Given the existence of
various tax breaks we do not use the statutory corporate tax rate (35% in the period of investigation), but rather
use the estimate reported in PricewaterhouseCoopers (2011) and set b = 27.7%. Following Mulligan (2015b) we set
s = 7.65%. These adjustments are reflected in our definition of .




                                                          37
                1.00
                0.75
  Probability
                                                                                                         No ins.
                0.50                                                                                     Emp. ins.
                0.25                                                                                     Emp/sp. ins.

                0.00
                       10   20   30     40   50   10   20   30    40       50   10   20   30   40   50
                             (a) Base                   (b) ACA                      (c) ACA-SP
                                                            Productivity

Figure 4: Endogenous insurance offering probability ( I ; p) under the baseline, the ACA, and
a modified version of the ACA. See Section 3.3 for details regarding their calculation. Base
(panel a) refers to the pre-ACA benchmark economy from our estimation, ACA (panel b) refers
to the post-ACA equilibrium, ACA-SP (panel c) refers to the equilibrium of a modified ACA
system, where access to spousal employer-sponsored health insurance does not restrict eligibility
for marketplace subsidies. Productivity corresponds to the hourly flow marginal product for a
worker with maximal health status. Figures have been truncated at productivity levels exceeding
$50 in average 2006 prices.


of employee-only insurance increases from 1 = 0.010 to 1 = 0.061. This corresponds to 15% of
firms that are offering health benefits in the new equilibrium.
           Before describing the broader impact of the ACA, we again emphasize that the incentives for
the provision of employee-only insurance are directly related both to the availability of health
insurance through the marketplace exchange, and the categorical eligibility structure for the as-
sociated premium subsidies. Specifically, and as we discussed in Section 1, individuals are ineli-
gible to receive the tax credit subsidy if they have access to employer-sponsored health insurance
either through their own employer or their spouse's employer. To understand the quantitative
importance of these rules, we also consider an equilibrium (referred to as "ACA-SP") where cate-
gorical eligibility is only restricted by access to health insurance through workers' own employer.
The results of this exercise are presented in Figure 4c. The figure shows that relative to the ACA
equilibrium, there is a clear shift away from employee-only insurance towards employee and
spouse insurance, with the overall health insurance offering rate across firms (1 + 2 ) broadly
unchanged. In contrast, if we consider an equilibrium where the premium subsidy is completely
removed (not illustrated), then we obtain schedules that are essentially between the pre-ACA
equilibrium and ACA-SP, with the overall fraction of firms offering health benefits declining by
7% relative to the pre-reform equilibrium (compared to a 15% decline under the full ACA with
premium subsidies).
           In Table 5 we document how individuals' health insurance coverage changes in the long-run
ACA equilibrium. Here we classify individuals according to whether they are covered by their
own employer's health insurance (own ESHI), their spouse's health insurance (spouse ESHI),


                                                                 38
           Table 5: The impact of the ACA on household health insurance coverage

                                   (a) Husband and wife both employed

                                                               Female
                                       Own ESHI      Spousal ESHI       HIX       Uncovered

                 Male   Own ESHI       0.17 / 0.10    0.39 / 0.34   0.00 / 0.08   0.07 / 0.06
                        Spousal ESHI   0.23 / 0.17    0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 0.00
                        HIX            0.00 / 0.05    0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 0.07   0.00 / 0.02
                        Uncovered      0.05 / 0.03    0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 0.02   0.09 / 0.05

                              (b) Husband employed and wife non-employed

                                                              Female
                                       Own ESHI      Spousal ESHI       HIX       Uncovered

                        Own ESHI       0.00 / 0.00    0.72 / 0.69   0.00 / 0.06   0.06 / 0.04
                 Male




                        Spousal ESHI   0.00 / 0.00    0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 0.00
                        HIX            0.00 / 0.00    0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 0.19   0.00 / 0.00
                        Uncovered      0.00 / 0.00    0.00 / 0.00   0.00 / 0.01   0.21 / 0.01

                Notes: Table shows household insurance coverage conditional on joint labor
                market state. Coverage status is presented as X.XX / Y.YY where X.XX (respec-
                tively Y.YY) corresponds to coverage under the pre-ACA (respectively post-
                ACA) equilibrium. Numbers may not sum to one due to rounding.


insurance purchased from the marketplace health insurance exchange (HIX), or whether they
are uninsured (uncovered). As we are also interested in how these vary by labor market state,
we present these conditional on i) both the husband and wife being employed (panel a), and ii)
when the husband is employed and the wife non-employed (panel b). The table shows that there
are important shifts in the sources of insurance coverage in the new equilibrium. For example, in
the joint-employment state, the fraction of married couples where both individuals are insured
through their own employer declines from 17% to 10%, while the total fraction of households
that are covered by spousal insurance declines from 63% to 51%. Meanwhile, insurance through
the marketplace exchange becomes important: 22% of households receive coverage for at least
one adult through this channel.
   Returning to the long-run labor market impact of the ACA, we present the impact on select
outcomes in Table 6. For single households, there is a 5 percentage point decline in the employ-
ment rate, while both the insurance coverage rate and the fraction of individuals in good health
improve substantially. Similarly, for married households, we find somewhat small adjustments in
the steady state joint employment shares (a slight shift towards male single earner households).
Reflecting what we saw in Table 5 above, while the overall insurance rate increases, the fraction
who are insured through their spouse declines. There are also small improvements in the health
status of married men and women.


                                                      39
                       Table 6: The impact of the ACA on household outcomes

                                                                        Base    ACA

                             Married Couples
                                Male employed, female employed           0.75   0.73
                                Male employed, female non-employed       0.16   0.18
                                Male non-employed, female employed       0.08   0.08
                                Insurance rate                           0.82   0.90
                                Spousal insurance rate                   0.64   0.54
                                Male good health                         0.93   0.95
                                Female good health                       0.93   0.95
                             Single Individuals
                                Employed                                 0.70   0.65
                                Insurance rate                           0.55   0.95
                                Good health                              0.88   0.98

                            Notes: Table shows select household outcomes for married
                            and single households under the base and reform (ACA)
                            systems.


5.2    Post-reform empirical comparison

      We view the model as being informative about firm and household behavior in the long-run
equilibrium under the ACA. With some of the most significant provisions (including the mar-
ketplace health exchanges) taking effect from 2014, we now have several years of post-reform
data. That said, comparing model outcomes to data is complicated by the fact that the transi-
tion to the new steady state equilibrium may take some time, with this problem compounded
by the well-documented policy uncertainty regarding the ACA under both the Obama and the
Trump administration. In Appendix H we show, using data from the Kaiser Family Foundation
Employer Health Benefit Annual Survey, how the fraction of firms that offer any form of health
insurance benefits has changed over time. While the interpretation of some changes is compli-
cated by pre-reform trends in the data, we do see notable reductions in the fraction of firms that
are offering health insurance (a 5 percentage point decline since 2013), with this reduction largest
for small firms, while the offering decision among large firms is relatively unaffected. Using
the same data source, we similarly document how the fraction of firms not extending health
insurance to the spouses of their employees has changed beginning in 2014. While early survey
evidence (see Section 1) suggested important changes in spousal insurance benefits, given sam-
ple size limitations the data series unfortunately exhibits considerable noise and it is difficult to
discern clear trends.48
  48 The Kaiser Family Foundation Employer Health Benefit Annual Survey only explicitly asks about whether health
insurance coverage is offered to the spouses of employees beginning in 2014. Prior to this, firms were only asked
whether they provide "family coverage". In a given year, the number of (unweighted) survey observations that report
not offering spousal insurance varies ranges from 13 to 27.



                                                        40
5.3     The value of spousal insurance

      Here we seek to quantify how much households' value the availability of employer-sponsored
spousal health insurance, and how these valuations change in the long-run post-ACA equilib-
rium.49 As our model is stationary we proceed to define the welfare W (, x) of a type-(, x)
household to be the associated value functions weighted by the respective steady-state measures.
That is

               W (, x) =  guu (h; , x) · V (h; , x)
                             h

                            +                     geu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h; , x) · Veu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h; , x) dw1
                                 h   I1 i1  I1

                            +                     gue (w2 , i2 , I2 , h; , x) · Vue (w2 , i2 , I2 , h; , x) dw2
                                 h   I2 i2  I2

                            +                    gee (w, i, I, h; , x) · Vee (w, i, I, h; , x) dw.                (30)
                                 h   I iI

We first calculate these welfare metrics under the pre-ACA benchmark equilibrium. Next, we
remove the availability of spousal health insurance by exogenously making the purchase of em-
ployee and spouse insurance prohibitively expensive, i.e. letting r (2; w, 2)  +, but otherwise
leave the structure of compensation packages unchanged. We then proceed to calculate the in-
crease in consumption in every labor market position such that the welfare measures in the
new steady state is equal to W (, x) from our initial benchmark equilibrium. We refer to this
consumption change as the direct valuation of spousal health insurance, and in our pre-ACA
equilibrium we obtain a mean average valuation of $1160 (standard deviation $400) for cou-
ple households. The valuation of spousal insurance is directly related to spousal employment
prospects. If we condition upon type-(, x) households where there is a low incidence of joint
employment (defined as no greater than 20% probability of joint-employment in the steady state
of the pre-ACA benchmark economy), then as both spouses are much less likely to have access to
health insurance through their own employer, these direct valuations are correspondingly higher,
with a mean valuation of $2290 (standard deviation $470).
      Of course, if spousal health insurance were not available then firms would likely respond by
changing the compensation packages that they offer to their workers. To quantify this, we calcu-
late a new equilibrium where the insurance contract space is restricted to I = 0 (no insurance)
and I = 1 (employee only insurance). In this new equilibrium, we find that the overall offering
rate of employer-sponsored health insurance (1 + 2 ) increases by 4.6 percentage points, with
this counterfactual highlighting a quantitatively important externality that is associated with the
  49 While other papers have attempted to quantify the value of health insurance, to the best of our knowledge none

of these quantify the value of spousal health insurance. See Dey and Flinn (2008), Finkelstein, Hendren and Luttmer
(2018), Conti, Ginja and Narita (2018), and Finkelstein, Hendren and Shepard (2019).


                                                             41
provision of spousal health insurance. We then proceed to calculate the equilibrium valuation of
spousal insurance in the same way: starting from this new equilibrium we calculate the necessary
increase in consumption such that we obtain the welfare measure from our benchmark economy.
On average, we obtain an equilibrium valuation of $900 for couple households, while among
those households with a low incidence of joint employment (again defined with respect to the
equilibrium of our benchmark economy) we calculate $1900.50
      Next, we quantify how these valuations change post-ACA. Our calculations proceed as be-
fore. First, we calculate the household welfare measure (equation 30) under the ACA equilibrium.
We then calculate the change in consumption that is needed to attain the same welfare should
the purchase of spousal health insurance become prohibitive, but the structure of compensation
packages otherwise remain unchanged. This is the direct valuation of spousal health insurance.
Given the (subsidized) availability of non-employer provided insurance through the health in-
surance exchange, the mean average valuation for couple households falls considerably to $280
(compared to $1160 in the pre-ACA equilibrium economy). Given the health insurance exchange
acts to decouple health insurance from employment, these value reductions are even larger for
households with a low incidence of joint-employment,51 with the mean valuation for this group
now quantitatively very similar to that for the aggregate population. As in the pre-reform econ-
omy, the equilibrium valuation are lower than the direct valuations, although the quantitative
differences compared to the direct valuation are not large (for example, the mean equilibrium
valuation for married couples in $240).
      Finally, to better understand how the incentive structure under the ACA affects these val-
uations we compute a new equilibrium where the income-based subsidy for purchasing from
the health insurance exchange is completely removed. In this equilibrium we obtain a direct
valuation of employer-provided spousal health insurance equal to $410, while the equilibrium
valuation is equal to $300.


5.4    Spousal insurance and job mobility

      There is now considerable evidence that employer-provided health insurance may have im-
portant implications for the labor market mobility of individuals.52 Our focus here is on the
extent to which spousal health insurance affects job mobility rates, and how this is affected by
the ACA. As a simple way of illustrating this, we first calculate the continuous time exit rate to
another job as a function of both the current wage and whether their spouse is employed in a job
  50 For single households, the direct valuation is zero by construction. The equilibrium valuation is -$70. As this is
negative, single households prefer the equilibrium in an environment that prohibits employers from offering spousal
health insurance.
  51 Note that we define the set of such type-( , x ) households in the pre-ACA equilibrium.
  52 This phenomenon is often referred to as "job-lock". See Gruber and Madrian (2004) for a recent survey of the

empirical literature.



                                                          42
that offers spousal health insurance or not. This is illustrated in Figure 5 for married women,
where we also condition upon the type of insurance offered of the wife's employer.
      In Figure 5a we present this exit rate in the pre-ACA benchmark economy when the wife does
not have access to employee and spouse health insurance through her own employer ( I2 < 2),
while Figure 5b provides the corresponding figure when she does ( I2 = 2). As job offers accrue
at the same rate regardless of the wage or the insurance coverage status, any differences must
reflect differential job acceptance behavior. We note the following features. First, the conditional
exit rates are declining in the wage. Second, exit rates are typically higher when the wife does
not have access to health insurance through her own employer. Third, there is an important inter-
dependency between exit rates and the insurance coverage options available to both spouses. To
understand this last point consider first a woman who has insurance through her own employer.
If her husband also has health insurance through his employer ( I1 = I2 = 2) then the household
can be less selective in the jobs that the wife will accept, while if her husband does not have his
own coverage ( I1 < 2, I2 = 2), there will be increased selectivity as some job offers will result
in the household losing insurance coverage. This behavior generates the patterns that we see
in Figure 5b. For example, at low wages, the female exit rate is 10% higher when her husband
has access to spousal insurance coverage. Conversely, if neither spouse has access to employer
provided health insurance ( I1 , I2 < 2), then the wife would be more willing to accept lower
paying jobs to secure health insurance compared to when her husband has insurance coverage
( I1 = 2, I2 < 2), which produces the patterns seen in Figure 5a.53
      Consider now the impact that the ACA has upon these transition rates. Given that the health
insurance exchange increases access to health insurance, one may expect that the difference be-
tween exit rates (by access to employer-sponsored health insurance) may decrease. This pattern
is clearly seen in Figure 5c. Interestingly, the gap is not reduced as significantly when they both
have access to employer-sponsored health insurance through their respective employers, except
at low wages (Figure 5d).


6      Conclusion
      We have studied an important, yet under explored aspect of the employer-sponsored health
insurance system in the United States, namely, that employers typically offer insurance not only
to their own employees, but also to the spouses of their employees. We show that the wide-
ranging set of provisions in the Affordable Care Act (ACA) significantly alter the firms' incentives
to offer health insurance to the spouses of their employees. More generally, ACA may be expected
to have important equilibrium effects on the labor market (Aizawa and Fang, 2018). To explore
the role of spousal health insurance, and how it is affected by the ACA, we present an equilibrium
    53 Thesame patterns in exit rates exist for married men, but the difference in these by spousal health insurance
status is smaller.


                                                        43
              1.00
                                    I1 = 2
              0.75
                                    I1 < 2
  Exit rate

              0.50

              0.25

              0.00
                     5    10   15    20      25 5    10   15     20    25 5    10   15   20     25 5    10   15   20     25
                         (a) Base, I2 < 2           (b) Base, I2 = 2          (c) ACA, I2 < 2          (d) ACA, I2 = 2
                                                               Hourly Wage

Figure 5: Figure shows continuous time exit rate to another job for married women conditional
on their wage and whether the woman and her husband is employed in a job that provides
spousal health insurance ( Ij = 2) or not ( Ij < 2). The unit-of-time is a year. Base (panels a and b)
refers to the pre-ACA benchmark economy from our estimation, ACA (panels c and d) refers to
the post-ACA equilibrium. Figures have been truncated at wages exceeding $25 in average 2006
prices.


labor market search model that extends the Burdett and Mortensen (1998) framework to an
environment where multiple household members are searching for jobs. The distribution of job
offers is endogenously determined, with compensation packages consisting of a wage and menu
of insurance offerings (including whether coverage is extended to the spouses of workers' and
the associated premiums) that risk averse agents/households select from. In this framework
we incorporate important institutional features, including the qualifying event restrictions on
households' choice of health insurance.
      A multi-step estimation procedure is proposed, and we empirically implement our model
using the Survey of Income and Program Participation as our primary data source. Our esti-
mated model is able to replicate important joint household outcomes from the data, including
that a large fraction of both working and non-working individuals are insured through their
spouses' employers. Further, we are able to reproduce salient patterns concerning labor market
and health dynamics, wages, medical expenditure, and the insurance distributions of employer
sizes. We use our estimated model to evaluate the long-run equilibrium labor market responses
to the Affordable Care Act. Consistent with early survey evidence, our model simulations imply
that while the provisions in ACA are successful in reducing the uninsurance rate and improv-
ing health outcomes, there are significant changes in firms' insurance offering decisions. First,
the overall health insurance offering rate of firms declines. Second, an "employee-only" health
insurance contract, which is largely impertinent in the pre-ACA equilibrium, emerges among
low productivity firms. These equilibrium responses are shown to be closely related to the avail-
ability of non-employer sponsored insurance from the marketplace exchange, and the specific
eligibility rules of the associated premium subsidies. Indeed, if individuals' access to health in-
surance through their spouses' employers did not render households categorically ineligible for


                                                                      44
the premium subsidies, then the incidence of employee-only insurance is considerably muted.
We further use our model to assess how households' valuation of spousal health insurance is
changed under the ACA, and show that these valuations decline significantly.
   The framework we have developed has been used to examine the role of the household, both
in terms of their behavior in the labor market, and the consequences that this has for the optimal
strategies of firms. An important feature of our framework is that we have considered a unitary
model, where the household unit is fixed. Many of the components of the ACA are based on
household income which therefore acts to introduce an implicit marriage penalty. Moreover, the
availability of non-employer sponsored health insurance imply that an individual who is not
covered by his/her own employer does not require a married partner to obtain coverage. As
such, the ACA may have implications for the incentives to enter marriages. Finally, we note
that our empirical framework can also be used to assess other policies where the role of the
household is important, such as tax and transfer policy, which in many countries depend upon
family income. These are interesting areas to apply our framework in future research.


References
Abramowitz, Joelle. 2016. "Saying, "I Don't": The Effect of the Affordable Care Act Young Adult
  Provision on Marriage." Journal of Human Resources, 51(4): 933­60.

Abramowitz, Milton, and Irene A. Stegun. 1964. Handbook of Mathematical Functions with Formu-
  las, Graphs, and Mathematical Tables. New York: Dover Publications.

Aizawa, Naoki. 2019. "Labor Market Sorting and Health Insurance System Design." Quantiative
  Economics. Forthcoming.

Aizawa, Naoki, and Hanming Fang. 2018. "Equilibrium Labor Market Search and Health Insur-
  ance Reform." PIER Working Paper No. 18-012.

Albrecht, James W., and Bo Axell. 1984. "An Equilibrium Model of Search Unemployment." The
  Journal of Political Economy, 92(5): 824­840.

Altonji, Joseph G., and Lewis M. Segal. 1996. "Small-Sample Bias in GMM Estimation of Co-
  variance Structures." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 14(3): 353­366.

Arcidiacono, Peter, Attila Gyetvai, Ekaterina Jardim, and Arnaud Maurel. 2019. "Condi-
  tional Choice Probability Estimation of Continuous-Time Job Search Models." Unpublished
  manuscript.




                                                  45
Barkowski, Scott, and Joanne Song McLaughlin. 2018. "In Sickness and in Health: The Influence
  of State and Federal Health Insurance Coverage Mandates on Marriage of Young Adults in the
  USA." Social Science Research Network Working Paper Series.

Bellman, Richard. 1957. Dynamic Programming. Princeton, NJ, USA: Princeton University Press.

Bemmaor, Albert C., and Nicolas Glady. 2012. "Modeling Purchasing Behavior with Sudden
  "Death": A Flexible Customer Lifetime Model." Management Science, 58(5): 1012­1021.

Bontemps, Christian, Jean-Marc Robin, and Gerard J. Van den Berg. 1999. "An Empirical Equi-
  librium Job Search Model With Search on the Job and Heterogeneous Workers and Firms."
  International Economic Review, 40(4): 1039­1074.

Bontemps, Christian, Jean-Marc Robin, and Gerard J. Van den Berg. 2000. "Equilibrium Search
  with Continuous Productivity Dispersion: Theory and Nonparametric Estimation." Interna-
  tional Economic Review, 41(2): 305­358.

Bowley, Arthur Lyon. 1920. Elements of Statistics. London: P. S. King & Son, Ltd.

Burdett, Kenneth, and Dale Mortensen. 1978. "Labor Supply Under Uncertainty." In Research in
  Labor Economics, ed. Ronald Ehrenberg, 109­158. JAI Press.

Burdett, Kenneth, and Dale T. Mortensen. 1998. "Wage Differentials, Employer Size, and Un-
  employment." International Economic Review, 39(2): 257­273.

Cohen, Alma, and Liran Einav. 2007. "Estimating Risk Preferences from Deductible Choice."
  American Economic Review, 97(3): 745­788.

Collins, Sara R., Michelle M. Doty, Jennifer L. Kriss, and Sheila Rustgi. 2008. Losing Ground:
  How the Loss of Adequate Health Insurance Is Burdening Working Families. The Commonwealth
  Fund.

Conti, Gabriella, Rita Ginja, and Renata Narita. 2018. "The Value of Health Insurance: A House-
  hold Job Search Approach." Institute for Fiscal Studies W18/20.

Courtemanche, Charles, James Marton, and Aaron Yelowitz. 2016. "Who Gained Insurance
  Coverage in 2014, the First Year of Full ACA Implementation?" Health Economics, 25(6): 778­
  784.

Courtemanche, Charles J., and Daniela Zapata. 2014. "Does Universal Coverage Improve
  Health? The Massachusetts Experience." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 33(1): 36­69.

Currie, Janet, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 1999. "Health, Health Insurance and the Labor Market."
  In Vol. 3 of Handbook of Labor Economics, Chapter 50, 3309­3416. Elsevier.

                                                46
De Nardi, Mariacristina, Eric French, and John Bailey Jones. 2016. "Medicaid Insurance in Old
  Age." American Economic Review, 106(11): 3480­3520.

Dey, Matthew, and Christopher Flinn. 2008. "Household Search and Health Insurance Cover-
  age." Journal of Econometrics, 145(1­2): 43­63. The Use of Econometrics in Informing Public
  Policy Makers.

Dey, Matthew S., and Christopher J. Flinn. 2005. "An Equilibrium Model of Health Insurance
  Provision and Wage Determination." Econometrica, 73(2): 571­627.

Dillender, Marcus, Carolyn Heinrich, and Susan Houseman. 2016. "Effects of the Affordable
  Care Act on Part-Time Employment: Early Evidence." W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment
  Research 16­258. Working Paper.

Dizioli, Allan, and Roberto Pinheiro. 2016. "Health Insurance as a Productive Factor." Labour
  Economics, 40: 1­24.

Duggan, Mark, Gopi Shah Goda, and Emilie Jackson. 2019. "The Effects of the Affordable
  Care Act on Health Insurance Coverage and Labor Market Outcomes." National Tax Journal,
  72(2): 261­322.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Stephen P. Ryan, Paul Schrimpf, and Mark R. Cullen. 2013.
  "Selection on Moral Hazard in Health Insurance." American Economic Review, 103(1): 178­219.

Fang, Hanming, and Alessandro Gavazza. 2011. "Dynamic Inefficiencies in an Employment-
  Based Health Insurance System:         Theory and Evidence." American Economic Review,
  101(7): 3047­3077.

Feenberg, Daniel, and Elisabeth Coutts. 1993. "An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model." Journal
  of Policy Analysis and Management, 12(1): 189­194.

Finkelstein, Amy, Nathaniel Hendren, and Erzo F.P. Luttmer. 2018. "The Value of Medicaid: In-
  terpreting Results from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment." Journal of Political Economy.
  Forthcoming.

Finkelstein, Amy, Nathaniel Hendren, and Mark Shepard. 2019. "Subsidizing Health In-
  surance for Low-Income Adults: Evidence from Massachusetts." American Economic Review,
  109(4): 1530­67.

Flabbi, Luca, and Christopher Flinn. 2015. "Simultaneous Search in the Labor and Marriage
  Markets with Endogenous Schooling Decisions." Working Paper.

Flabbi, Luca, and James Mabli. 2018. "Household Search or Individual Search: Does it Matter?"
  Journal of Labor Economics, 35(1).

                                               47
Garc´
    ia-P´                      ilvio Rendon. 2016. "Family Job Search and Wealth: The Added
        erez, J. Ignacio, and S´
  Worker Effect Revisited." Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper 16-34.

Garicano, Luis, Claire Lelarge, and John Van Reenen. 2016. "Firm Size Distortions and the
  Productivity Distribution: Evidence from France." American Economic Review, 106(11): 3439­
  3479.

Gemici, Ahu. 2011. "Family Migration and Labor Market Outcomes." Working Paper, New York
  University.

            ¸ ois, and Nicolas Roys. 2014. "Size-Dependent Regulations, Firm Size Distribution,
Gourio, Franc
  and Reallocation." Quantitative Economics, 5(2): 377­416.

Gruber, Jonathan. 2000. "Health Insurance and the Labor Market." In Handbook of Health Eco-
  nomicsVol. 1 of Handbook of Health Economics, ed. Anthony J. Culyer and Joseph P. Newhouse,
  Chapter 12, 645­706. Elsevier.

Gruber, Jonathan, and Brigitte Madrian. 2004. "Health Insurance, Labor Supply, and Job Mo-
  bility: A Critical Review of the Literature." In Health Policy and the Uninsured, ed. Catherine
  McLaughlin, 97­178. Urban Institute Press.

Guler, Bulent, Fatih Guvenen, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2012. "Joint-Search Theory: New
  Opportunities and New Frictions." Journal of Monetary Economics, 59(4): 352­369.

Guner, Nezih, Gustavo Ventura, and Yi Xu. 2008. "Macroeconomic Implications of Size-
  Dependent Policies." Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4): 721­744.

Hackmann, Martin B., Jonathan T. Kolstad, and Amanda E. Kowalski. 2015. "Adverse Selec-
  tion and an Individual Mandate: When Theory Meets Practice." American Economic Review,
  105(3): 1030­1066.

Handel, Benjamin R. 2013. "Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets: When
  Nudging Hurts." American Economic Review, 103(7): 2643­82.

Heim, Bradley, Ithai Lurie, and Kosali Simon. 2015. "The Impact of the Affordable Care Act
  Young Adult Provision on Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from Tax Data." Tax Policy and
  the Economy, 29(1): 133­157.

Kolstad, Jonathan T., and Amanda E. Kowalski. 2012. "The Impact of Health Care Reform
  on Hospital and Preventive Care: Evidence from Massachusetts." Journal of Public Economics,
  96(11­12): 909­929.




                                               48
Kolstad, Jonathan T., and Amanda E. Kowalski. 2016. "Mandate-Based Health Reform and the
  Labor Market: Evidence from the Massachusetts Reform." Journal of Health Economics, 47: 81­
  106.

Korenman, Sanders, and David Neumark. 1991. "Does Marriage Really Make Men More Pro-
  ductive?" The Journal of Human Resources, 26(2): 282­307.

Lise, Jeremy, and Jean-Marc Robin. 2017. "The Macrodynamics of Sorting between Workers and
  Firms." American Economic Review, 107(4): 1104­1135.

Long, Sharon K., Michael Karpman, Adele Shartzer, Douglas Wissoker, Genevieve M. Kenney,
  Stephen Zucherman, Nathanial Anderson, and Katherine Hempstead. 2014. "Taking Stock:
  Health Insurance Coverage under the ACA as of September 2014." Urban Institute.

MaCurdy, Thomas, David Green, and Harry Paarsch. 1990. "Assessing Empirical Approaches
  for Analyzing Taxes and Labor Supply." The Journal of Human Resources, 25(3): pp. 415­490.

Maher, Brendan S. 2017. "Unlocking Exchanges." Connecticut Insurance Law Journal, 24(1): 125­
  161.

Meghir, Costas, Renata Narita, and Jean-Marc Robin. 2015. "Wages and Informality in Devel-
  oping Countries." American Economic Review, 105(4): 1509­46.

Mortensen, Dale, and Tara Vishwanath. 1993. "Information Sources and Equilibrium Wage Out-
  come." In Panel Data and Labour Market DynamicsVol. 31 of D, ed. Peter Jensen Henning Bunzel
  and Niels Westerg°
                   ard-Nielsen. North Holland.

Mulligan, Casey B. 2015a. "The New Employment and Income Taxes." Journal of Policy Analysis
  and Management, 34(2): 466­473.

Mulligan, Casey B. 2015b. "The New Full-Time Employment Taxes." Tax Policy and the Economy,
  29(1): 89­132.

                ¨
Murray, K., S. Muller, and B. A. Turlach. 2016. "Fast and Flexible Methods for Monotone Poly-
  nomial Fitting." Journal of Statistical Computation and Simulation, 86(15): 2946­2966.

                             ¨
Nakajima, Makoto, and Didem Tuzemen. 2017. "Health-Care Reform or Labor Market Reform?
  A Quantitative Analysis of the Affordable Care Act." Working Paper.

Pashchenko, Svetlana, and Ponpoje Porapakkarm. 2013. "Quantitative Analysis of Health In-
  surance Reform: Separating Regulation from Redistribution." Review of Economic Dynamics,
  16(3): 383­404.



                                                 49
Pilossoph, Laura, and Shu Lin Wee. 2019a. "Assortative Matching and Household Income In-
  equality: A Structural Approach." Working Paper.

Pilossoph, Laura, and Shu Lin Wee. 2019b. "Household Search and the Marital Wage Premium."
  Working Paper.

PricewaterhouseCoopers. 2011. "Global Effective Tax Rates." PricewaterhouseCoopers.

Rust, John, and Christopher Phelan. 1997. "How Social Security and Medicare Affect Retirement
  Behavior In a World of Incomplete Markets." Econometrica, 65(4): 781­831.

Schlueter, M., S. Erb, M. Gerdts, S. Kemble, and J.J. Ruckmann. 2013. "MIDACO on MINLP
  Space Applications." Advances in Space Research, 51(7): 1116­1131.

Shephard, Andrew. 2017. "Equilibrium Search and Tax Credit Reform." International Economic
  Review, 58(4): 1047­1088.

van den Berg, Gerard J., and Geert Ridder. 1998. "An Empirical Equilibrium Search Model of
  the Labor Market." Econometrica, 66(5): 1183­1221.

Wang, Haomin. 2019. "Intra-household Risk Sharing and Job Search Over the Business Cycle."
  Review of Economic Dynamics, 34: 165­182.

Wellington, Alison J, and Deborah A Cobb-Clark. 2000. "The Labor-Supply Effects of Universal
  Health Coverage: What Can We Learn from Individuals With Spousal Coverage?" Vol. 19 of
  Research in Labor Economics, 315­344. Emerald Group Publishing Limited.




                                               50
Online Appendices

A      Worker value functions
     In Section 2.4, we presented the value functions for couple households in the male single
earner (eu) state from the baseline (pre-ACA) economy. (Value functions in the female single
earner state are obtained symmetrically.) For completeness, we now present the value functions
for both the joint employment (ee) state, and joint non-employment (uu) state. For notational
conciseness we continue to suppress the explicit conditioning of both the value functions and
worker parameters on leisure values and the vector of demographic characteristics ( and x).


A.1      Joint employment state

     The expected flow utility when both adults are employed is given by uee (w, i, I, h), which is
obtained by integrating the flow utility function (equation (1)) over the distribution of medical
expenditure shocks for all household members. In describing the value function in this state, we
note that the following events may happen. First, either adult may experience a health transition,
which occurs at rate  j (h j , q j ) for spouse j. In this event, both may continue being employed at
(w, i, I), or individuals may exit to non-employment. Note that health transitions themselves do
not allow individuals to re-optimize over the set of insurance offerings by their employers. Sec-
ond, either adult may receive a job offer. If the offer is accepted, the couple decides whether the
other adult will remain employed or exit to non-employment. In both cases, optimization over the
set of insurance options is permitted. Third, at rate j spouse j experiences an exogenous job de-
struction. At this level of generality, we allow the other spouse to also quit to non-employment. If
one individual remains employed, then again, re-optimization over insurance options is allowed.
Fourth, at rate  there is an open enrollment event which allows re-optimization over the set of
insurance options, absent a job change, with value V ee (w, I, h) then attained. It follows that

  Dee (i, h)Vee (w, i, I, h) = uee (w, i, I, h)
    + h 1 (h1 |h1 , q1 (i)) max{Vee (w, i, I, h1 , h2 ), V eu (w1 , I1 , h1 , h2 ), V ue (w2 , I2 , h1 , h2 ), Vuu (h1 , h2 )}
           1

    + h 2 (h2 |h2 , q2 (i)) max{Vee (w, i, I, h1 , h2 ), V eu (w1 , I1 , h1 , h2 ), V ue (w2 , I2 , h1 , h2 ), Vuu (h1 , h2 )}
           2

    + 1
      e        max{V ee (w1 , w2 , I1 , I2 , h), V eu (w1 , I1 , h), Vee (w, i, I, h)} d F (w1 , I1 )

    + 2
      e        max{V ee (w1 , w2 , I1 , I2 , h), V ue (w2 , I2 , h), Vee (w, i, I, h)} d F (w2 , I2 )

    + 1 max{V ue (w2 , I2 , h), Vuu (h)} + 2 max{V eu (w1 , I1 , h), Vuu (h)} +  V ee (w, I, h),

where Dee (i, h)   + 1 (h1 , q1 (i)) + 2 (h2 , q2 (i)) + 1   2
                                                         e + e + 1 + 2 +  .




                                                                 51
A.2        Joint non-employment state

     In our baseline (pre-ACA) economy, there is no availability of non-employer sponsored health
insurance. Thus, both adults are necessarily uninsured whenever the couple is in the joint non-
employment state, so that q1 (0) = q2 (0) = 0. The current state may be exited if either adult
experiences a health transition, or if either adult optimally exits to employment. Therefore

      Duu (h)Vuu (h) = uuu (h) + h 1 (h1 |h1 , q1 (0))Vuu (h1 , h2 ) + h 2 (h2 |h2 , q2 (0))Vuu (h1 , h2 )
                                             1                                           2

                             + 1
                               u       max{V eu (w1 , I1 , h), Vuu (h)} d F (w1 , I1 )

                             + 2
                               u       max{V ue (w2 , I2 , h), Vuu (h)} d F (w2 , I2 ),

where uuu (h) is expected flow utility in the joint non-employment state given h, and with
Duu (h)   + 1 (h1 , q1 (0)) + 2 (h2 , q2 (0)) + 1   2
                                                u + u .



B         Flow equation derivations
     In this Appendix we present the flow equations for couple households, corresponding to the
measures in both the joint employment and joint non-employment states. See Section 2.5 for the
flow equations that define the measure of single earner couple households. As in the preceding
Appendix, we suppress the conditioning on the persistent household characteristics, (, x).


B.1        Joint employment state

     Consider gee (w, i, I, h), the measure of workers in the joint employment state. Exits from this
joint state occur following: i) either spouse experiencing an exogenous job destruction; ii) either
spouse experiencing a change in their health status; iii) either spouse accepting a new job; iv)
an open enrollment event that facilitates re-optimisation over the set of insurance options. Total
outflows are therefore


  gee (w, i, I, h) · 1 + 2 + 1 (h1 , q1 (i)) + 2 (h2 , q2 (i)) + 1
                                                                 e              d F (w1 , I1 ) + 2
                                                                                                 e      d F (w2 , I2 ) +  ,
                                                                         -                       -
                                                                       1
                                                                       ee ( w,i,I,h )          2
                                                                                               ee ( w,i,I,h )
                                                                                                                         (B.1)
              -
where       1
            ee ( w, i, I, h ) = {w1 , I1 : max{V ee (w1 , w2 , I1 , I2 , h), V eu (w1 , I1 , h)} > Vee (w, i, I, h)} is the
set of acceptable spouse 1 job offers given (w, i, I, h). Similarly, the set of acceptable spouse 2 job
               -
offers is 2   ee ( w, i, I, h ) = { w2 , I2 : max{V ee ( w1 , w2 , I1 , I2 , h ), V ue ( w2 , I2 , h ) } > Vee ( w, i, I, h ) }.
     Now consider all inflows into this joint employment state, conditional on the inequality
Vee (w, i, I, h) > max{V eu (w1 , I1 , h), V ue (w2 , I2 , h), Vuu (h)} being satisfied.54 Firstly, inflows may
  54 If   this does not hold then we necessarily have gee (w, i, I, h) = 0 since quits are always permitted.


                                                              52
occur following changes in health from an existing (w, i, I, h ) state. The contribution of health
changes to total inflows is obtained by summing over all possible health transitions. That is

                 1 (h1 |h1 , q1 (i)) · gee (w, i, I, h1 , h2 ) +  1 (h2 |h2 , q2 (i)) · gee (w, i, I, h1 , h2 ).                (B.2)
                h1                                                   h2


Inflows also result following a job acceptance. These may be from an initial single earner state,
or from a lower value joint-employment state. In both cases, we require that the joint insurance
choices are optimal given (w, I, h), since job changes are qualifying events. The male (adult 1)
inflows into this state are given by

  vee ( w, i, I, h ) · f ( w1 , I1 )


                        × 1
                          u                                        e 
                                          gue (w2 , i2 , I2 , h) + 1                       gee (w1 , w2 , i , I1 , I2 , h) dw1 , (B.3)
                                        +
                               i2  I2 1
                                      ee ( w,I,h )
                                                                     I1 i1  I1 i2  I2
                                                                                        2 +
                                                                                        ee ( w,i ,I, I1 ,h )

                                  adult 1 inflows from ue
                                                                           adult 1 inflow from lower value ee state


and where the inflow set 1 +
                         ee ( w, I, h ) = {i2 : V ee ( w, I, h ) > max{Vue ( w2 , i2 , I2 , h ), V eu ( w1 , I1 , h ) }}
defines the conditional set of choices in the female single earner state, from which the joint state
(w, I, h) may arise. Similarly, the inflows from the lower value joint-employment states is given
by the set 2 +
            ee ( w, i , I, I1 , h ) = { w1 : V ee ( w, I, h ) > max{Vee ( w1 , w2 , i , I1 , I2 , h ), V eu ( w1 , I1 , h ) }}.
    The female (adult 2) job mobility transitions into the joint state (w, i, I, h) are symmetrically
defined by

  vee ( w, i, I, h ) · f ( w2 , I2 )


                        × 2
                          u                                        e 
                                          geu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h) + 2                       gee (w1 , w2 , i , I1 , I2 , h) dw2 , (B.4)
                                        +
                               i1  I1 3
                                      ee ( w,I,h )
                                                                     I2 i2  I2 i1  I1     +
                                                                                        4
                                                                                        ee ( w,i ,I, I2 ,h )

                                  adult 2 inflows from eu
                                                                           adult 2 inflow from lower value ee state


with the acceptance sets 3 +
                         ee ( w, I, h ) = {i1 : V ee ( w, I, h ) > max{Veu ( w1 , i1 , I1 , h ), V ue ( w2 , I2 , h ) }}
and 4 +
    ee ( w, i , I, I2 , h ) = { w2 : V ee ( w, I, h ) > max{Vee ( w1 , w2 , i , I1 , I2 , h ), V ue ( w2 , I2 , h ) }}.
    Third, inflows may occur as a result of an open enrollment event whenever the insurance
choice i  I is optimal given (w, I, h)

                                           vee ( w, i, I, h ) ×  ×    gee (w, i , I, h).                                        (B.5)
                                                                     i I

    In steady state, the sum of these inflow terms must exactly balance the outflows. That is, (B.1)
= (B.2) + (B.3) + (B.4) + (B.5).



                                                               53
B.2    Joint non-employment state

    Consider the measure of jointly non-employed workers with the joint health status h. The
couple will exit this state if either spouse experiences a health transition, or if either spouse
receives a job offer that is acceptable. Thus, total outflows are given by
                                                                                                                        

            guu (h) · 1 (h1 , q1 (0)) + 2 (h2 , q2 (0)) + 1                        d F (w1 , I1 ) + 2       d F (w2 , I2 ) ,   (B.6)
                                                                                                                          
                                                          u                                         u
                                                                               -                        -
                                                                             1
                                                                             uu ( h )                 2
                                                                                                      uu ( h )


                -
where the set 1
              uu ( h ) = { w1 , I1 : Veu ( w1 , I1 , h ) > Vuu ( h ) } describes the set of jobs that adult
                                                -
1 would accept given current state h. The set 2
                                              uu ( h ) = { w2 , I2 : Vue ( w2 , I2 , h ) > Vuu ( h ) } is
similarly defined as the conditional set of job offers that would be accepted by adult 2.
    Now consider inflows into the joint non-employment state with health status h. These can
occur for both endogenous and exogenous reasons. Firstly, there may be exogenous health tran-
sition flows within the joint non-employment state from some health vector h to h. That is

                     1 (h1 |h1 , q1 (0)) · guu (h1 , h2 ) +  2 (h2 |h2 , q2 (0)) · guu (h1 , h2 ).                             (B.7)
                    h1                                                      h2


Secondly, there will be inflows from the employed states following a health transition if such a
transition results in endogenous quits. These inflows are given by


                                           1 (h1 |h1 , q1 (i1 )) geu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h1 , h2 ) dw1
                         h1 I1 i1  I1     +
                                        1
                                        uu (i1 , I1 ,h )

                                   adult 1 health transition from eu, adult 1 quits

                               +                           2 (h2 |h2 , q2 (i2 )) gue (w2 , i2 , I2 , h1 , h2 ) dw2
                                  h2 I2 i2  I2        +
                                                    2
                                                    uu (i2 , I2 ,h )

                                                 adult 2 health transition from ue, adult 2 quits

                               +                       1 (h1 |h1 , q1 (i )) gee (w , i , I , h1 , h2 ) dw
                                  h1 I i  I           +
                                                    3
                                                    uu ( i ,I ,h )

                                             adult 1 health transition from ee, both adults quits

                               +                       2 (h2 |h2 , q2 (i )) gee (w , i , I , h1 , h2 ) dw ,                    (B.8)
                                  h2 I i  I           +
                                                    3
                                                    uu ( i ,I ,h )

                                              adult 2 health transition from ee, both adults quits


where the inflow sets above are defined by 1 +
                                           uu (i1 , I1 , h ) = { w1 : Vuu ( h ) > Veu ( w1 , i1 , I1 , h ) },
2
uu (i2 , I2 , h ) = { w2 : Vuu ( h ) > Vue ( w2 , i2 , I2 , h ) }, and finally uu ( i , I , h ) = { w : Vuu ( h ) >
  +                                                                            3+




                                                                       54
max{Vee (w , i , I , h), Veu (w1 , I1 , h), Vue (w2 , I2 , h)}}.
    Thirdly, inflows arise as a result of job destruction events. We have inflows from both single
earner states, together with possible inflows from the joint employment state should one spouse's
exogenous job destruction event induce their spouse to endogenously quit. The job destruction
induced inflows are

  1                geu (w1 , i1 , I1 , h) dw1 + 2                  gue (w2 , i2 , I2 , h) dw2
      I1 i1  I1                                      I2 i2  I2

                  adult 1 job destroyed from eu/adult 2 job destroyed from ue

                                 + 1                gee (w , i , I , h) dw + 2                   gee (w , i , I , h) dw , (B.9)
                                        I i I                                         I i I       +
                                                  4 +
                                                  uu ( I2 ,h )                                  5
                                                                                                uu ( I1 ,h )

                                          adult 1 job destroyed from ee/adult 2 job destroyed from ee, spouse quits


with the conditional inflow sets defined 4 +
                                         uu ( I2 , h ) = { w2 : Vuu ( h ) > Vue ( w2 , I2 , h ) }, and
5 +
uu ( I1 , h ) = { w1 : Vuu ( h ) > Veu ( w1 , I1 , h ) }.
    The steady state condition for the joint non-employment state is therefore given by (B.6) =
(B.7) + (B.8) + (B.9).


C     Tax schedule implementation
    In our model tax schedules (as a function of family earnings and demographic characteristics
x) are calculated using the NBER TAXSIM program (Feenberg and Coutts, 1993), using the 2006
tax code. For non-employed workers, we impute a value of unemployment insurance (UI) that
is equal to the equivalent of $98 per-week (the average UI payment multiplied by the recipiency
rate). For married couples we assume joint filing status, and for singles with children we assume
head-of-household filing status. Note that while UI is taxed, it is taxed differently from earned
labor earnings, and we account for this tax treatment.
    We smooth the underlying tax schedules using the method proposed by MaCurdy, Green
and Paarsch (1990). With K tax brackets, the marginal tax rate approximation for a family with
observable characteristics x at household earnings z, and total UI receipt b is given by

                                                            K
                                     MTR(z; b, x) =               k
                                                                  x,b ( z ) - x,b ( z ) x,b ,
                                                                              k +1      k

                                                           k =1

      k is the marginal tax rate at the kth bracket given x and 
where x ,b                                                       x,k is the normal cumulative
distribution function with a mean equal to the value of the kth tax bracket given x and with
standard deviation x,k . The value of x,k determines how quickly the smoothed marginal tax
rates MTR(z; x) change in the neighborhood of the break points, with a small value fitting the


                                                                  55
underlying step function more closely. We set x,k = 400 (measured in annual dollars in average
2006 prices), although our results are not sensitive to this particular choice. The same smoothing
procedure is applied in our implementation of individual tax penalties and premium subsidies.


D     Medical expenditure distribution
    In Section 3.2 we described our parametrization of the medical expenditure distribution. We
assume a mixture distribution, with the distribution of medical expenditure conditional on a
positive realization specified as a (truncated) Gamma-Gompertz distribution. In this appendix we
present expressions for the expected medical expenditure and the expected utility risk adjustment
factor under these assumptions.
    In what follows we suppress the dependence of medical expenditure distributions on demo-
graphics, gender, health status, and insurance coverage. In the case of the untruncated conditional
medical expenditure distribution, the mean unconditional expenditure can be derived by simply
using the expression for the expectation of the Gamma-Gompertz distribution (see Bemmaor and
Glady, 2012). That is
                                              1 - M0
                                  E[ m ] =           2 F1 ( s, 1; s + 1; 1 - 1/  ) ,                                             (D.1)
                                                 bs
where 2 F1 is the Gaussian hypergeometric function (see Abramowitz and Stegun, 1964), and with
a slight change of our earlier notation, we let b, s, and , denote the parameters of the Gamma-
Gompertz distribution. In the case where medical expenditures are drawn from a truncated
distribution with support [0, x ], the expected value is given by

                      1           x      mbsebm s
E[m|m  [0, x]] =      +
                                                        dm
                     M (x)    0       (  - 1 + ebm )s+1
                        s     2 F1 ( s, s; s1 , 1 -      )       2 F1 ( s, s; s   + 1, (1 - )e-bx )           x
                 =                                           -                                       -
                  M+ ( x )                 bs                                      bse  bsx             (  - 1 + ebx )s
                   1                             s                                               -1                s x
                 = +          E[ m ] -                       2 F1                 s, 1; s + 1,             -                  ,
                  M (x)                    bs(  - 1 + ebx )s                                    - 1 + ebx     (  - 1 + ebx )s

where the third equality follows from the identity 2 F1 ( a, b; c, z) = (1 - z)-a 2 F1 ( a, c - b; c, z/(z -
1)) and the definition of the untruncated mean.
    The main complication in deriving the expected utility risk adjustment factor (see equa-
tion (3)) is the evaluation of the expectation

                                       1            x                                   1           x     em bsebm s
    E[exp(m)|m  [0, x]] =              +
                                                        exp(m) d M+ (m) =               +                                s +1
                                                                                                                                dm,
                                      M (x)     0                                      M (x)    0       (  - 1 + ebm )
                                                                                                                                 (D.2)



                                                                 56
which we note is just the moment generating function for the random variable m. Evaluating the
indefinite integral and using straightforward, but tedious calculations, we obtain

    E[exp(m)|m  [0, x]]
         1                                                                                  ebx - 1 + 
    =    +        2 F1 (1, -  / b, 1 - s,  ) - (1 -   M+ ( x ))e x 2 F1 1, -/b, 1 - s,                        . (D.3)
        M (x)                                                                                   ebx

This expectation always exists for finite x. In the unbounded case, x  , this will only converge
when  < bs. In these cases, multiplying equation (D.3) by 1 - M0 (positive expenditure proba-
bility) and adding M0 (zero expenditure probability) then gives us the required risk adjustment
factor when a single household member is uninsured. Given the assumed independence of the
medical expenditure shocks within the household, it is straightforward to extend the definition
of the risk adjustment factor when multiple household members are uninsured.


E       Numerical implementation
     Here we provide a brief sketch of the numerical implementation of our model. The algorithm
that we develop begins by discretizing the underlying firm productivity distribution, together
with the leisure flow distribution for all demographic groups. For all values of p on our grid,
we provide an initial guess of the wage policy functions, w I ( p), and sector choice probabilities
( I ; p) for all I . This allows us to obtain the joint cumulative distribution function F (w, I ). The
associated wage offer density functions are obtained through numerical differentiation. We also
provide an initial guess of the insurance premiums r (i, w; I ).
     For each type-(, x) household we solve the household decision problem by iterating on the
value functions as presented in Section 2.4 and Appendix A. Given these value functions, we then
solve for the system of flow equations (Section 2.5 and Appendix B) by iterating. From these flow
equations, we calculate conditional firm sizes (equation (10)) and then numerically integrate to
obtain the aggregate firm size (w, I ) (equation (12)). Note that while theoretically allowing for a
continuous distribution of leisure flows will smooth the labor supply function at the aggregate, in
our implementation we necessarily have a finite number of leisure values on our integration grid.
Our approach to this problem is to replace the indicator functions 1(·) that appear in our flow
equations with a Logistic smoothing kernel             K(·).55 This function depends upon the difference
in values between states, together with a smoothing parameter that the researcher may control.
Given these (smoothed) flow equations we calculate firm size and the implied average worker
productivity A(w, I ; p) using equation (13). We also obtain updated insurance premiums r (i, w; I )
by using equation (14), to be applied in the next iteration step.
  55 Thisis similar to the approach taken in Arcidiacono et al. (2019), where the logistic errors are given a behavioral
interpretation.


                                                          57
      In order to update the wage policy function, it is necessary to solve the problem of the least
productive firm, p. This is achieved by constructing a wage subgrid for each sector I that contains
wages both above and below (and including) the candidate w I ( p). For each wage on this subgrid,
we perform value function iteration and solve flow equations to determine firm size and worker
productivity as before. (For conciseness, these flow equations are not presented here, but take
a similar form to those derived on the support of wages.) An update of the wage for the least
productive firm is obtained by considering which wage on this subgrid maximizes flow profits
(equation (15)). This provides an update to the profits of the least productive firm in all sectors
I , denoted  I ( p). We are then able to update the wage function everywhere using

                                                                       p                                1
                  w+
                   I ( p ) = A ( w I ( p ), I ; p ) -  I ( p ) +           ( w I ( x ), I ) d x                    ,
                                                                   p                              ( w I ( p ), I )

which is derived by first noting that  I ( p) = (w I ( x ), I ) by application of the Envelope Theorem
and then relating maximized profits flows (equation (16)) to the definite integral of maximized
                                                            p
profits from p to p. That is,  I ( p) =  I ( p) +          p
                                                                 I ( x ) dx. The sector choice probabilities ( I ; p)
are then updated using equation (18).
      The algorithm then proceeds by iterating on these equilibrium objects until we obtain a fixed
point. While we have no proof in the general case of either existence or uniqueness of equi-
librium, in practice we are always able to calculate an equilibrium and obtain this from a wide
variety of initial guesses.


F      Estimation moments
      In this appendix we describe the full set of targeted estimation moments. Recall that we have
H = 2 health categories and dim(x) = 5 demographic household types. The first set of moments
that we construct relate to health and insurance coverage outcomes. Using SIPP we calculate
the fraction of individuals of each demographic type with a given health and insurance coverage
status. For couples, we also calculate the fraction in each joint health state. Additionally, we
describe annual health transitions conditional on gender, marital status, and both initial health
status and insurance coverage. There are a total of 68 moments in this set.
      The second set of moments, also calculated using SIPP, summarize employment and insur-
ance outcomes. We calculate the fraction of individuals of each demographic type observed in
each possible joint employment and insurance coverage state.56 For individuals of each demo-
graphic type, we describe the annual transition rate from unemployment to employment (by
insurance coverage), the annual transition rate from employment to non-employment, and the
    56 Recall
           that all single non-employed individuals are treated as being uninsured, and all individuals in couples are
treated as uninsured in the joint non-employment state.


                                                           58
annual transition rate from employment to another job (broken down by insurance coverage). We
also calculate insurance take-up rates using data from the SIPP employer health-benefits topical
module (from wave 5). For each demographic type we calculate the joint insurance coverage
state, conditional on ESHI being available. There are a total of 93 moments in this set.
    The third set of moments relate to wages. Using SIPP, the cross-sectional distribution of
wages is summarized by the mean, standard deviation, and the 1st, 5th, 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th,
90th, 95th, and 99th percentiles of the distribution. These are calculated conditional on individual
type and insurance coverage. For individuals in two-earner couples (separately with and without
children), we also calculate the mean and standard deviation of the product of male and female
wages. The distribution of wages for individuals observed as non-employed in the initial cross
section ("accepted wages") are summarized by their mean, median, and standard deviation.
There are a total of 183 wage moments.
    The fourth set of moments relate to medical expenditure and are calculated using MEPS-HC.
We calculate the zero medical expenditure mass, the 5th, 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, 90th, 95th per-
centiles of the conditional medical expenditure distribution, together with the mean, standard
deviation, and skewness coefficient57 of this distribution. For adults these moments are con-
structed conditional on gender, health status, and insurance coverage status. For children, they
condition on insurance coverage status. A total of 110 moments are in this set.
    The fifth and final set of moments, derived from KFF, are related to the firm. We describe
average firm size, the fraction of firms in five binned size categories (defined as less than 10
employees, 10­25 employees, 25­50 employees, 50­100 employees, 100+ employees), and the
fraction of firms within these size categories that offer employer sponsored insurance. There are
a total of 11 firm-side moments in this set.


G     ACA parameters
G.1    Tax credits

    Under the ACA, households are eligible to receive premium subsidies if households have a
Modified Adjusted Gross Income (MAGI) that is between 100% and 400% of the federal poverty
line (FPL).58 The "premium cap" defines the maximum percentage of income for the 2nd lowest
cost silver plan, with the cap rate dependent upon household income. The actual rates and
poverty levels from the 2016 benefit year are presented in Table G.1.
    The subsidy amount is the difference between the cost of the plan, and income times the
premium cap. In our implementation we apply a few modifications to the schedule to ensure
  57 Defined   as Bowley's (1920) robust skewness measure.
  58 The definition of MAGI includes income sources such as wages and salary income,
                                                                                   taxable interest, Social Security,
and unemployment insurance. Note that tax credits for a given year are calculated using the previous years federal
poverty guideline.


                                                         59
                              Table G.1: Premium cap, by household income

                          Income                    Income range                     Premium cap
                        (% of FPL)     Single Individual         Family of Four      (% of MAGI)
                        100%­133%       $11, 770­$15, 654        $24, 250­$32, 253   2.03%
                        133%­150%       $15, 654­$17, 655        $32, 253­$36, 375   3.05%­4.07%
                        150%­200%       $17, 655­$23, 540        $36, 375­$48, 500   4.07%­6.41%
                        200%­250%       $23, 540­$29, 425        $48, 500­$60, 625   6.41%­8.18%
                        250%­300%       $29, 425­$35, 310        $60, 625­$72, 750   8.18%­9.66%
                        300%­400%       $35, 310­$47, 080        $72, 750­$97, 000   9.66%
                      Table shows applicable premium cap according to the MAGI of the tax-
                      payer, spouse, and dependents and measured as a percentage of the FPL.
                      Tax credits for 2016 are calculated using 2015 federal poverty guidelines.


that there are no discontinuities and that marginal effective tax rates are always less than 100%.
Firstly, in the 100%­133% income range, we let the premium cap vary from 0% to 3.05%. This pre-
vents a discontinuous change in the premium at 100% of the FPL (below which households are
covered by Medicaid) and 133% (where the premium cap rate changes discontinuously). Second,
we remove the upper income threshold to prevent the discontinuous change when household
incomes exceed 400% of the FPL (the so-called "subsidy cliff"), with the implicit premium sub-
sidy now declining smoothly to zero. Third, we replace the original schedule by a piecewise
linear schedule that is formed by linearly interpolating the original function at the income levels
associated with the different cap rates. Fourth, we smooth the subsidy in the neighborhood of
any marginal rate changes using the same method as we apply to the income tax schedule, and
described in Appendix C. Note that the first two changes act to slightly increase subsidies (de-
crease post-subsidy price) at incomes around 100% and above 400% of the federal poverty line.
In Figure G.1a we illustrate how these modifications change the subsidy schedule.


G.2    Individual mandate

    The individual mandate requires that individuals are covered by a health insurance policy or
face a tax penalty.59 The amount of the tax penalty is either a flat rate amount for each uninsured
individual ($695 per adult and $347.50 per child under 18),60 or 2.5% of gross income (defined
as household modified adjusted gross income less the applicable tax filing threshold), whichever
is higher. In the case of the income based penalty, the penalty is capped at the national average
cost for a bronze plan for each uninsured individual. Using the notation introduced in Section 2
  59 In practice there are coverage exemptions. These apply if the gross income of the household is below the tax filing

threshold (in which case it is not necessary to file a federal income tax return). Coverage exemptions are also granted
for certain hardship situations, to members of certain religious sects, and select other reasons.
  60 These flat rates amounts are for the year 2016.




                                                            60
it follows that the tax penalty Q(z, i; x) for a household without dependent children is given by

      Q(z, i; x) = max{$695 × [q j (i) = 0], min{0.025 × (z - z (x)), r H IX ×  1[q j (i) = 0]}},
                                      j                                                         j


where z is the modified adjust gross income (as defined in equation (26)), and z (x) is the tax
filing threshold for a household with characteristics x.61 The definition of the tax penalty function
extends naturally for households with dependent children. As before, we smooth this tax penalty
function in the neighborhood of any marginal rate changes. Again, see Appendix C for details.


G.3       Firm penalties

    The ACA requires that firms with 50 or more full-time employees provide health insurance
to workers and their dependents or pay a fine. The definition of dependents under the ACA
includes children up to age 26 but does not include an employee's spouse. The penalty for a
non-complying firm is equal to $2904 (2016) per employee (minus the first 30).62 Small firms
(less than 50 employees) are not subject to a penalty.63 Thus, the penalty is given by

                               $2904 × 1[ I = 0  (w, I )  50] × [ (w, I ) - 30].

The form of this unmodified penalty function introduces technical complications as firms' profits
fall discontinuously at the wage w =               -1 (50, 0)    that is associated with the threshold firm size.
In our application we instead implement the following form for the firm penalty function
                              
                               $0                                                      if    30
                              
                   E ( , 0) =  $2904 × B[( - 30)/40; p a , pb ] × ( - 30)              if 30 <      < 70            (G.1)
                              
                              $2904 × ( - 30)
                              
                                                                                       if    70,

where     B(·; pa , pb ) is the incomplete beta function with parameters pa > 1 and pb > 1.64 It has
the following properties. Firstly, the penalty function coincides with the unmodified schedule for
   30 and  70. Second, for 30 < < 70 the penalty is now replaced by an increasing smooth
function, with the unmodified schedule obtained in the limiting case when p a , pb  . The
choice of parameters p a , pb is important as differentiability of the schedule alone is not sufficient
  61 In 2016 this is $10,350 for a single filing status, $13,350 for head-of-household filing status (applicable for single
individuals without children), and $20,700 for a married couple filing jointly.
  62 This dollar amounts reflects that employer penalty taxes are non-deductible for the purposes of calculating a

business' income tax liability. It is calculated as $2904 = $2290 × [(1 - b )(1 + s )]-1 , with b = 0.277 reflecting
business taxes and s = 0.0765 reflecting payroll taxes. See Footnote 47 from the main text for more discussion.
  63 Size dependent policies exist in other countries and in other contexts. See, for example, Guner, Ventura and Xu

(2008), Gourio and Roys (2014), and Garicano, Lelarge and Van Reenen (2016).
  64 The requirement that these parameters ( p and p ) exceed 1 ensures the function is continuously differentiable.
                                                  a       b




                                                            61
           4                                                             200

           3                                                             150




                                                               Penalty
 r H IX




           2                                                             100

           1                                 Original                     50                                Original
                                             Modified                                                       Modified
           0                                                               0
               0    100    200     300     400      500                        0    25        50       75          100

                          Income (% FPL)                                                   Firm size

            (a) Post-subsidy marketplace premium                                   (b) Firm penalty

Figure G.1: Original and modified policy functions the under 2016 rules. Panel a shows the
original and modified post-subsidy marketplace premium r H IX (in thousands of dollars per year)
as a function of household income. Here we assume a single tax payer with no dependents and an
annual pre-subsidy market place premium r H IX = $4, 000. Horizontal axis measures household
MAGI relative to the FPL. Panel b shows the original and modified firm penalty schedule if it
does not offer health insurance ( I = 0), when the dollar fine is $2,904 and with the modified
schedule calculated with p a = pb = 2. Penalty is expressed in thousands of dollars per year.


to rule out mass points in the wage distribution. Rather, we require that the penalty function
can never increase more quickly than firm profits (exclusive of the penalty). We set these to
p a = pb = 2.65 Figure G.1b illustrates how these modifications impact the penalty function.


H          Additional tables
          In this Appendix we present further results tables. In Table H.1 we present our model pa-
rameter estimates and the accompanying standard errors. In Tables H.2 and H.3 we respectively
present the fit to the annual employment and health status transition rates for single individuals.
(The analogous tables for married individuals are presented in Tables 1 and 2 from the main
text.) Additional model fit tables are presented in Table H.4 (the bivariate distributions of insur-
ance coverage and health status), Table H.5 (the bivariate distributions of insurance coverage and
employment), Table H.6 (the health insurance take-up decision conditional on availability), and
Table H.7 (the joint distribution of health status within the household). Finally, in Table H.8 and
Table H.9 we document how both the percentage of firms offering health insurance benefits, and
the fraction of firms that do not offer spousal health insurance, has changed over time.

  65 In the context of a homogeneous worker and firm model with a diminishing marginal value labor product,
Mortensen and Vishwanath (1993) demonstrate that the equilibrium wage distribution is characterized by a mass
point at the upper support of the distribution, where the wage is equal to the marginal product of labor. Our setting
differs as we have heterogeneous productivity and the penalty-implied diminishing marginal returns are only local.


                                                          62
                           Table H.1: Parameter Estimates

                                                       Estimate    Standard Error

   Job offer arrival rates (non-employed)
     Married men                                         1.450          0.065
     Married women, children                             1.119          0.046
     Married women, no children                          1.234          0.064
     Single, no children                                 1.567          0.065
     Single women, children                              0.733          0.034
   Job offer arrival rates (employed)
     Married men                                         0.606          0.019
     Married women, children                             0.955          0.035
     Married women, no children                          0.809          0.034
     Single, no children                                 0.282          0.012
     Single women, children                              0.100          0.004
   Job destruction rates
     Married men                                         0.049          0.002
     Married women, children                             0.200          0.007
     Married women, no children                          0.107          0.004
     Single, no children                                 0.079          0.003
     Single women, children                              0.088          0.004
   Wage offer distributions
     No health insurance, lowest wage                    6.000          0.168
     No health insurance, highest wage                  32.454          0.980
     No health insurance, Beta                           1.010          0.039
     No health insurance, Beta                           9.591          0.420
     Health insurance, lowest wage                       5.372          0.139
     Health insurance, highest wage                     58.022          1.322
     Health insurance, Beta                              1.010          0.034
     Health insurance, Beta                              6.065          0.195
     Wage measurement error, s.d.                        0.198          0.009
     Fraction no health insurance                        0.441          0.012
     Relative measure of workers                        18.000          0.810
   Leisure distribution (mean)
     Constant                                          -0.419           0.017
     Couple                                            -1.101           0.041
     Female                                             0.302           0.013
     Children                                          -0.784           0.027
     Female × Children                                  1.031           0.036
   Leisure distribution (s.d.)                           0.277          0.014
   Risk aversion
     Couples, children                                   1.131          0.015
     Couples, no children                                1.217          0.023
     Single men, no children                             1.217          0.021
     Single women, no children                           1.286          0.039
     Single women, children                              1.433          0.033
   Relative productivity (unhealthy)                     0.886          0.002

   Log-linear index function of the parameters.
   Consumption is measured in tens of thousands of dollars in flow utility.


                                            63
                             Table H.1: (continued)

                                                     Estimate   Standard Error

 Health transition (unhealthy to healthy)
    Constant                                         -1.735         0.058
    Couple                                           -0.373         0.017
    Female                                            0.127         0.006
    Insured                                           2.106         0.066
 Health transition (healthy to unhealthy)
    Constant                                         -1.909         0.037
    Couple                                            0.221         0.011
    Female                                            0.057         0.003
    Insured                                          -1.775         0.066
 Adult zero medical expenditure probability§
    Healthy                                           1.051         0.040
    Unhealthy                                        -0.326         0.015
    Female                                           -0.661         0.032
    Insured                                          -2.580         0.048
 Adult conditional medical expenditure, Gamma-Gompertz
    b: Healthy                                      -12.552         0.199
    b: Unhealthy                                    -18.174         0.202
    b: Female                                         0.431         0.019
    b: Insured                                       -8.450         0.144
    s: Healthy                                        0.114         0.005
    s: Unhealthy                                     -0.267         0.008
    s: Female                                         0.342         0.011
    s: Insured                                        0.559         0.018
    : Healthy                                        -7.344         0.178
    : Unhealthy                                     -12.122         0.209
    : Female                                          1.313         0.029
    : Insured                                        -6.005         0.158
 Child zero medical expenditure probability§
    Constant                                         -1.882         0.053
    Insured                                          -0.317         0.012
 Child conditional medical expenditure, Gamma-Gompertz
    b: Constant                                      -8.959         0.092
    b: Insured                                       -1.630         0.051
    s: Constant                                       0.846         0.039
    s: Insured                                        0.283         0.013
    : Constant                                       -1.942         0.079
    : Insured                                        -0.744         0.032

Notes: All parameters estimated using procedure as detailed in Section 3.3 from
the main text. See Footnote 35 for a description of the method used to calculate
standard errors.
 Log-linear    index function of the parameters.
§ Logistic   index function of the parameters.




                                            64
                               Table H.2: Annual Employment Transitions, Singles

                                                Single Men                                  Single Women
                                            No Children                         Children                 No Children
                                         Data      Model     S.E.        Data      Model     S.E.     Data      Model     S.E.

            Transitions from employment
               . . . to non-emp.         0.05      0.06      0.01        0.10      0.08      0.01     0.04      0.07      0.01
               . . . to emp. (ins.)      0.08      0.05      0.01        0.07      0.03      0.01     0.07      0.06      0.01
               . . . to emp. (unins.)    0.06      0.03      0.01        0.07      0.02      0.01     0.05      0.02      0.01
            Transitions from non-employment
               . . . to emp. (ins.)      0.12      0.11      0.02        0.05      0.09      0.01     0.07      0.11      0.01
               . . . to emp. (unins.)    0.15      0.05      0.02        0.19      0.06      0.02     0.09      0.04      0.02

          Notes: Table shows annual transitions from employment and non-employment for single individ-
          uals to different labor market states. In parentheses ins. (respectively unins.) refer to transitions
          to a job with (without) health insurance. S.E. refers to the standard deviation of the empirical
          moment. Empirical moments are calculated using SIPP data.




                                  Table H.3: Annual Health Transitions, Singles

                                           Single Men                                                  Single Women
                                Insured                     Uninsured                        Insured                     Uninsured
                        Data     Model      S.E.     Data     Model         S.E.     Data     Model      S.E.     Data     Model     S.E.

 Transitions from healthy
   . . . to healthy     0.96      0.98      0.01     0.89      0.89         0.01     0.96      0.98      0.01     0.84      0.88     0.01
   . . . to unhealthy   0.04      0.02      0.01     0.11      0.11         0.01     0.04      0.02      0.01     0.16      0.12     0.01
 Transitions from unhealthy
   . . . to healthy     0.72      0.72      0.07     0.38      0.28         0.04     0.58      0.75      0.06     0.31      0.27     0.03
   . . . to unhealthy   0.28      0.28      0.07     0.62      0.72         0.04     0.42      0.25      0.06     0.69      0.73     0.03

Notes: Table shows annual health transitions for single individuals conditional on health and insurance coverage sta-
tus at the start of the year. S.E. refers to the standard deviation of the empirical moment. Empirical moments are
calculated using SIPP data.




                                                                    65
                                  Table H.4: Insurance and Health Status

                                             Insured                                           Uninsured
                                 Healthy                  Unhealthy                 Healthy                  Unhealthy
                          Data    Model     S.E.   Data    Model      S.E.   Data    Model     S.E.   Data Model         S.E.

 Married couples
   Men, children          0.76     0.77     0.01   0.03     0.05      0.00   0.17     0.15     0.01   0.03     0.02      0.00
   Men, no children       0.82     0.85     0.02   0.06     0.04      0.01   0.09     0.10     0.01   0.04     0.02      0.01
   Women, children        0.74     0.78     0.01   0.04     0.05      0.00   0.19     0.15     0.01   0.03     0.02      0.00
   Women, no children     0.82     0.85     0.01   0.05     0.04      0.01   0.11     0.09     0.01   0.02     0.02      0.01
 Single individuals
   Men, no children       0.53     0.53     0.01   0.02     0.04      0.00   0.34     0.35     0.01   0.11     0.08      0.01
   Women, children        0.41     0.42     0.01   0.04     0.03      0.00   0.43     0.41     0.01   0.13     0.15      0.01
   Women, no children     0.59     0.52     0.01   0.03     0.03      0.01   0.26     0.36     0.01   0.12     0.08      0.01

Notes: Table shows the cross-sectional joint distribution of insurance coverage and health status for women and men
of different demographic types. S.E. refers to the standard deviation of the empirical moment. Empirical moments
are calculated using SIPP data.




                              Table H.5: Insurance and Employment Status

                                             Insured                                           Uninsured
                                 Employed            Non-employed                   Employed            Non-employed
                          Data    Model     S.E.   Data    Model      S.E.   Data    Model     S.E.   Data Model         S.E.

 Married couples
   Men, children          0.77     0.78     0.01   0.03     0.04      0.00   0.16     0.14     0.01   0.05     0.04      0.00
   Men, no children       0.82     0.78     0.02   0.05     0.10      0.01   0.08     0.07     0.01   0.05     0.05      0.01
   Women, children        0.54     0.58     0.01   0.24     0.25      0.01   0.08     0.08     0.01   0.13     0.09      0.01
   Women, no children     0.75     0.72     0.02   0.12     0.17      0.01   0.06     0.05     0.01   0.06     0.06      0.01
 Single individuals
   Men, no children       0.55     0.57     0.01                             0.25     0.18     0.01   0.20     0.26      0.01
   Women, children        0.45     0.45     0.01                             0.26     0.21     0.01   0.29     0.35      0.01
   Women, no children     0.62     0.55     0.01                             0.14     0.13     0.01   0.24     0.32      0.01

Notes: Table shows the cross-sectional distribution of insurance coverage and employment status for women and
men of different demographic types. S.E. refers to the standard deviation of the empirical moment. Empirical mo-
ments are calculated using SIPP data.




                                                            66
                       Table H.6: Health Insurance Take-Up Decisions

                                                           Children                 No Children
                                                   Data     Model     S.E.   Data      Model      S.E.

        Married couples
             Male insured, female insured          0.89      0.86     0.01   0.93       0.92      0.01
             Male insured, female, uninsured       0.04      0.03     0.00   0.03       0.02      0.01
             Male uninsured, female insured        0.02      0.03     0.00   0.03       0.02      0.01
             Male uninsured, female uninsured      0.05      0.08     0.00   0.02       0.04      0.01
        Single individuals
             Male insured                                                    0.89       0.92      0.01
             Female insured                        0.80      0.93     0.01   0.93       0.96      0.01

      Notes: Table shows the cross-sectional insurance take-up rate for women and men of dif-
      ferent demographic types. S.E. refers to the standard deviation of the empirical moment.
      Empirical moments are calculated using SIPP data.



                       Table H.7: Married Couples Joint Health Status

                                                           Children             No Children
                                                   Data     Model     S.E.   Data     Model       S.E.

        Married couples
             Male healthy, female healthy          0.88      0.87     0.01   0.87      0.89       0.01
             Male healthy, female, unhealthy       0.05      0.06     0.00   0.04      0.05       0.01
             Male unhealthy, female healthy        0.05      0.06     0.00   0.06      0.05       0.01
             Male unhealthy, female unhealthy      0.02      0.01     0.00   0.03      0.01       0.01

      Notes: Table shows the cross-sectional joint distribution of health status for married in-
      dividuals. S.E. refers to the standard deviation of the empirical moment. Empirical mo-
      ments are calculated using SIPP data.



        Table H.8: Percentage of Firms Offering Health Benefits, by Firm Size

                              1999   2001   2003     2005     2007    2009   2011      2013    2015      2017

 Firm size
   3­9 Workers                 55     58     55       47       45      47     48        45      47        40
   10­199 Workers              81     83     81       79       80      79     77        75      72        73
   200 or More Workers         99     99     97       97       99      98     99        99      98        99
 All firms                     66     68     66       60       59      59     60        57      57        53

Source: Kaiser/HRET Survey of Employer-Sponsored Health Benefits, various years.
Notes: Table shows fraction of firms that offer ESHI conditional on firm size (as measured by the num-
ber of workers). Estimates are based on the sample of both firms that completed the entire survey
and those that answered just one question about whether they offer health benefits



                                                    67
Table H.9: Percentage of Firms Offering Spousal Health Benefits, by Firm Size

                                        2014    2015   2016    2017   2018

             Firm size
               3­199 Workers              4      2      11      6       3
               200 or More Workers        1      0       1      0       1

            Source: Kaiser/HRET Survey of Employer-Sponsored Health
            Benefits, various years.
            Notes: Table shows fraction of firms that do extend health insur-
            ance to the spouses of workers, conditional on offering benefits.
            The survey question regarding spousal benefits was not asked
            prior to 2014.




                                           68
