                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    SERVICE IMPORTS, WORKFORCE COMPOSITION, AND FIRM PERFORMANCE:
                   EVIDENCE FROM FINNISH MICRODATA

                                           Andrea Ariu
                                    Katariina Nilsson Hakkala
                                       J. Bradford Jensen
                                        Saara Tamminen

                                       Working Paper 26355
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26355


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




Andrea Ariu acknowledges the support of the CRC TRR 190 "Rationality and Competition".
Katariina Nilsson Hakkala and Saara Tamminen acknowledge the support of Academy of Finland
(Grant number 288923). All views expressed in this paper, as well as the errors, are our own
solely. We thank the participants to various seminars and conferences for helpful suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26355.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Andrea Ariu, Katariina Nilsson Hakkala, J. Bradford Jensen, and Saara Tamminen.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Service Imports, Workforce Composition, and Firm Performance: Evidence from Finnish
Microdata
Andrea Ariu, Katariina Nilsson Hakkala, J. Bradford Jensen, and Saara Tamminen
NBER Working Paper No. 26355
October 2019
JEL No. F10,F14,L80

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper uses unique Finnish firm-level micro data on service imports, work- force
composition, and firm characteristics to examine changes in employment composition and
performance of Finnish service importers during a period of a significant increase in services
imports (2002-2012). We use world service export supply shocks, which we allocate to firms
based on their highly specialized service input structure, as an instrument to identify the impact of
service offshoring. We find that firms that increase imports of service inputs reduce employment
of low-skill service workers, increase employment of (high-skilled) managers and improve their
performance in terms of sales (turnover), assets, service exports, and firm survival. The
employment composition and performance responses to service imports differ across firms in the
manufacturing sector and those in the service sector.

Andrea Ariu                                       J. Bradford Jensen
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München            McDonough School of Business
Ludwigstr. 28 (Front building), Room 217          Georgetown University
München                                           Washington, DC 20057
Deutschland                                       and Peterson Institute for International Economics
andrea.ariu@econ.lmu.de                           and also NBER
                                                  jbj24@georgetown.edu
Katariina Nilsson Hakkala
ETLA Research Institute of                        Saara Tamminen
the Finnish Economy                               SITRA The Finnish Innovation Fund
Arkadiankatu 23 B                                 Itämerenkatu 11-13
Helsinki                                          Helsinki
Finland                                           Finland
katariina.nilsson.hakkala@etla.fi                 Saara.Tamminen@sitra.fi
1         Introduction
The well-known dramatic increase in global merchandise trade has fostered a number
of empirical studies examining the impact of imports on domestic labor markets (e.g.
Feenstra and Hanson, 1996; Autor et al., 2013; Hummels et al., 2014). While starting
from a lower level, there has been a similar six-fold increase in global service trade over
the same period. Because the labor force in most developed economies is predominantly
in the service sector, and because tradable service industries are more skill intensive
in general than manufacturing,1 there is increasing interest in the impact of service
imports on job displacement ­ particularly among higher skilled workers. Yet, due to
limitations in the availability of detailed information on trade in services, the impact
of service imports has received less attention in the literature.2 In this paper, we
combine detailed information on firm-level imports of services with detailed worker-
level information on firms' occupation and skill mix to examine how firms adjust their
labor force as they increase foreign sourcing of service inputs and how these changes
affect firm performance across a number of dimensions. The empirical setting for the
analysis is Finland which, in addition to having uniquely detailed employment and trade
data, experienced a dramatic increase in service imports of almost 5 percentage points
of GDP.3 To put this in context, the "China Shock" involved an increase of about 2
percentage points of GDP in U.S. merchandise imports from China.4
        We find that firms that increase imports of service inputs reduce employment of
low-skill service workers and increase employment of managers. At the same time, they
experience improvements in their performance in terms of sales (turnover), assets, ser-
vice exports, and firm survival. Distinguishing between firms in the manufacturing and
services sector, we show that service offshoring has heterogeneous effects across indus-
tries. For firms in the services sector, the skill upgrading just described is accentuated
by an increase in the employment of high-skilled professionals. This category of workers
includes engineers, computer programmers, and scientists, suggesting that firms could
be refocusing more on R&D related activities. These changes are associated with im-
proved firm performance: employment, sales, assets, and service exports increase. In
contrast, for firms in the manufacturing sector, medium-skilled professional employ-
    1
     See, for example Jensen and Kletzer (2005) and Gervais and Jensen (2019)
    2
     Notable exceptions include Jensen and Kletzer (2005), Amiti and Wei (2005), Crin`
                                                                                     o (2010b), Liu
and Trefler (2019) and Eppinger (2019).
   3
     From 7.4 percent of GDP to 12.3 percent of GDP during the period of this study (2002-2012).
Source: Statistics Finland.
   4
     U.S. merchandise imports from China increased from 0.3 percent of GDP in 1990 to 2.2 percent
of GDP in 2007. Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.


                                                2
ment also decreases and increasing foreign sourcing of service inputs is associated with
higher survival, though we do not observe any other significant improvement in firm
performance.
       Our ability to examine the impact of firm-level changes in service importing on the
composition of a firm's labor force is possible because of rich, detailed information on
firm-level accounts, service trade, and worker occupational and educational character-
istics for Finland during the period 2002-2012. These data can be linked together and
provide an unusual level of detail on services trade, workforce composition, and a range
of other firm-level measures. We are thus able to go beyond the usual employment
classification of blue/white collar and low/high-skilled workers and precisely identify
the detailed occupations affected by service offshoring. We can link the transformation
of the occupational structure of firm employment to changes in performance with a rich
set of covariates. In addition, because we observe service imports at the firm level, the
data allow us to create a measure of service offshoring that goes beyond the traditional
definition based on the industry affiliation of the firm (e.g. Feenstra and Hanson, 1996;
Amiti and Wei, 2005, 2009; Crin`
                               o, 2010b). A key advantage of our approach is that
because the measure of service imports is firm-specific, firms outside the service sector
that import services can be classified as involved in service offshoring. This allows us
to perform our analysis on a broader set of firms sourcing services from abroad and
to examine the heterogeneity across sectors in the impact of service offshoring. We
examine two measures of service imports. For the first measure of service imports,
we focus on services that are potentially related to offshoring activities performed by
the firm. We use information from the Finnish input-output supply tables to identify
service categories that account for more than one percent of total sales in the firm's
2-digit industry and classify these as narrow service offshoring (NSO) services.5 For the
second measure of service imports (which are included in the robustness section), we
use the overall firm service imports. Our empirical results are robust to the choice of
service imports measure.
       The analysis begins with a description of the scope of service offshoring in Finland.
Between 2002 and 2012 (the period of this study), service imports tripled in Finland,
with services potentially associated with offshoring accounting for at least half of this
growth. Finland's service imports increased from 7.4 percent of GDP to 12.3 percent
of GDP, an increase of almost 5 percent of GDP.6 This suggests that Finland presents
   5
     We assume that if a service category accounts for more than one percent of sales in an industry,
this service is likely to be produced by firms in the industry.
   6
     Source: Statistics Finland.


                                                 3
an interesting empirical setting to study service offshoring. We observe significant
increases in imports in a number of business service categories, including computer
services; intellectual property rights; trade related services between related companies;
legal, advertising and consulting services; and R&D and technical services. We show
that firms that source service inputs from abroad are relatively rare, accounting for three
percent of firms in Finland. These firms are present in both the manufacturing and
service sector and, despite being relatively rare, they represent an important share of the
Finnish economy; they account for 45% of revenues, more than 13% of employment, and
almost 20% of value added in Finland. Finally, we document that over the period of our
analysis firms engaged in foreign sourcing of service inputs changed the composition of
their workforces. Firms in the service sector that engaged in service offshoring decreased
employment of low-skilled workers and experienced significant increases in medium-
skilled and high-skilled workers. In addition, they increased substantially the number
of workers in medium-skilled professional occupations. Firms in the manufacturing
sector reduced low-skilled and medium-skilled employment. In occupational terms,
they reduced employment in goods producing, service producing, and medium-skilled
professional occupations.
   In the second section, we go beyond descriptive statistics and analyze the con-
sequences of increasing foreign sourcing of service inputs. To properly identify the
impact of service offshoring on workforce composition and firm performance, we need
to address the possible endogeneity of our offshoring measure. In particular, we need
an instrument that is correlated with the firm's decision to offshore services but un-
correlated with the firm's employment and performance changes. We exploit shocks
in the export supply of specific service-country pairs which are arguably exogenous to
Finland and allocate them based on the relative importance of each service-country in
the total service imports of the firm in the initial year in which it is observed importing
services. This approach exploits a strong empirical regularity in the data: firms tend
to consistently purchase the same service input from the same origin country. This
means that trade relations are pre-determined and exogenous to over-time variation in
firm employment and performance. Thus, we can use initial firm-service-origin country
weights to distribute aggregate supply shocks which are exogenous to Finnish firms.
This feature of service imports is similar to the evidence of a highly specialized sourc-
ing structure for trade in goods presented in Hummels et al. (2014) and allows us to
properly identify the effect of service offshoring in a similar way.
   Using this strategy, we first analyze employment composition changes. We find


                                             4
that firms that increase imports of service inputs decrease the number of low-skilled
workers and increase the number of high-skilled workers. Looking into narrowly defined
occupational categories, we show that this is due to a reduction in employment of
workers related to low-skilled service activities such as office clerks and customer services
and an increase in employment of managers. These results suggest that when firms
offshore services, they reduce their production of low-skilled service inputs and increase
the number of managers, presumably to oversee the increased international activities.
   Differentiating across firms belonging to manufacturing and service industries, we
find a heterogeneous impact of service offshoring. For firms in the service sector, service
offshoring is also associated with an increase in the number of high-skilled professionals.
Thus, increasing the sourcing of services from abroad provides an opportunity for service
firms to focus more on R&D related competencies by increasing the number of high-
skilled professionals such as engineers and scientists. For firms in the manufacturing
sector, foreign sourcing of service inputs is associated with a decrease in medium-skilled
professionals.
   Switching to the analysis on performance, we find that service offshoring leads to
growth only for firms in the service sector in terms of overall employment, sales, assets
and services exports. Instead, we find no evidence of increased employment, sales,
assets, or exports when firms in the manufacturing sector increase service offshoring.
However, for perhaps the most important performance indicator, service offshoring is
associated with higher firm survival in both manufacturing and services industries.
   In the third section, we show that these results hold under a number of robustness
checks: using an alternative broader measure for service offshoring, excluding the years
during the 2008-2009 crisis, and controlling for firm-specific demand shocks, goods
offshoring and import competition.
   These results contribute to the literature in a number of ways. First, they com-
plement recent research that analyzes whether and how service offshoring affects em-
ployment. There are two broad waves in this research. The first employs sectoral or
aggregate occupation data to analyze employment reallocation induced by offshoring.
For instance, Jensen and Kletzer (2005) use US data to show that workers in tradable
service sectors have higher displacement rates and lower employment growth than work-
ers in non-tradable services sectors (especially at the lower end of the skill distribution).
Amiti and Wei (2005) use industry data for several countries and find no evidence of job
losses related to service offshoring. Amiti and Wei (2009) show a positive effect of ser-
vice offshoring on industry productivity in the US. Using individual data and measures


                                             5
of service offshoring at the industry level for UK, Geishecker and G¨
                                                                    org (2013) show that
service offshoring is associated with a decrease in the real wage of low and medium-
skilled and an increase for high-skilled. Using similar data for US, Crin`
                                                                         o (2010b) and
Crin`
    o (2012) show that service offshoring increases the demand for high-skilled more
than for low-skilled. Finally, Liu and Trefler (2019) find that service offshoring increases
job turnover in occupation categories but there is only weak evidence of negative effects
of offshoring services on employment, wages or earnings. The second wave makes use
of the increasing availability of firm-level data, and focuses on within firm changes due
to service offshoring. Crin`
                           o (2010a) compares service offshoring firms to non-offshoring
firms in Italy and finds that employment levels remain unaffected after offshoring but
the employment composition shifts in favor of high-skilled workers. Andersson et al.
(2016a,b) using data for Sweden find that service offshoring firms experience an increase
in the demand for high-skilled labor. Eppinger (2019) uses German firm-level data to
show that service offshoring firms increases their employment. Our paper contributes
to this literature by offering a uniquely detailed description of the consequences of ser-
vice offshoring on the firm employment composition. More specifically, we are able to
precisely identify the skills and the detailed occupation of the workers that are affected
by offshoring. Furthermore, we can analyze the firm-level consequences of this strat-
egy in terms of performance. Therefore, we offer to the literature a more detailed and
comprehensive analysis of service offshoring at the firm level.
   Second, our results identify and emphasize the within-firm channel for changes in
factor demands. An important channel emphasized in the literature since Melitz (2003)
and Bernard et al. (2003) is the reallocation of activity across firms with different
characteristics. Another channel that has received more attention recently is within-
firm changes in factor demands (e.g. Hummels et al., 2014; Bernard et al., 2018b;
Mion and Zhu, 2013; Amiti and Davis, 2012). Our results suggest that the within-firm
channel for changes in factor demands is important in the case of service offshoring.
More specifically, sourcing service intermediates from abroad decreases the number of
low-skilled workers and increases high-skilled workers. This is due to a decrease in the
number of workers related to low-skilled service activities and to an increase in the
number of managers. Bernard et al. (2018b) show that goods offshoring leads firms in
the manufacturing sector to reorganize employment towards R&D related occupations.
Similarly, we find that service offshoring expands the number of workers related to
high-skilled service activities for firms in the services sector. In addition, we show that
this strategy is associated with higher performance (e.g. increasing overall employment,


                                             6
sales, assets and services exports). Finally, our results provide an alternative mechanism
for the skill upgrading experienced by Norwegian firms following broadband internet
adoption analyzed in Akerman et al. (2015): if increased access to broadband internet
led to more opportunities to source services from abroad, firms might have exploited
the opportunity to change the composition of employment in favor of high-skilled.
        Third, our results relate to the growing literature on service firms that engage in
international trade. Since Breinlich and Criscuolo (2011) and Jensen (2011), a number
of papers examined trade in services data to understand similarities and differences of
firm characteristics between firms that trade goods and firms that trade services.7 One
particular aspect of this literature is that manufacturing firms also engage in trade in
services (e.g. Breinlich and Criscuolo, 2011; Lodefalk, 2013; Kelle, 2013; Crozet and
Milet, 2017b). Our paper shows that service offshoring involves firms in both the
service sector and the manufacturing sector and these firms, while being relatively rare,
account for a substantial share of the economy in terms of sales, employment and value
added. Recent papers study why manufacturing firms get into services activities and
the relation between goods and services trade (e.g. Breinlich et al., 2018; Ariu et al.,
2018; Crozet and Milet, 2017a; Ariu et al., 2019; Blanchard et al., 2017). With our
paper, we show that importing intermediate services from abroad is an opportunity for
firms to reorganize employment and affect performance.
        The paper is organized as follows: section 2 describes the data, section 3 outlines
the empirical strategy and presents the results, and 4 provides some robustness check.
Finally, section 5 concludes.


2         Data Description and Descriptive Statistics
In this section, we describe the datasets and different samples used in the analysis and
provide some descriptive statistics of the data.


2.1        Data
Our study covers the years 2002-2012 and relies on four different microdata sources: the
Finnish Longitudinal Employer Employee Database (FLEED), the Finnish Annual Ac-
counts Panel for firm-level financial accounts details, the International Trade in Services
Survey by Statistics Finland, and the Finnish Custom Declarations for goods trade.
    7
     For example, Kelle (2013) for Germany, Gaulier et al. (2011) for France, Federico and Tosti (2017)
for Italy, Ariu (2016b) for Belgium and Walter and Dell'mour (2010) for Austria.


                                                  7
2.1.1      Finnish Longitudinal Employer Employee Database (FLEED)

Our main source of information is the register-based Finnish Longitudinal Employer
Employee Database (FLEED) from Statistics Finland for the period 2002-2013. This
database covers the universe of working age population with detailed information on
individual characteristics, such as education, occupation, annual wages, gender, family
status, and previous work history. We include only workers from 20 to 55 years old in
order to exclude exits due to (early) retirement.
       In our analysis, we distinguish workers by education level and occupation. We
define five occupational categories: goods production workers, service production work-
ers, medium-skilled professionals, high-skilled professionals and managers (see Table 8
in Appendix B for the list of detailed occupations included in each of our five macro
categories).8 This level of detail allows us to go beyond the traditional blue/white collar
categorization of workers and determine more precisely their actual occupation. For ex-
ample, we can distinguish between blue collar workers that produce goods (e.g machine
operators) and those producing services (e.g. office clerks) and between medium-skilled
professionals (e.g technicians) and high-skilled professionals (e.g. engineers). The three
educational categories follow the usual distinction: low-skilled (lower than secondary
education, e.g. less than 9 years of education); medium-skilled (upper secondary edu-
cation, e.g 9-12 years of education) and high-skilled (tertiary education, e.g. more then
12 years of education).

2.1.2      Finnish Annual Accounts Panel

The firm-level information comes from the financial statement Panel and includes an-
nual accounts variables (e.g., value added, turnover, total value of assets, industry
affiliation and R&D purchases). It is important to highlight that all firms in Finland
are legally bounded to declare their financial statements, therefore, similar to the worker
data, we have information on the population of active firms. We restrict the analysis to
those that have a minimum of 5 employees in the first year in which we observe them
in order to avoid our estimates being driven by micro firms.
   8
    FLEED has three-digit ISCO-88 occupation code information for all employed individuals only
in the years 2000 and 2004-2009. For the years missing occupation codes in the FLEED, we first
complement the occupation codes from the Structure of Earnings data which has three-digit ISCO
codes for the entire time period but it is not comprehensive of all workers. For the remaining small
number of individuals which are not in the Structure of Earnings who are missing an occupation code
in the FLEED and the Structure of Earnings data (2001-2003), we enter the occupation code that is
the nearest non-missing year observation (either 2000 or 2004).




                                                 8
2.1.3   International Trade in Services Survey

Service trade data are collected from all firms known to have international service trade
activity. In addition to firms that responded to previous surveys, a random sample
is drawn from all other companies in Statistics Finland's Business Register each year.
The database covers 1,800-3,100 enterprises annually. Firms have to declare every year
service imports and exports by country and service type (EBOPS classification of the
balance of payments at the 3-digit level). The data contains modes 1, 2 and 4 of trade
in services defined in the GATS. Unfortunately, firms do not need to declare the mode,
therefore, it is not possible to carry out the analysis distinguishing across them. The
survey covers manufacturing services, maintenance and repair services n.i.e., postal and
courier services, transport services, construction services, financing services, telecom-
munication, information technology and information services, royalties and license fees,
other business services, and personal, cultural and recreational services. Tourism, trans-
portation and insurance services are not included because data on these service trade
transactions are collected with other surveys. Therefore, they are excluded from the
analysis. The data account for about 98% of total imports of services for Finland, which
insures that our sample includes the bulk of international trade in services by Finnish
firms. Annually, around 53-69% of the firms included in the survey show positive service
imports and 37-52% show positive service exports.

2.1.4   Finnish Custom Declarations

The firm-level goods trade data is obtained from the Custom declarations. Both imports
and exports are available at the level of the 8-digit Combined Nomenclature (CN8) by
partner-country from 1999 onwards. Stemming from compulsory registration in Finnish
Customs, extra-EU trade data consist of all transactions. Similar to other EU countries
such as France (Eaton et al., 2011; Mayer et al., 2014) and Belgium (Amiti et al., 2014;
Ariu, 2016b), intra-EU trade transactions are available for firms with an annual import
or export to all other EU countries above 100,000 euro. According to Finnish Customs,
the data incorporates about 96.5 percent of the total imports and exports from/to other
EU countries. We use these information to control for firms that also engage in goods
imports and to control for firm-specific demand shocks that could represent potential
confounding factors in our analysis.




                                            9
2.1.5    Measuring Service Offshoring

We use the detailed firm-level information on service imports combined with industry-
level information from the Finnish input-output "supply" tables to construct a novel
measure of narrow services offshoring. We focus on service activities that accounted
for more than one percent of total sales in the firm's 2-digit industry for the initial
2002-2003 period as more likely to be produced internally by firms within the industry
and define these service activities as narrow services offshoring (NSO) categories for
each 2-digit industry. We assume that if a service category accounts for more than
one percent of sales in an industry, this service is likely to be produced by firms in the
industry. We then aggregate firm imports of these NSO categories to obtain a firm-level
measure of narrow service offshoring. Purchases of R&D services and services between
related enterprises might not satisfy this criteria, but could still involve offshoring since
many manufacturing firms carry out these activities without selling them to other firms.
We define services between related enterprises as a narrow service offshoring category
in all industries and R&D in the industries where its intensity (measured by total R&D
expenditure over total revenue) is above the median value of 0.6 percent in the pe-
riod considered. The full lists of EBOPS categories of services included in the narrow
measure per industry are reported in Table 7 in appendix A. A key advantage of this
measure compared to the traditional use of the industry affiliation (e.g. Feenstra and
Hanson, 1996; Amiti and Wei, 2005, 2009; Crin`
                                             o, 2010b) is that firms in the manufac-
turing sector can potentially be classified as involved in service offshoring. Our measure
has the advantage of identifying which firms actually import services, instead of simply
using the industry affiliation of the firm as an indication of service offshoring. Our
approach enables us to examine a broad range of Finnish firms importing services and
to examine the potential heterogeneous impact of service offshoring across firms in dif-
ferent sectors. As we show in the robustness section, our empirical results are robust
to a broader measure of service imports.

2.1.6    Sample of Analysis

Starting from the universe of Finnish firms having at least five employees, we keep
only those that have imported services according to the NSO definition for at least two
consecutive years.9 The resulting sample includes more than eight thousand firm-years
   9
    Since our analysis aims at understanding the effect of an increase in imports of service inputs,
those firms that we observe only for one year would be anyway dropped from the regression analysis.
Our baseline results focus on the set of firms engaged in NSO. In the robustness section, we present
results for all service importers.


                                                10
and we can identify 1,167 unique firms that show positive narrow service offshoring that
we can employ in our econometric analysis. However, to provide a meaningful portrait
of service offshoring and compare NSO firms with those not involved in NSO, we also
use all Finnish firms not involved in NSO in the next subsection.
   For every firm-year observation, we match information on: i) the number of employ-
ees by occupational and educational categories from the FLEED dataset; ii) produc-
tivity (measured as log of value added per employee), turnover, value of assets, R&D
expenditure and the industry classification of firms from the Finnish Financial State-
ment Panel; iii) imports and exports for both goods (from Custom declarations) and
services (from the Trade in Services Survey). Finally, we add industry-year trends for
all of the above variables computed using all firms in the economy and excluding the
firm considered.


2.2     Descriptive Statistics
Using the data just described, we present below descriptive statistics on the scale and
scope of service offshoring in Finland.

2.2.1   Aggregate Trends of NSO

Figure 1 shows that during the period from 2002 to 2012 imports of services increased
almost three times in Finland. This is significant growth both with respect to Finnish
GDP (which increased of less than 1.5% per year in the same period) but also with re-
spect to countries such as UK or US that roughly doubled their services imports. Figure
1 shows that Finland imports services primarily from developed economies (which ac-
count for about 75 percent of service imports at the end of the period), with both
categories of countries contributing to the growth in service imports. This threefold
increase in service imports is empirically relevant because it is equivalent to 5 percent
of Finnish GDP. To provide a benchmark, the "China Shock" examined in Autor et al.
(2013, 2016) involved growth in U.S. manufacturing imports from China of about 2
percent of GDP.
   Distinguishing across broad and narrow service imports, NSO accounts for at least
half of the observed growth. A closer look at the different service categories in Table
1 reveals that "R&D and Technical Services", "Legal, Advertising and Consulting",
"Trade Related Services & Services between related Companies" and "Computer Ser-
vices" account for most of imports. In terms of evolution over time, most services
categories grew substantially, with exceptional growth in "Computer Services" which

                                           11
                   Figure 1: Composition of Service Imports Growth




           Table 1: 2002-2012 Growth by Service Type (Millions of Euros)

                                                                2002    2012   % Change
        Postal, Information and Telecommunication                325     450        38%
        Construction and Mining                                  225     257        14%
        Computer services                                        363   1,794      394%
        IPR                                                      641   1,385      116%
        Trade Relat. Services & Services bw Relat. Companies   1,216   3,138      158%
        Legal, Advertising, Consulting                           917   2,263      147%
        R&D and Technical Services                             1,569   3,707      136%
        Personal, Health, Education and Government               192     143       -26%



almost quadrupled between 2002 and 2012. These figures indicate that services imports
experienced substantial growth during our period of analysis and that NSO played an
important role in these aggregate trends.

2.2.2   NSO Participation

To understand the scope of service offshoring, we plot in Figure 2 the number (right
scale) and the share of firms (left scale) that report positive narrow service offshoring
by industry. On average only 3% of firms source intermediate services from abroad
and most of them are in the services sector. "Business Services" accounts for most
of them, followed by "Wholesale and Retail", "Other Services" and "IT Services".




                                              12
The manufacturing sector also has a significant number of NSO firms.10 Firms that
produce goods need service inputs and they actively source them from foreign markets.
Thus, they can be involved in service offshoring and, in our analysis, we provide results
differentiating firms belonging to the manufacturing and service sector.

                           Figure 2: NSO Participation by Industry




       Looking at the left scale, we observe that service offshorers represent a small but non
negligible share of firms in their respective sector. For example, NSO firms represent
10% of the companies in the "Paper and Chemical" industry, 8% in the "IT Services".
These figures are in line with many studies that find that import participation is rather
low among firms even within the same sector (e.g. Bernard et al., 2018a) and especially
for service imports (e.g. Breinlich and Criscuolo, 2011). While the number of service
offshoring firms may be small, we show in the next subsection that these firms are
actually large and important players in the economy.

2.2.3      NSO and Non-NSO Firms

Despite being relatively rare, NSO firms represent an important share of the Finnish
economy. During the period of analysis, they account on average for 45% of revenues,
more than 13% of employment and almost 20% of value added in Finland. Their
  10
    For confidentiality issues we needed to aggregate manufacturing industries in sub-categories. Pa-
per and Chemicals include NACE codes 21-25, Electronics, Machinery and Cars 29-25 and Other
Manufacturing all the remaining codes.



                                                 13
importance is growing over time. For example, the revenues generated by firms that
import service intermediates increased from 40% of all Finnish revenues to almost 50%
in 2012. This means that NSO firms are bigger than firms that do not offshore services
and they are becoming more important in aggregate over time. To quantify these
differences, we compare the NSO and non-NSO firms in terms of standard performance
measures such as employment size, value added per worker, turnover, capital intensity
and skill intensity (measured as average wage) in Table 2.11 NSO firms are bigger in
terms of number of employees, they have higher performance in terms of value added
per worker, turnover, capital intensity and they pay higher wages. These figures confirm
that it is larger, more productive firms that are engaged in services offshoring.

                      Table 2: NSO and Non-NSO Firms' Characteristics

                                             NSO Firms          Non-NSO Firms
                                                 Obs.    Mean    Obs.    Mean
                  Employees (ln)             8,490       4.8    49,295   3.1
                  VA per empl. (ln)          7,877       11.2   45,617   10.9
                  Turnover (ln)              8,284       17.2   48,311   15.2
                  Capital per empl. (ln)     8,366       10.5   46,657   9.8
                  Average wage bill (ln)     8,336       10.6   47,273   10.3




2.2.4      NSO Firms Employment Changes

To analyze the evolution of employment composition for NSO firms, we decompose the
changes in the number of workers by educational category and sector between 2002
and 2012 in Panel a of Table 3. We find that the aggregate number of low-skilled
employed in NSO firms decreased while the number of high-skilled increased. For the
manufacturing sector, the number of medium-skilled also decreased. This is suggestive
that service offshoring might also be affecting medium-skilled workers in manufacturing
industries. These results show that NSO firms experienced a skill upgrading contributed
to by a decrease in the number of low-skilled workers and by an increase in the number
of high-skilled workers during the period of analysis.
 11
      Each observation represents a firm-year.




                                                    14
             Table 3: Employment Changes by Education and Occupation

       Panel a: Education                 Manufacturing                    Services
                                       2002     2012    Change     2002      2012     Change
       Low-Skilled                    34,083   19,276   -14,807   23,716   19,426      -4,290
       Medium-Skilled                 73,627   60,193   -13,434   46,317   63,060     16,743
       High-Skilled                   59,538   61,137     1,599   50,195   72,614     22,419

       Panel b: Occupation                Manufacturing                    Services
                                       2002     2012    Change     2002      2012     Change
       Goods Production               78,342   56,849   -21,493   12,581   14,941      2,360
       Service Production             24,112   13,130   -10,982   50,250   60,159      9,909
       Medium-skilled Professionals   35,495   31,303    -4,192   27,294   42,264     14,970
       High-skilled Professionals     22,394   26,451     4,057   21,289   27,126      5,837
       Managers                        4,851    7,636     2,785    5,295    7,473      2,178




    Because of the great level of detail available in our data, we can perform a similar
decomposition by occupational category in Panel b of Table 3. In the service sector,
all occupational groups of workers increased. In contrast, for the manufacturing sector,
we observe a decrease in the number of service production workers and, to a lesser ex-
tent, of medium-skilled professionals. Keeping in mind that these are simple descriptive
statistics, two points are worth mentioning. First, service offshoring can have potential
negative effects on employment not only in service industries but also in the manufac-
turing sector. Second, service offshoring might differentially affect firms depending on
the industry of affiliation. Therefore, it could potentially represent different strategies
depending on whether the firm produces goods or services. In the next section, we
examine more systematically the relationship between the dramatic increase in service
offshoring and the changing employment composition observed in this section.


3     Empirical Strategy and Results
To go beyond the stylized facts highlighted in the previous section, we need to address
the issue of the endogeneity related to the firm-level choice of pursuing service offshoring.
We describe our approach to addressing this potential problem below.


3.1    Empirical Strategy
The equation that we bring to the data takes the following form:

                                                15
                               Yit = 0 + 1 NSOit + Xjt + µi +              it


       where Yit is defined as the (log) level of employment in the educational and occupa-
tional category of workers for firm i at time t. N SOit is our main variable of interest,
i.e. the (log) measure of narrow service offshoring for firm i at time t. Xjt represent
industry j trends that control for aggregate shocks that affect all firms within the same
industry.12 Finally, µi is a firm fixed effect and              it   is our error term. Identification
comes from the within-firm over-time variation in the N SOit measure of narrow ser-
vice offshoring. More specifically, we can test whether changes in the exposure of the
firm to service offshoring are related to changes in employment by occupational and
educational category.
       One important element to take into account for a proper identification is the possible
endogeneity of our service narrow offshoring measure, NSOit . To correct for this issue,
we need an instrument that is correlated with the firm's decision to offshore services but
uncorrelated with the firm's changes in the level and composition of the workforce. We
exploit shocks in the export supply of specific service-country pairs which are exogenous
to Finland and allocate them based on the relative importance of each service-country in
the total service imports of the firm in the initial year in which it is observed importing
services. Analytically, our instrument is constructed as following:

                                                                 N SOisct
                           WESit =                EXPsct 
                                         s    c
                                                                 N SOit

       Where EXPsct indicates the world exports supply of service s and country c at time
t excluding exports directed to Finland computed using COMTRADE data. N SOisct
captures the imports of services following our narrow definition of firm i, of service s
from country c in the initial year in which the firm is observed importing the narrow
services, t . N SOit represents the total imports of narrow services for firm i in the
initial year in which the firm is observed importing services, t .
       Our identification strategy is similar to the one used in Hummels et al. (2014) for
goods offshoring and it relies crucially on the high level of specialization in the sourcing
structure. In the context of manufacturing inputs sourcing, Hummels et al. (2014)
find that the median product-origin country is imported by only one firm. Despite
the fact that the level of disaggregation for the services classification is very low,13
  12
     Note that the trend is computed using all firms in Finland and for each observation the industry
trend is computed excluding the firm considered.
  13
     There are only about thirty service categories. This means that we have half the number of the
categories present in CN classification for trade in goods at the lowest level of disaggregation, i.e 2-digit


                                                     16
we find that the median service-origin country is actually imported by only two firms
and this relation remains quite stable over time. In other words, for both goods and
services, firms rarely use the same input-country combinations and they do not change
them over-time. These features make the firm-service-country relation pre-determined
and exogenous with respect to changes over-time in firm employment and performance.
Therefore, the initial importance of the service-origin country combination for each firm
can be used to allocate exogenous service-country changes over-time in export supply.
This highly specific sourcing structure implies that any shock that affects a particular
service-origin country will impact firms within the same sector differently. Therefore,
the widely used industry-level weights would introduce noise in the measure of service
offshoring that can potentially affect the estimates.
   There are three main threats that could affect our instrument: unobserved demand
shocks, supply shocks, and technological shocks. With respect to the first, our instru-
ment uses an aggregate supply shock which is orthogonal to the demand that the firm
faces. Of course, it could be that the world export supply is not only due to a pure
supply shock but to a demand shock that affects all countries including Finland. Our
strategy to overcome this issue is the use of industry-year trends which control for ag-
gregate demand changes and are constructed excluding the firm considered. Therefore,
demand shocks common to all sectors are controlled for by means of industry trends.14
Second, supply-side shocks specific to Finnish firms could propagate to customers and
suppliers and thus influence the world export supply. This is very unlikely because
Finland is a small country and its share of service exports and imports is less than 1%
among OECD countries. Therefore, the extent to which Finnish shocks can propagate
internationally appears quite negligible with respect to the case of a large country like
the US or UK. Third, technological shocks could also induce firms to change the compo-
sition of employment and service offshoring. Our instrument has an important feature
that alleviates this concern: firm-level weights are time invariant. Therefore, the instru-
ment should be exogenous to short term changes in technology at the level of the firm
which could drive both the offshoring decision and the composition of the workforce. In
any case, our industry-year trends can also capture industry-wide technological trends
and mitigate this potential bias.
level and half percent of the number of products with respect to the 6-digit level used in Hummels
et al. (2014), which counts about 5,300 products.
  14
     We discuss the case of firm-specific demand shocks in the robustness check section.




                                               17
3.2       Results
Our first objective is to understand whether service offshoring is associated with a
change in the composition of employment within firms. In Table 4 we analyze how
service offshoring affects the number of employees in each education and occupational
category.15 Consistent with our stylized facts, we observe in Panel a that service off-
shoring is related with a reduction in the number of low-skilled workers and to an
increase in high-skilled workers. Most of the decrease in the number of low-skilled is
explained by a reduction in the number of workers related to the production of services
and to a lesser extent to a reduction in goods production workers. This implies that
workers in occupations such as clerks, personal and protective services workers, sales-
persons and customer services clerks experience a decrease in their numbers following
service offshoring.16 The fact that offshoring actually affects negatively some educa-
tional and occupational categories suggests that our measure is not merely capturing
a switch from arm's-length domestic suppliers to foreign suppliers because that would
not involve a decrease in the employment of the firm. To provide a quantitative assess-
ment of our results, we perform a simple back of the envelope calculation that ignores
all the possible general equilibrium effects. An increase of ten percent in the average
level of NSO (i.e. an increase of 660 thousand Euros on average), leads to a decrease
of 81 low-skilled workers and to an increase of 91 high-skilled workers. Given that the
average firm employment in our sample is 418 workers, these represent sizable changes
in employment composition.
       Separating the sample into manufacturing firms (Panel b) and service firms (Panel
c), we observe that for manufacturing firms service offshoring has negative effects on low
and medium-skilled employment; workers such as technicians are negatively affected
by the relocation of services abroad. The positive increase in the number of high-
skilled is not significant and the increase in managers is lower than in the complete
sample. For firms in the services sector, we observe a strong increase in high-skilled
employment which is explained by an increase in the number of managers and high-
skilled professionals. For the low-skilled workers, the effect of NSO is still negative but
weaker than for the complete sample.
       These results highlight that for both industries, service offshoring decreases the pro-
duction of low-skilled services. These can include activities such as transportation,
  15
    Please, note that the first stage of the 2SLS is available in Table 9 in Appendix C
  16
    The decrease in the number of goods production workers could be explained by the fact that the
two production activities are complementary and shutting down or reducing one would result in a
decrease in both.


                                               18
Table 4: IV Estimates, NSO Effect on Employment by Education, Occupation and
Task Intensity
Panel a: Complete Sample                    (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)            (5)              (6)                (7)            (8)             (9)         (10)
                                                    Education                                              Occupation                                              Task Intensity
                                            Low       Medium       High        Goods          Service      Medium-skilled      High-skilled    Managers        Non-Routine Interactive
                                                                             Production     Production      professionals      professionals


NSO                                      -0.136***      -0.022    0.046**     -0.106***      -0.258***         -0.045*             0.036        0.106***        0.072***     0.284***
                                          (0.040)      (0.024)    (0.019)      (0.036)        (0.056)          (0.026)            (0.024)        (0.027)         (0.023)      (0.060)

Observations                               7,475        7,475      7,475        7,475          7,475            7,475              7,475          7,475           7,475       7,475
Panel b: Manufacturing Firms                (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)            (5)              (6)                (7)            (8)             (9)         (10)
                                                    Education                                              Occupation                                              Task Intensity
                                            Low       Medium       High        Goods          Service      Medium-skilled      High-skilled    Managers        Non-Routine Interactive
                                                                             Production     Production      professionals      professionals



NSO                                      -0.279**     -0.143**    -0.051*     -0.245**       -0.399***         -0.121**            -0.007       0.072**           0.012      0.132**
                                          (0.124)      (0.062)    (0.029)      (0.097)        (0.140)           (0.048)           (0.031)       (0.034)          (0.027)     (0.057)

Observations                               3,456        3,456      3,456        3,456          3,456            3,456              3,456          3,456           3,456       3,456
Panel c: Services Firms                     (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)            (5)              (6)                (7)            (8)             (9)         (10)
                                                    Education                                              Occupation                                              Task Intensity
                                            Low       Medium       High        Goods          Service      Medium-skilled      High-skilled    Managers        Non-Routine Interactive
                                                                             Production     Production      professionals      professionals



NSO                                        -0.052       0.037     0.098**     -0.087**       -0.155***           -0.015          0.098**        0.108***         0.088**     0.376***
                                          (0.034)      (0.028)    (0.040)      (0.040)        (0.048)           (0.035)          (0.040)         (0.037)         (0.035)      (0.097)

Observations                               3,980        3,980      3,980        3,980          3,980            3,980              3,980          3,980           3,980       3,980
  Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions include firm fixed effects and industry trends. Firm clustered standard errors in parentheses.




cleaning, customer assistance and basic back office.17 The decrease in the scale of do-
mestic service production can be associated with an increasing need for international
coordination due to service offshoring and this might lead firms to increase the num-
ber of managers. For service firms however, the increase in the number and share of
high-skilled is also explained by an increase in the category of high-skilled profession-
als, meaning that the firm increases its involvement in R&D-related activities such
as engineers, software developers, lawyers, architects and scientists. Therefore, while
for manufacturing firms service offshoring can potentially represent just a cost saving
strategy, for service firms it appears to allow firms to strengthen the production of
high-skilled activities.
       Using the measures of task intensity provided by Becker et al. (2013) to classify
occupations, we observe in columns (9) and (10) of Table 4 that the number of workers
performing non-routine and interactive tasks increases following NSO. By splitting the
results for the manufacturing (Panel b) and services (Panel c) industries, we find that
  17
     While it might be counter-intuitive that services carried out by drivers and construction workers
could be imported, it actually happens frequently in small countries like Finland. This is because
foreign workers can freely move across EU countries and foreign companies can provide their services
by sending their employees to their customers. While this phenomena is infrequent for large countries
like the US, this type of service provision is classified as "Mode 4" of trade in services; it is recorded
in our data and it involves potentially many firms and an important share of services trade. Unfortu-
nately, firms are not required to declare the import mode and thus it is impossible for us to provide a
quantification of this mechanism.


                                                                                          19
for firms in both sectors service offshoring is associated with an increase in the use of
interactive tasks. This is in line with the increased international dimension of service
offshoring that could require a more intensive coordination effort, especially provided
by the increased employment of managers. For the services sector, service offshoring
is associated also with an increase in the use of non-routine tasks. According to the
classification of Becker et al. (2013), these are especially carried out by high-skilled
professionals such as engineers, software developers and scientists, thus reinforcing the
idea that service offshoring can represent a strategy for firms in the services sector to
refocus on high-skilled and R&D-related activities.


3.3       Firm Performance
A key question in the analysis of the consequences of offshoring is whether the changes
in the composition of employment are associated with firm performance. To analyze
this issue, we perform the same regression as for employment instead using different
performance measures as the dependent variable. The results for the whole sample in
Panel a of Table 5 indicate that on average there is no effect on employment, produc-
tivity, R&D expenditure and goods exports.18 However, firms expand in terms of sales,
service exports and in the value of total assets. Therefore, while not directly affect-
ing productivity, firms are able to expand their sales and their involvement in foreign
markets.
      Distinguishing across sectors provides interesting insights. Panel c of Table 5 presents
the results for firms in the services sector. We observe here that the skill upgrading
due to offshoring translates into a slightly bigger workforce and to higher performance
in terms of turnover, value of assets and services exports. Therefore, it appears that
by getting rid of marginal service activities, firms in the service sector were able to
re-allocate resources to concentrate on more high-skilled activities. This translated
into: i) a higher number of high-skilled professionals; ii) an increase in the number
of managers (probably used to coordinate the increased complexity due to the inter-
national dimension of offshoring); iii) higher performance in the form of higher sales
and service exports. Therefore, for firms which are in the booming services sector, ser-
vice offshoring appears to offer firms an opportunity to improve their performance by
refocusing employment on R&D related activities.
      Panel b of Table 5 shows that NSO induces firms in the manufacturing sector to
decrease the number of employees without any noticeable difference in the other perfor-
 18
      Please note that the first stage of the 2SLS is available in Table 10 in Appendix C


                                                   20
                   Table 5: IV Estimates, The Effect of NSO on Firm Performance

    Panel a: Complete Sample                    (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)         (7)
                                              Employees     Productivity      Turnover    Total Value       R&D           Services    Goods
                                                                                           of Assets     Expenditure      Exports     Exports
    NSO                                          -0.003         -0.009        0.095***     0.155***         0.196         0.597***     -0.115
                                                (0.022)        (0.026)         (0.024)      (0.037)        (0.164)         (0.183)    (0.112)

    Observations                                 7,475          6,962          7,318         7,475           7,475          7,475       7,475
    Panel b: Manufacturing Firms                (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)         (7)
                                              Employees     Productivity      Turnover    Total Value       R&D           Services    Goods
                                                                                           of Assets     Expenditure      Exports     Exports
    NSO                                        -0.138**         -0.027         0.055         0.078          0.105          0.501*      -0.013
                                                (0.060)        (0.042)        (0.035)       (0.050)        (0.323)        (0.293)     (0.157)

    Observations                                 3,456          3,274          3,404         3,456           3,456          3,456       3,456
    Panel c: Service Firms                      (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)         (7)
                                              Employees     Productivity      Turnover    Total Value       R&D           Services    Goods
                                                                                           of Assets     Expenditure      Exports     Exports
    NSO                                         0.056*          -0.034        0.115***     0.182***         0.166         0.538**     -0.340*
                                                (0.031)        (0.046)         (0.034)      (0.055)        (0.176)        (0.216)     (0.202)

    Observations                                 3,980          3,648          3,873         3,980           3,980          3,980       3,980
       Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions include firm fixed effects and industry trends. Firm clustered standard errors
       in parentheses.



mance measures. This further supports the idea that for manufacturing firms, service
offshoring is a cost minimizing strategy that allows the firms to get rid of marginal ser-
vice activities. Therefore, it could be seen as a way to survive in an environment which
involves a high level of competition and possibly also high exit rates. Indeed, several
papers argue that the import competition during that period put pressure on the man-
ufacturing sector (e.g. Autor et al., 2013; Nilsson Hakkala and Huttunen, 2016; Dauth
et al., 2014) thus increasing the need to find a viable path to survive (e.g. Bloom et al.,
2016; Breinlich et al., 2018). Indeed, when looking at exit rates, for offshoring firms
they are less than half with respect to those of firms that do not engage in offshoring
(3% against 7.5%). To provide econometric evidence, we show in Table 6 the results
of regressing a dummy identifying exit on lagged service importer status and firm fixed
effects.19 We consistently find that importing service inputs is negatively associated
with firm exit for both sectors. Therefore, service offshoring could potentially represent
a strategy to survive in a competitive environment.


4         Robustness Checks
Our instrumental strategy allows us to infer causality about service offshoring and solves
a number of the most important econometric challenges. However, there are a number
  19
     Please note that this analysis is carried out using all firms in Finland. Using different lags or
different definitions of service imports does not change the results.


                                                                         21
                          Table 6: Service Imports and Firm Exit

                                          (1)            (2)             (3)
                                       All firms     Manufacturing     Services

                   Service Importer    -0.023***       -0.022***      -0.023***
                                        (0.004)         (0.007)        (0.005)

                   Observations        1,280,130        199,527       1,079,301
                     Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions
                     include firm fixed effects. Firm-clustered standard errors in
                     parentheses.


of other minor issues that could affect our results that we discuss in this section.


4.1     Alternative Measure of Service Offshoring
The first check we perform is related to our measure of NSO offshoring, which we
defined as all service activities that accounted for more than 1 percent of total sales
in the firm's 2-digit industry. To examine whether this choice is driving our results
and in order to compare to the rest of the literature which uses all the service imports,
we run all regressions using as the measure of offshoring all the service imports of the
firm and we define our instrument and estimation sample accordingly (i.e. using all
imported inputs to construct the shares). Despite the fact that all service imports can
potentially embed other motives such as an increase in demand and represent a more
noisy measure of offshoring, results in Tables 11 and 12 in Appendix C show that this
is actually not an issue. Results are very similar both in terms of employment levels
and performance, with the only difference that for the manufacturing sector (Panel b)
some performance measures are now small and positive.
   A second issue related to our measure of narrow service offshoring is that it includes
also services between related enterprises. Besides representing an important channel
of service offshoring, this category of service imports does not specify which service
is actually traded within the same firm. The lack of the determination of the service
involved raises the suspicion that this category of services imports could potentially
be contaminated by profit shifting motives. When removing this category in our NSO
measure, we actually find very similar results (Tables 13 and 14 in Appendix C). There-
fore, our results do not appear to be driven by the opportunity of firms to engage in
profit shifting.



                                                22
4.2     Firm-Specific Demand Shocks
We highlighted in the explanation of our empirical strategy that our instrument is
constructed from a pure supply shock which is exogenous to Finland. However, it could
be that demand shocks are correlated across countries and so, the supply shock could
also embed demand components. Our industry-year trends capture demand shocks that
are common to all firms in the same industry but they cannot exclude the case in which
these shocks are firm-specific. Even if our instrument should be exogenous to firm-level
demand because it is constructed using aggregate world export supply and the firm-
shares are set at the beginning of the offshoring period, we still check the importance of
this potential bias by adding to the regression firm level exports of services and goods.
The idea is that these variables can control for idiosyncratic demand shocks coming
from international markets that could have an effect on employment, performance and
the offshoring decision. Tables 15 and 16 in Appendix C show that our results remain
the same when adding covariates that control for demand shocks at the firm level.
Therefore, it is unlikely that unobserved demand shocks specific to the firm are driving
our results.


4.3     Goods Offshoring
Firms might simultaneously engage in both goods and service offshoring. As long
as our instrument is uncorrelated with increases in foreign sourcing of manufacturing
intermediates, this is not problematic. To dissipate any doubt on this issue, we include
in our specification a measure of goods imports to control for possible increases of
goods offshoring. Tables 17 and 18 in Appendix C show that our results remain the
same when controlling for the fact that firms might also be increasing their sourcing of
manufacturing inputs.20


4.4     Import Competition
Even if we are controlling for industry-year trends, our measure of firm-level narrow
offshoring could potentially embed import competition effects (as opposed to the effects
of offshoring). More specifically, import competition and offshoring can have different
consequences for the employment and performance of firms (e.g. Bernard et al., 2018b;
Hummels et al., 2016; Mion and Zhu, 2013), thus potentially confounding our results.
  20
     Please note that it is not possible to compare our goods offshoring coefficient with the rest of the
literature because our sample of analysis includes only those firms that import services from abroad.


                                                   23
To check whether this potential omitted variable is affecting our results, we add to our
baseline specification a measure of import competition computed as total imports of
the industry of affiliation of the firm (using all Finnish firms). Results in Tables 19 and
20 in Appendix C show that our results are not affected by the potential presence of
industry import competition.


4.5    The Great Collapse
Our period of analysis includes the 2008-2009 crisis. While industry controls probably
capture most of the industry response to this shock, it could still be that firms reacted
heterogeneously within the same industry (e.g. Behrens et al., 2011; Ariu, 2016a). This
means that changes in employment, performance and offshoring strategies could poten-
tially be affected by the crisis. To remove this remaining doubt, we exclude the years
after 2007 from the analysis. Tables 21 and 22 in Appendix C show that the great
collapse does not represent a confounding factor for our results.


5     Conclusion
Using rich, detailed information on international trade in services, firm-level character-
istics, and worker characteristics from Finland, this paper investigates the implications
of service offshoring on employment composition and firm performance. We find that
firms that increase foreign sourcing of service inputs experience a skill upgrading com-
posed of a reduction in the employment of low-skill service workers and an increase
in the employment of managers. For services firms, these changes are also associ-
ated with an increase in the employment of high-skilled professionals (e.g., engineers,
computer programmers, scientists) suggesting that firms could be upgrading skills and
refocusing more on R&D related activities. Following increases in imports of service
inputs, service offshoring firms experience a general performance improvement in terms
of employment, sales (turnover), assets, service exports and firm survival. Manufactur-
ing firms also reduce the number of medium-skilled professionals and the occupational
changes induced by the increase in service offshoring are associated with an increased
survival probabilities only, without any significant improvement in other performance
indicators.
    These results highlight both the opportunities for firms associated with the ability
to source service intermediate inputs globally and the potential challenges for work-
ers, particularly low-skilled workers, as firms' labor demands change. They suggest a

                                            24
possible need for appropriate public policies to facilitate and enable the reallocation
of workers in response to increasing international trade in services. The firm survival
results demonstrate that the ability for firms to source inputs at the lowest cost is po-
tentially important to firm competitiveness and survival. Therefore, any public policy
responses to the challenges faced by workers as a result of service offshoring need to
recognize these benefits.




                                           25
References
Akerman, A., Gaarder, I., and Mogstad, M. (2015).       The Skill Complementarity of
    Broadband Internet *. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4):1781­1824.

Amiti, M. and Davis, D. R. (2012). Trade, Firms, and Wages: Theory and Evidence.
    Review of Economic Studies, 79(1):1­36.

Amiti, M., Itskhoki, O., and Konings, J. (2014). Importers, Exporters, and Exchange
    Rate Disconnect. American Economic Review, 104(7):1942­78.

Amiti, M. and Wei, S.-J. (2005). Fear of Service Outsourcing: Is It Justified? Economic
    Policy, 20(42):308­347.

Amiti, M. and Wei, S.-J. (2009). Service Offshoring and Productivity: Evidence from
    the US. The World Economy, 32(2):203­220.

Andersson, L., Karpaty, P., and Savsin, S. (2016a). Firm-level effects of offshoring
    of materials and services on relative labor demand. Review of World Economics
    (Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv), 152(2):321­350.

Andersson, L., Karpaty, P., and Savsin, S. (2016b). Labour Demand, Offshoring and In-
    shoring: Evidence from Swedish Firm-level Data. The World Economy, 40(2):240­
    274.

Ariu, A. (2016a). Crisis-Proof Services: Why Trade in Services Did Not Suffer During
    the 2008-2009 Collapse. Journal of International Economics, 98(C):138­149.

Ariu, A. (2016b). Services Versus Goods Trade: A Firm-Level Comparison. Review of
    World Economics (Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv), 152(1):19­41.

Ariu, A., Breinlich, H., Corcos, G., and Mion, G. (2019). The Interconnections Between
    Services and Goods Trade at the Firm-Level. Journal of International Economics,
    116:173­188.

Ariu, A., Mayneris, F., and Parenti, M. (2018). One Way to the Top: How Services
    Boost the Demand for Goods. CEPR Discussion Papers 12918, C.E.P.R. Discussion
    Papers.

Autor, D. H., Dorn, D., and Hanson, G. H. (2013). The China Syndrome: Local Labor
    Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States. American Economic
    Review, 103(6):2121­68.

                                          26
Autor, D. H., Dorn, D., and Hanson, G. H. (2016). The China Shock: Learning
    from Labor Market Adjustment to Large Changes in Trade. Annual Review of
    Economics, 8:205­240.

Becker, S. O., Ekholm, K., and Muendler, M.-A. (2013). Offshoring and the Onshore
    Composition of Tasks and Skills. Journal of International Economics, 90(1):91­
    106.

Behrens, K., Corcos, G., and Mion, G. (2011). Trade Crisis? What Trade Crisis? The
    Review of Economics and Statistics, 95:702­209.

Bernard, A., Jensen, J. B., Redding, S., and Schott, P. (2018a). Global Firms. Journal
    of Economic Literature, 56(2):565­619.

Bernard, A. B., Eaton, J., Jensen, J. B., and Kortum, S. (2003). Plants and Productivity
    in International Trade. American Economic Review, 93(4):1268­1290.

Bernard, A. B., Fort, T. C., Smeets, V., and Warzynski, F. (2018b). Heterogeneous
    Globalization: Offshoring and Reorganization. Technical report, Mimeo.

Blanchard, P., Fuss, C., and Mathieu, C. (2017). Why do Manufacturing Firms Produce
    Services? Evidence for the Servitization Paradox in Belgium. NBB Discussion
    Papers 330, National Bank of Belgium.

Bloom, N., Draca, M., and Reenen, J. V. (2016). Trade Induced Technical Change?
    The Impact of Chinese Imports on Innovation, IT and Productivity. Review of
    Economic Studies, 83(1):87­117.

Breinlich, H. and Criscuolo, C. (2011). International Trade in Services: A Portrait of
    Importers and Exporters. Journal of International Economics, 84(2):188­206.

Breinlich, H., Soderbery, A., and Wright, G. C. (2018). From Selling Goods to Selling
    Services: Firm Responses to Trade Liberalization. American Economic Journal:
    Economic Policy, 10(4):79­108.

Crin`
    o, R. (2010a). Employment effects of service offshoring: Evidence from matched
    firms. Economics Letters, 107(2):253­256.

Crin`
    o, R. (2010b). Service Offshoring and White-Collar Employment. Review of Eco-
    nomic Studies, 77(2):595­632.



                                          27
Crin`
    o, R. (2012). Service Offshoring and the Skill Composition of Labour Demand.
    Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 74(1):20­57.

Crozet, M. and Milet, E. (2017a). Should Everybody be in Services? The Effect
    of Servitization on Manufacturing Firm Performance. Journal of Economics and
    Management Strategy, 26(4):820­841.

Crozet, M. and Milet, E. (2017b). The Servitization of French Manufacturing Firms. In
    Fontagn´
           e, L. and Harisson, A., editors, The Factory-Free Economy: Outsourcing,
    Servitzation, and the Future of Industry. Oxford University Press.

Dauth, W., Findeisen, S., and Suedekum, J. (2014). The Rise of the East and the
    Far East: German Labor Markets and Trade Integration. Journal of the European
    Economic Association, 12(6):1643­1675.

Eaton, J., Kortum, S., and Kramarz, F. (2011). An Anatomy of International Trade:
    Evidence From French Firms. Econometrica, 79(5):1453­1498.

Eppinger, P. S. (2019). Service Offshoring and Firm Employment. Journal of Interna-
    tional Economics, 117:209­228.

Federico, S. and Tosti, E. (2017). Exporters and Importers of Services: Firm-Level
    Evidence on Italy. The World Economy, 40(10):2078­2096.

Feenstra, R. C. and Hanson, G. H. (1996). Globalization, Outsourcing, and Wage
    Inequality. The American Economic Review, 86(2):240­245.

Gaulier, G., Mirza, D., and Milet, E. (2011). French Firms in International Trade in
    Services. Economie et Statistique, (435-436):125­147.

Geishecker, I. and G¨
                    org, H. (2013). Services offshoring and wages: evidence from micro
    data. Oxford Economic Papers, 65(1):124­146.

Gervais, A. and Jensen, J. B. (2019). The Tradability of Services: Geographic Concen-
    tration and Trade Costs. Journal of International Economics, 104(7):1942­78.

Hummels, D., J¨
              orgensen, R., Munch, J., and Xiang, C. (2014). The Wage Effects of Off-
    shoring: Evidence from Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data. American Economic
    Review, 104(6):1597­1629.

Hummels, D., Munch, J. R., and Xiang, C. (2016). Offshoring and Labor Markets.
    NBER Working Papers 22041, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

                                          28
Jensen, J. B. (2011). Global Trade in Services: Fear, Facts, and Offshoring. Peterson
    Institute for International Economics.

Jensen, J. B. and Kletzer, L. G. (2005). Tradable Services: Understanding the Scope
    and Impact of Services Outsourcing. Working Paper Series WP05-9, Peterson
    Institute for International Economics.

Kelle, M. (2013). Crossing Industry Borders: German Manufacturers as Services Ex-
    porters. The World Economy, 36(12):1494­1515.

Liu, R. and Trefler, D. (2019). A Sorted Tale of Globalization: White Collar Jobs and
    the rise of Service Offshoring. Journal of International Economics, 118:105­122.

Lodefalk, M. (2013). Servicification of manufacturing - evidence from Sweden. Inter-
    national Journal of Economics and Business Research, 6(1):87­113.

Mayer, T., Melitz, M. J., and Ottaviano, G. I. (2014). Market Size, Competition, and
    the Product Mix of Exporters. American Economic Review, 104(2):495­536.

Melitz, M. J. (2003). The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggre-
    gate Industry Productivity. Econometrica, 71(6):1695­1725.

Mion, G. and Zhu, L. (2013). Import Competition from and Offshoring to China: A
    Curse or Blessing for Firms? Journal of International Economics, 89(1):202­215.

Nilsson Hakkala, K. and Huttunen, K. (2016). Worker-Level Consequences of Import
    Shocks. IZA Discussion Papers 10033, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).

Walter, P. and Dell'mour, R. (2010). Firm-Level Analysis of International Trade in
    Services. IFC Working Papers No.4.




                                         29
A       Appendix: NSO Definition

                               Table 7: NSO Definition by Industry

Nace 2-digit       Industry Name                           NSO EBOPS 3-digit Codes
           10-14   Mining                                  281, 283, 274, 285
           15-16   Food and Tobacco                        274, 285
           17-19   Textile                                 279, 285
           20-21   Wood and Pulp                           274, 285
              22   Publishing                              288, 889, 290, 274, 285
           23-25   Coke, Chemical, Rubber                  274, 279, 285
           26-28   Basic Minerals                          274, 279, 285
     29-31 & 33    Machinery                               274, 279, 285
              32   Communication Equipment                 263, 274, 279, 285
           34-35   Vechicles                               274, 279, 285
              36   Other Manufacturing                     274, 279, 285
              37   Recycling                               279, 282, 274, 263, 250, 285
              45   Construction                            250, 251, 285
              50   Sales and Repair of Vehicles            270, 271, 272, 285
              51   Wholesale                               270, 271, 285
              52   Retail                                  270, 271, 285
              64   Postal Services                         246, 247, 958, 959, 279, 285
              65   Financial services                      260, 285
              67   Aux. serv. to financial serv.           260, 285
              72   IT services                             263, 279, 285
              73   R&D services                            279, 895, 285
              74   Other business services                 274, 275, 276, 277, 278, 280, 284, 279, 285
              80   Education                               895, 285
              91   NGOs                                    897, 985, 274, 285
              92   Recreational serv., culture, sports     897, 985, 274, 285

    Sectors 01-05 (Agricultural and Forest), 40-41 (Electricity and Water Supply), 70 (Real Estate), 71
    (Renting of Machinery), 75 (Governmental Services), 85 (Health Services), 90 (Environmental Services),
    93 (Other Services) and 99 (Other) are excluded because we do not have enough observations. Sectors
    55-63 (Travel and Transport), 66 (Insurance) are not included in the survey.




                                                    30
B      Appendix: Groupings of occupations

Table 8: Occupational groups, based on 2001 Classification of occupations, Statistics
Finland

                                           Classification of occupations, 2001
 Occupational group      Code   Name of occupation
 1. Goods Production      71    Extraction and building trades workers
 Workers                  72    Metal, machinery and related trades workers
                          73    Precision, handicraft, craft printing and related trades workers
                          74    Other craft and related trades workers
                          81    Stationary plant and related operators
                          82    Machine operators and assemblers
 2. Service Production    51    Personal and protective services workers
 Workers                  52    Models, salespersons and demonstrators
                          83    Drivers and related water traffic operators
                          91    Sales and services elementary occupations
                          92    Agricultural, fishery and related labourers
                          93    Labourers in manufacturing and construction
                          41    Office clerks
                          42    Customer services clerks
 4. Medium-Skilled        31    Physical and engineering science associate professionals
 Professionals            32    Life science and health associate professionals
                          33    Traffic instructors and other teaching associate professionals
                          34    Other associate professionals
 5. High-skilled          21    Physical, mathematical and engineering science professionals
 Professionals            22    Life science and health professionals
                          23    Teaching professionals
                          24    Other professionals
 6. Managers              11    Legislators and senior officials
                          12    Corporate managers
                          13    Managers of small enterprises




                                                31
C         Appendix: Further Results and Robustness

                                             Table 9: First Stage Number of Employees
                                     (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)               (6)               (7)            (8)            (9)         (10)
Dep. Var                           NSOit        NSOit       NSOit         NSOit          NSOit            NSOit             NSOit          NSOit          NSOit        NSOit


WESit                             0.286***    0.307***     0.305***     0.316***       0.310***          0.317***          0.320***       0.335***       0.317***     0.319***
                                   (0.065)     (0.065)      (0.065)      (0.065)        (0.065)          (0.065)            (0.065)        (0.066)        (0.065)     (0.065)
Industry Trends:                    Low       Medium         High        Goods          Service      Medium-skilled      High-skilled    Managers      Non-Routine   Interactive
                                                                       Production     Production      professionals      professionals
Observations                        7,387       7,387       7,387         7,387          7,387            7,387              7,387          7,387          7,387       7,387
R2                                  0.447       0.447       0.446         0.446          0.447            0.446              0.446          0.446          0.446       0.446
Kleibergen-Paap Wald stat           15.00       17.07       16.91         17.61          17.40            17.76              18.20          19.67          17.82       17.72

    Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions include firm fixed effects and industry trends. Firm clustered standard errors in parentheses.




                                                    Table 10: First Stage Performance

                                                           (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)               (5)             (6)           (7)
                  Dep. Var                                NSOit           NSOit           NSOit           NSOit             NSOit           NSOit         NSOit


                  WESit                                  0.319***       0.251***         0.323***        0.301***         0.306***        0.301***      0.295***
                                                         (0.065)         (0.067)          (0.066)         (0.067)          (0.065)         (0.065)       (0.064)
                  Industry Trends:                      Employees     Productivity       Turnover      Total Value          R&D            Services      Goods
                                                                                                        of Assets       Expenditure        Exports      Exports
                  Observations                            7,387            7,387           7,387           7,387            7,387           7,387         7,387
                  R2                                      0.446            0.447           0.446           0.446            0.447           0.447         0.449
                  Kleibergen-Paap Wald stat               15.88            10.40           18.13           15.73            16.51           16.18         16.41

                    Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions include firm fixed effects and industry trends. Firm clustered standard
                    errors in parentheses.




                                                                                        32
Table 11: IV Estimates, Broad Service Offshoring Effect on Employment by Education,
Occupation and Task Intensity
   Panel a: all firms                          (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)             (5)              (6)                  (7)              (8)                (9)        (10)
                                                        Education                                               Occupation                                                    Task Intensity
                                               Low       Medium        High        Goods          Service      Medium-skilled       High-skilled      Managers         Non-Routine     Interactive
                                                                                 Production      Production      professionals      professionals


   BSO                                      -0.255***     -0.053     0.124***     -0.259***      -0.477***          -0.056            0.099**         0.254***             0.177***     0.612***
                                             (0.090)      (0.049)    (0.044)       (0.093)        (0.138)           (0.053)           (0.050)          (0.074)               (0.059)    (0.169)


   Observations                               7,380       7,380       7,380         7,380           7,380            7,380             7,380               7,380             7,380       7,380

   Panel b: manufacturing sector               (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)             (5)              (6)                  (7)              (8)                (9)        (10)
                                                        Education                                               Occupation                                                    Task Intensity
                                               Low       Medium        High        Goods          Service      Medium-skilled       High-skilled      Managers         Non-Routine     Interactive
                                                                                 Production      Production      professionals      professionals


   BSO                                      -0.442**     -0.262**     -0.050      -0.469***      -0.604***         -0.213**            0.013           0.124**               0.065      0.319***
                                             (0.176)      (0.106)    (0.044)       (0.182)        (0.209)           (0.087)           (0.056)          (0.056)               (0.051)    (0.119)


   Observations                               3,390       3,390       3,390         3,390           3,390            3,390             3,390               3,390             3,390       3,390

   Panel c: services sector                    (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)             (5)              (6)                  (7)              (8)                (9)        (10)
                                                        Education                                               Occupation                                                    Task Intensity
                                               Low       Medium        High        Goods          Service      Medium-skilled       High-skilled      Managers         Non-Routine     Interactive
                                                                                 Production      Production      professionals      professionals


   BSO                                        -0.121      0.092      0.252**       -0.284*        -0.410*            0.036            0.278**          0.426*                0.253*     1.008**
                                             (0.107)      (0.078)    (0.129)       (0.167)        (0.211)           (0.088)           (0.133)          (0.250)               (0.130)    (0.475)


   Observations                               3,951       3,951       3,951         3,951           3,951            3,951             3,951               3,951             3,951       3,951

     Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions include firm fixed effects and industry trends. Firm clustered standard errors in parentheses.




Table 12: IV Estimates, The Effect of Broad Service Offshoring on Firm Performance
                           Panel a: complete sample                     (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)
                                                                    Employees     Productivity      Turnover   Total value          R&D          Services          Goods
                                                                                                                 of assets       Expenditure     Exports          Exports
                           BSO                                        0.032           0.075         0.302***     0.455***           0.466        1.561***         -0.640**
                                                                     (0.054)         (0.067)        (0.058)       (0.078)          (0.423)       (0.443)           (0.293)


                           Observations                               6,351           6,031          6,351         6,351            6,351           6,351          6,351

                           Panel b: manufacturing firms                 (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)
                                                                    Employees     Productivity      Turnover   Total value          R&D          Services          Goods
                                                                                                                 of assets       Expenditure     Exports          Exports
                           BSO                                      -0.202***         0.062         0.206***     0.288***          -0.201         1.276*           -0.371
                                                                     (0.077)         (0.077)        (0.072)       (0.100)          (0.705)       (0.660)           (0.354)


                           Observations                               2,995           2,873          2,995         2,995            2,995           2,995          2,995

                           Panel c: service firms                       (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)
                                                                    Employees     Productivity      Turnover   Total value          R&D          Services          Goods
                                                                                                                 of assets       Expenditure     Exports          Exports
                           BSO                                       0.182**          0.028         0.383***     0.524***           0.712        1.701***         -1.507**
                                                                     (0.088)         (0.141)        (0.098)       (0.133)          (0.577)       (0.646)           (0.596)


                           Observations                               3,319           3,125          3,320         3,320            3,320           3,320          3,320

                              Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions include firm fixed effects and industry trends. Firm clustered standard
                              errors in parentheses.




                                                                                               33
Table 13: IV Estimates, NSO Effect on Employment by Education, Occupation and
Task Intensity Excluding Intra-Firm Trade in Services
   Panel a: all firms                            (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)             (5)             (6)                  (7)              (8)               (9)        (10)
                                                         Education                                             Occupation                                                   Task Intensity
                                                Low        Medium       High       Goods         Service      Medium-skilled      High-skilled      Managers        Non-Routine     Interactive
                                                                                 Production     Production     professionals      professionals


   NSO                                        -0.273***    -0.070     0.077**     -0.265**      -0.549***          -0.080            0.058          0.221***              0.104**    0.471***
                                               (0.101)     (0.050)     (0.039)    (0.104)        (0.193)          (0.051)           (0.045)          (0.083)              (0.048)     (0.159)


   Observations                                 7,318       7,318      7,318       7,318           7,318           7,318             7,318               7,318             7,318       7,318

   Panel b: manufacturing sector                 (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)             (5)             (6)                  (7)              (8)               (9)        (10)
                                                         Education                                             Occupation                                                   Task Intensity
                                                Low        Medium       High       Goods         Service      Medium-skilled      High-skilled      Managers        Non-Routine     Interactive
                                                                                 Production     Production     professionals      professionals


   NSO                                         -0.786      -0.501      -0.181      -0.872        -0.897*           -0.361            -0.134              0.195             -0.072      0.211
                                               (0.607)     (0.400)     (0.155)    (0.772)        (0.536)          (0.280)           (0.142)          (0.141)              (0.092)     (0.180)


   Observations                                 3,367       3,367      3,367       3,367           3,367           3,367             3,367               3,367             3,367       3,367

   Panel c: services sector                      (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)             (5)             (6)                  (7)              (8)               (9)        (10)
                                                         Education                                             Occupation                                                   Task Intensity
                                                Low        Medium       High       Goods         Service      Medium-skilled      High-skilled      Managers        Non-Routine     Interactive
                                                                                 Production     Production     professionals      professionals


   NSO                                         -0.066       0.054     0.133**     -0.149**      -0.215***          -0.007           0.138**          0.162**              0.109**    0.466***
                                               (0.047)     (0.040)     (0.057)    (0.064)        (0.077)          (0.043)           (0.058)          (0.065)              (0.048)     (0.142)


   Observations                                 3,915       3,915      3,915       3,915           3,915           3,915             3,915               3,915             3,915       3,915

     Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions include firm fixed effects and industry trends. Firm clustered standard errors in parentheses.




Table 14: IV Estimates, The Effect of NSO on Firm Performance Excluding Intra-Firm
Trade in Services
                          Panel a: complete sample                      (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)
                                                                     Employees   Productivity     Turnover    Total value         R&D          Services          Goods
                                                                                                                of assets      Expenditure     Exports           Exports
                          NSO                                          0.023        -0.023        0.106***     0.138***           0.051        0.700***         -0.296***
                                                                      (0.019)       (0.020)        (0.022)      (0.024)          (0.137)       (0.162)           (0.113)


                          Observations                                 7,475         6,962          7,318        7,475            7,475           7,475           7,475

                          Panel b: manufacturing firms                  (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)
                                                                     Employees   Productivity     Turnover    Total value         R&D          Services          Goods
                                                                                                                of assets      Expenditure     Exports           Exports
                          NSO                                         -0.408        -0.031          0.193        0.080           -0.885           2.755          -0.671
                                                                      (0.309)       (0.064)        (0.179)      (0.071)          (1.085)       (1.843)           (0.611)


                          Observations                                 3,367         3,185          3,315        3,367            3,367           3,367           3,367

                          Panel c: service firms                        (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)
                                                                     Employees   Productivity     Turnover    Total value         R&D          Services          Goods
                                                                                                                of assets      Expenditure     Exports           Exports
                          NSO                                         0.098**       -0.029        0.156***     0.205***           0.285        0.600**           -0.589*
                                                                      (0.050)       (0.070)        (0.050)      (0.060)          (0.229)       (0.268)           (0.335)


                          Observations                                 3,915         3,582          3,808        3,915            3,915           3,915           3,915

                            Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions include firm fixed effects and industry trends. Firm clustered standard errors
                            in parentheses.




                                                                                              34
Table 15: IV Estimates, NSO Effect on Empl. by Educ. Occ. & Task Int., Unob.
Demand Robustness
       Panel a: all firms                          (1)            (2)          (3)               (4)           (5)                  (6)                   (7)             (8)         (9)          (10)
                                                            Education                                                       Occupation                                                Task Intensity
                                                  Low         Medium          High          Goods            Service       Medium-skilled             High-skilled     Managers   Non-Routine   Interactive
                                                                                         Production       Production         professionals            professionals


       NSO                                      -0.146***      -0.020       0.049**       -0.111***        -0.283***              -0.049*                0.039         0.118***    0.081***      0.316***
                                                 (0.045)      (0.026)       (0.021)         (0.040)          (0.067)              (0.029)               (0.026)         (0.031)     (0.027)      (0.072)
       Service Exports                          0.024***         0.008       0.001         0.020**          0.048***              0.014***               0.002         -0.013**     -0.008      -0.048***
                                                 (0.025)      (0.014)       (0.007)         (0.023)          (0.031)              (0.011)               (0.006)         (0.008)     (0.006)      (0.013)
       Goods Exports                            0.101***     0.099***      0.057***        0.121***         0.071***              0.064***              0.052***       0.032***    0.053***       0.011
                                                 (0.007)      (0.005)       (0.004)         (0.007)          (0.009)              (0.005)               (0.004)         (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.009)
       Observations                               7,475          7,475       7,475              7,475         7,475                7,475                 7,475          7,475        7,475        7,475

       Panel b: manufacturing sector               (1)            (2)          (3)               (4)           (5)                  (6)                   (7)             (8)         (9)          (10)
                                                            Education                                                       Occupation                                                Task Intensity
                                                  Low         Medium          High          Goods            Service       Medium-skilled             High-skilled     Managers   Non-Routine   Interactive
                                                                                         Production       Production         professionals            professionals


       NSO                                      -0.313**      -0.166**      -0.063*        -0.285**        -0.443***              -0.139**               -0.015         0.074*       0.008       0.143**
                                                 (0.137)      (0.072)       (0.033)         (0.119)          (0.164)              (0.057)               (0.033)         (0.039)     (0.028)      (0.065)
       Services Exports                          0.053**      0.033**      0.020***        0.054**          0.080**               0.033***               0.011*         -0.006       0.005        -0.020
                                                 (0.030)      (0.016)       (0.007)         (0.029)          (0.039)              (0.013)               (0.008)         (0.011)     (0.007)      (0.018)
       Goods Exports                            0.112***     0.098***      0.057***        0.129***         0.093***              0.065***              0.051***       0.024***    0.046***       0.003
                                                 (0.018)      (0.014)       (0.007)         (0.019)          (0.021)              (0.010)               (0.006)         (0.005)     (0.006)      (0.008)
       Observations                               3,456          3,456       3,456              3,456         3,456                3,456                 3,456          3,456        3,456        3,456

       Panel b: services sector                    (1)            (2)          (3)               (4)           (5)                  (6)                   (7)             (8)         (9)          (10)
                                                            Education                                                       Occupation                                                Task Intensity
                                                  Low         Medium          High          Goods            Service       Medium-skilled             High-skilled     Managers   Non-Routine   Interactive
                                                                                         Production       Production         professionals            professionals


       NSO                                       -0.052          0.046      0.111**        -0.089**        -0.164***               -0.009               0.110**        0.119***     0.101**      0.408***
                                                 (0.038)      (0.033)       (0.048)         (0.043)          (0.054)              (0.037)               (0.045)         (0.042)     (0.040)      (0.112)
       Service Exports                           0.012*        -0.001        -0.009         0.015*          0.028***               0.003                 -0.010         -0.014*     -0.011      -0.056***
                                                 (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.008)         (0.008)          (0.010)              (0.007)               (0.008)         (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.022)
       Goods Exports                            0.025***     0.024***      0.018***        0.024***         0.027***              0.029***              0.019***       0.017***    0.021***       0.002
                                                 (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.005)         (0.006)          (0.007)              (0.005)               (0.006)         (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.015)
       Observations                               3,980          3,980       3,980              3,980         3,980                3,980                 3,980          3,980        3,980        3,980

         Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions include firm fixed effects and industry trends. Firm clustered standard errors in parentheses.




Table 16: IV Estimates, The Effect of NSO on Firm Performance, Unobserved Demand
Robustness
                                                  Panel a: complete sample                      (1)          (2)            (3)              (4)             (5)
                                                                                         Employees      Productivity     Turnover     Total value           R&D
                                                                                                                                          of assets     Expenditure
                                                  NSO                                       -0.004         -0.012        0.101***         0.166***         0.210
                                                                                           (0.024)         (0.028)        (0.027)         (0.041)          (0.182)
                                                  Services Exports                          0.007*         0.009*         -0.004       -0.021***           0.010
                                                                                           (0.004)         (0.005)        (0.005)         (0.008)          (0.034)
                                                  Goods Exports                           0.053***        -0.012***      0.041***         0.013***        0.152***
                                                                                           (0.005)         (0.004)        (0.005)         (0.005)          (0.023)
                                                  Observations                              7,475           6,962          7,318            7,475           7,475

                                                  Panel b: manufacturing firms                  (1)          (2)            (3)              (4)             (5)
                                                                                         Employees      Productivity     Turnover     Total value           R&D
                                                                                                                                          of assets     Expenditure
                                                  NSO                                      -0.166**        -0.023          0.048            0.072          0.064
                                                                                           (0.072)         (0.042)        (0.035)         (0.046)          (0.348)
                                                  Services Exports                         0.035**          0.005         -0.004           -0.007          0.048
                                                                                           (0.014)         (0.008)        (0.007)         (0.008)          (0.066)
                                                  Goods Exports                           0.082***         -0.009        0.073***         0.020***        0.269***
                                                                                           (0.012)         (0.007)        (0.009)         (0.004)          (0.043)
                                                  Observations                              3,456           3,274          3,404            3,456           3,456

                                                  Panel c: service firms                        (1)          (2)            (3)              (4)             (5)
                                                                                         Employees      Productivity     Turnover     Total value           R&D
                                                                                                                                          of assets     Expenditure
                                                  NSO                                       0.079*         -0.053        0.117***         0.196***          0.185
                                                                                           (0.043)         (0.054)        (0.036)         (0.062)          (0.190)
                                                  Services Exports                          -0.004        0.024***         0.003          -0.023**         -0.006
                                                                                           (0.008)         (0.009)        (0.007)         (0.011)          (0.032)
                                                  Goods Exports                           0.022***         -0.007        0.020***           0.009         0.066**
                                                                                           (0.005)         (0.005)        (0.005)         (0.007)          (0.026)
                                                  Observations                              3,980           3,648          3,873            3,980           3,980

                                                    Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions include firm fixed effects and industry trends. Firm
                                                    clustered standard errors in parentheses.




                                                                                                        35
Table 17: IV Estimates, NSO Effect on Employment by Education, Occupation and
Task Intensity, Controlling for Goods Imports
           Panel a: all firms                          (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)            (5)            (6)              (7)            (8)               (9)               (10)
                                                                Education                                                 Occupation                                            Task Intensity
                                                      Low        Medium            High         Goods       Service       Medium-skilled   High-skilled     Managers      Non-Routine           Interactive
                                                                                              Production   Production      professionals   professionals


           NSO                                      -0.153***     -0.038      0.037**         -0.123***    -0.277***         -0.058**          0.029        0.105***          0.063***           0.292***
                                                     (0.043)      (0.024)         (0.018)      (0.038)      (0.060)          (0.027)          (0.024)        (0.027)           (0.023)           (0.063)
           Goods Imports                            0.097***     0.091***     0.047***         0.107***     0.101***         0.072***        0.040***       0.021***          0.044***           -0.033**
                                                     (0.010)      (0.007)         (0.005)      (0.010)      (0.013)          (0.007)          (0.006)        (0.006)           (0.006)           (0.013)


           Observations                               7,481        7,481          7,481         7,481          7,481          7,481            7,481          7,481            7,481              7,481

           Panel b: manufacturing sector               (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)            (5)            (6)              (7)            (8)               (9)               (10)
                                                                Education                                                 Occupation                                            Task Intensity
                                                      Low        Medium            High         Goods       Service       Medium-skilled   High-skilled     Managers      Non-Routine           Interactive
                                                                                              Production   Production      professionals   professionals


           NSO                                      -0.262**     -0.127**         -0.041*     -0.223***    -0.384***        -0.111***          -0.003        0.073**           0.017             0.133**
                                                     (0.113)      (0.051)         (0.024)      (0.084)      (0.132)          (0.043)          (0.029)        (0.034)           (0.024)           (0.057)
           Goods Imports                            0.195***     0.189***     0.097***         0.232***     0.181***         0.124***        0.069***       0.044***          0.083***            0.003
                                                     (0.024)      (0.017)         (0.009)      (0.023)      (0.027)          (0.013)          (0.009)        (0.008)           (0.009)           (0.014)


           Observations                               3,458        3,458          3,458         3,458          3,458          3,458            3,458          3,458            3,458              3,458

           Panel c: services sector                    (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)            (5)            (6)              (7)            (8)               (9)               (10)
                                                                Education                                                 Occupation                                            Task Intensity
                                                      Low        Medium            High         Goods       Service       Medium-skilled   High-skilled     Managers      Non-Routine           Interactive
                                                                                              Production   Production      professionals   professionals


           NSO                                       -0.061*       0.026      0.093**          -0.098**    -0.172***          -0.028          0.093**       0.107***          0.080**            0.395***
                                                     (0.037)      (0.028)         (0.040)      (0.043)      (0.054)          (0.037)          (0.040)        (0.038)           (0.035)           (0.106)
           Goods Imports                            0.036***     0.033***     0.018**          0.040***     0.050***         0.040***         0.017**         0.012           0.023***           -0.054**
                                                     (0.007)      (0.006)         (0.007)      (0.008)      (0.012)          (0.008)          (0.008)        (0.008)           (0.007)           (0.021)


           Observations                               3,984        3,984          3,984         3,984          3,984          3,984            3,984          3,984            3,984              3,984

             Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions include firm fixed effects and industry trends. Firm clustered standard errors in parentheses.




Table 18: IV Estimates, The Effect of NSO on Firm Performance Controlling for Goods
Imports
                  Panel a: complete sample                                  (1)                  (2)              (3)             (4)                 (5)               (6)               (7)
                                                                    Employees               Productivity     Turnover        Total value           R&D               Services           Goods
                                                                                                                              of assets       Expenditure            Exports           Exports
                  NSO                                                     -0.017               -0.008          0.087***       0.155***             0.183           0.609***             -0.165
                                                                       (0.023)                (0.027)          (0.023)         (0.038)            (0.167)            (0.190)           (0.115)
                  Goods Imports                                      0.0076***                 -0.005          0.053***         0.001            0.094***             -0.031           0.299***
                                                                       (0.007)                (0.006)          (0.007)         (0.007)            (0.036)            (0.038)           (0.031)


                  Observations                                            7,841                6,962            7,324           7,481              7,481               7,481             7,481

                  Panel b: manufacturing firms                              (1)                  (2)              (3)             (4)                 (5)               (6)               (7)
                                                                    Employees               Productivity     Turnover        Total value           R&D               Services           Goods
                                                                                                                              of assets       Expenditure            Exports           Exports
                  NSO                                                 -0.124**                 -0.027           0.056*          0.081              0.142              0.502*             0.025
                                                                       (0.052)                (0.042)          (0.031)         (0.050)            (0.316)            (0.291)           (0.148)
                  Goods Imports                                       0.152***                 -0.009          0.119***         0.016*           0.342***             -0.031           0.406***
                                                                       (0.015)                (0.014)          (0.016)         (0.009)            (0.070)            (0.066)           (0.054)


                  Observations                                            3,458                3,274            3,406           3,458              3,458               3,458             3,458

                  Panel c: service firms                                    (1)                  (2)              (3)             (4)                 (5)               (6)               (7)
                                                                    Employees               Productivity     Turnover        Total value           R&D               Services           Goods
                                                                                                                              of assets       Expenditure            Exports           Exports
                  NSO                                                     0.061*               -0.035          0.110***       0.185***             0.169             0.550**           -0.430*
                                                                       (0.036)                (0.049)          (0.034)         (0.058)            (0.185)            (0.229)           (0.229)
                  Goods Imports                                       0.029***                 0.002           0.024***         -0.008            -0.013              -0.015           0.239***
                                                                       (0.007)                (0.007)          (0.007)         (0.011)            (0.039)            (0.044)           (0.046)


                  Observations                                            3,984                3,648            3,877           3,984              3,984               3,984             3,984

                     Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions include firm fixed effects and industry trends. Firm clustered standard
                     errors in parentheses.




                                                                                                          36
Table 19: IV Estimates, NSO Effect on Employment by Education, Occupation and
Task Intensity, Controlling for Import Competition
       Panel a: all firms                          (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)             (5)              (6)                  (7)              (8)                (9)        (10)
                                                            Education                                               Occupation                                                    Task Intensity
                                                  Low         Medium       High        Goods          Service      Medium-skilled       High-skilled      Managers         Non-Routine     Interactive
                                                                                     Production     Production       professionals      professionals


       NSO                                      -0.129***      -0.011     0.050**     -0.102**       -0.267***          -0.048             0.048*         0.117***               0.422      0.298***
                                                 (0.044)      (0.028)     (0.022)      (0.042)        (0.067)           (0.030)           (0.028)          (0.032)               (1.224)    (0.071)
       Import Competition                        -0.026       -0.043*      -0.014       -0.018          0.031            0.010            -0.045**         -0.043*               -1.360      -0.056
                                                 (0.031)      (0.025)     (0.018)      (0.036)        (0.049)           (0.023)           (0.021)          (0.024)               (4.983)    (0.054)


       Observations                               7,475        7,475       7,475        7,475           7,475            7,475             7,475               7,475             7,475       7,475

       Panel b: manufacturing sector               (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)             (5)              (6)                  (7)              (8)                (9)        (10)
                                                            Education                                               Occupation                                                    Task Intensity
                                                  Low         Medium       High        Goods          Service      Medium-skilled       High-skilled      Managers         Non-Routine     Interactive
                                                                                     Production     Production       professionals      professionals


       NSO                                      -0.252**      -0.131**    -0.054*     -0.224**       -0.385***         -0.125**            -0.007          0.073**               0.017      0.139**
                                                 (0.125)      (0.066)     (0.032)      (0.102)        (0.149)           (0.054)           (0.033)          (0.037)               (0.029)    (0.064)
       Import Competition                        -0.107*       -0.054      0.006        -0.067          -0.059           0.012             -0.006          -0.013                -0.029      -0.022
                                                 (0.058)      (0.043)     (0.021)      (0.062)        (0.077)           (0.035)           (0.019)          (0.023)               (0.019)    (0.043)


       Observations                               3,458        3,458       3,458        3,458           3,458            3,458             3,458               3,458             3,458       3,458

       Panel c: services sector                    (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)             (5)              (6)                  (7)              (8)                (9)        (10)
                                                            Education                                               Occupation                                                    Task Intensity
                                                  Low         Medium       High        Goods          Service      Medium-skilled       High-skilled      Managers         Non-Routine     Interactive
                                                                                     Production     Production       professionals      professionals


       NSO                                       -0.029       0.073*      0.119**      -0.100*        -0.151**          -0.003            0.127**          0.136**             0.144***     0.420***
                                                 (0.040)      (0.040)     (0.054)      (0.053)        (0.061)           (0.043)           (0.052)          (0.053)               (0.055)    (0.138)
       Import Competition                        -0.061*     -0.126***     -0.073       0.047           -0.019          -0.044            -0.134**         -0.100*             -0.210***     -0.144
                                                 (0.033)      (0.034)     (0.045)      (0.049)        (0.062)           (0.043)           (0.054)          (0.055)               (0.052)    (0.144)
       Observations                               3,984        3,984       3,984        3,984           3,984            3,984             3,984               3,984             3,984       3,984

         Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions include firm fixed effects and industry trends. Firm clustered standard errors in parentheses.




Table 20: IV Estimates, The Effect of NSO on Firm Performance Controlling for Import
Competition
                               Panel a: complete sample                     (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)
                                                                         Employees    Productivity     Turnover    Total value          R&D          Services          Goods
                                                                                                                     of assets       Expenditure     Exports          Exports
                               NSO                                         0.008          -0.009        0.100***     0.158***           0.234        0.590***          -0.146
                                                                          (0.027)        (0.026)        (0.027)       (0.040)          (0.194)       (0.208)           (0.127)
                               Import Competition                         -0.035          -0.030         -0.027       -0.018           -0.137           0.024          0.120
                                                                          (0.022)        (0.020)        (0.026)       (0.029)          (0.143)       (0.146)           (0.090)


                               Observations                                7,475          6,962          7,318         7,475            7,475           7,475          7,475

                               Panel b: manufacturing firms                 (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)
                                                                         Employees    Productivity     Turnover    Total value          R&D          Services          Goods
                                                                                                                     of assets       Expenditure     Exports          Exports
                               NSO                                       -0.133**         -0.026         0.060         0.078            0.213           0.372          0.007
                                                                          (0.054)        (0.043)        (0.037)       (0.051)          (0.352)       (0.306)           (0.170)
                               Import Competition                         -0.034          -0.003         -0.027        0.018          -0.450**       0.599***          -0.094
                                                                          (0.037)        (0.016)        (0.037)       (0.017)          (0.223)       (0.212)           (0.136)


                               Observations                                3,456          3,274          3,406         3,458            3,458           3,458          3,458

                               Panel c: service firms                       (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)
                                                                         Employees    Productivity     Turnover    Total value          R&D          Services          Goods
                                                                                                                     of assets       Expenditure     Exports          Exports
                               NSO                                        0.111*          -0.009        0.102***     0.159***           0.235        0.598***          -0.146
                                                                          (0.057)        (0.026)        (0.028)       (0.041)          (0.196)       (0.210)           (0.128)
                               Import Competition                        -0.123**         -0.030         -0.026       -0.018           -0.138           0.022          0.123
                                                                          (0.048)        (0.020)        (0.027)       (0.029)          (0.144)       (0.147)           (0.091)


                               Observations                                3,984          6,962          7,324         7,481            7,481           7,481          7,481

                                  Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions include firm fixed effects and industry trends. Firm clustered standard
                                  errors in parentheses.




                                                                                                   37
Table 21: IV Estimates, NSO Effect on Employment by Education, Occupation and
Task Intensity Excluding Crisis Period
    Panel a: all firms                 (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)               (5)                (6)               (7)            (8)             (9)          (10)
                                                Education                                                     Occupation                                            Task Intensity
                                       Low       Medium        High         Goods             Service         Medium-skilled     High-skilled    Managers       Non-Routine   Interactive
                                                                          Production       Production          professionals     professionals


    NSO                             -0.083***     0.043*     0.086***      -0.086**          -0.196***            0.011            0.094***      0.213***        0.121***     -0.075***
                                     (0.032)      (0.024)     (0.024)      (0.035)            (0.048)            (0.024)           (0.026)        (0.052)         (0.030)      (0.024)


    Observations                      4,765        4,765       4,765        4,765              4,765              4,765             4,765         4,765            4,765        4,765

    Panel b: services sector           (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)               (5)                (6)               (7)            (8)             (9)          (10)
                                                Education                                                     Occupation                                            Task Intensity
                                       Low       Medium        High         Goods             Service         Medium-skilled     High-skilled    Managers       Non-Routine   Interactive
                                                                          Production       Production          professionals     professionals


    NSO                              -0.254**     -0.072      -0.011       -0.179**          -0.365***           -0.092**           0.017        0.213**          0.060*      -0.143***
                                     (0.103)      (0.051)     (0.026)      (0.087)            (0.132)            (0.045)           (0.030)        (0.087)         (0.033)      (0.053)


    Observations                      2,221        2,221       2,221        2,221              2,221              2,221             2,221         2,221            2,221        2,221

    Panel c: services sector           (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)               (5)                (6)               (7)            (8)             (9)          (10)
                                                Education                                                     Occupation                                            Task Intensity
                                       Low       Medium        High         Goods             Service         Medium-skilled     High-skilled    Managers       Non-Routine   Interactive
                                                                          Production       Production          professionals     professionals


    NSO                               0.003      0.101**     0.155**       -0.106**          -0.114**             0.053            0.129***      0.233***        0.136***       -0.015
                                     (0.030)      (0.043)     (0.067)      (0.046)            (0.045)            (0.036)           (0.045)        (0.083)         (0.045)      (0.027)
    Observations                      2,516        2,516       2,516        2,516              2,516              2,516             2,516         2,516            2,516        2,516

      Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions include firm fixed effects and industry trends. Firm clustered standard errors in parentheses.




Table 22: IV Estimates, The Effect of NSO on Firm Performance Excluding Crisis
Period
                   Panel a: complete sample                       (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)            (6)        (7)
                                                              Employees       Productivity        Turnover         Total value          R&D          Services       Goods
                                                                                                                     of assets      Expenditure      Exports       Exports
                   NSO                                          0.056**             0.024             0.138***       0.129***           0.015         -0.107       -0.025**
                                                                (0.025)          (0.027)              (0.031)         (0.030)          (0.146)       (0.121)       (0.011)
                   Observations                                  4,771              4,483              4,705             4,771          4,771         4,771         4,771

                   Panel b: manufacturing firms                   (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)            (6)        (7)
                                                              Employees       Productivity        Turnover         Total value          R&D          Services       Goods
                                                                                                                     of assets      Expenditure      Exports       Exports
                   NSO                                          -0.082*             0.054             0.134**        0.067**           -0.155         -0.209       -0.049*
                                                                (0.048)          (0.041)              (0.052)         (0.032)          (0.274)       (0.278)       (0.027)
                   Observations                                  2,221              2,127              2,204             2,221          2,221         2,221         2,221

                   Panel c: service firms                         (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)            (6)        (7)
                                                              Employees       Productivity        Turnover         Total value          R&D          Services       Goods
                                                                                                                     of assets      Expenditure      Exports       Exports
                   NSO                                         0.073***             -0.051            0.150***       0.144***           0.124         -0.091       -0.019*
                                                                (0.028)          (0.058)              (0.046)         (0.046)          (0.184)       (0.116)       (0.011)
                   Observations                                  2,512              2,322              2,465             2,516          2,516         2,516         2,516

                     Note: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. All regressions include firm fixed effects and industry trends. Firm clustered standard
                     errors in parentheses.




                                                                                             38
