                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         POVERTY, SEASONAL SCARCITY AND EXCHANGE ASYMMETRIES

                                         Dietmar Fehr
                                         Günther Fink
                                         Kelsey Jack

                                      Working Paper 26357
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26357


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




We are indebted to A. Patrick Behrer for excellent research assistance as well as Rachel
Levenson for the overall project management and help throughout the study. We thank Leandro
Carvalho, Supreet Kaur, Karen Macours, Simon Quinn, Frank Schilbach, and audience members
at numerous seminars and workshops for constructive comments. Fieldwork was supported by
Growth and Labor Markets in Low Income Countries (GLM-LIC), the International Growth
Centre and an anonymous donor. Dietmar Fehr is grateful for financial support from the German
Research Foundation (DFG) through the CRC 649 "Economic Risk". This study is registered in
the AEA RCT Registry with the identification number AEARCTR-0001111. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Dietmar Fehr, Günther Fink, and Kelsey Jack. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Poverty, Seasonal Scarcity and Exchange Asymmetries
Dietmar Fehr, Günther Fink, and Kelsey Jack
NBER Working Paper No. 26357
October 2019
JEL No. D14,D90,G51

                                           ABSTRACT

A growing literature associates poverty with biases in decision-making. We investigate this link
in a sample of over 3,000 small-scale farmers in Zambia, who participated in a series of
experiments involving the opportunity to exchange randomly assigned household items for
alternative items of similar value. Analyzing a total of 5,842 trading decisions over a range of
household items, we show that exchange asymmetries are sizable and remarkably robust across
items and experimental procedures. Using cross sectional, seasonal and randomized variation in
financial resource availability, we show that exchange asymmetries decrease in magnitude when
subjects are more constrained. Consistent with the interpretation that financial constraints
increase decision stakes, we also show that trading probabilities increase when the value of the
items involved is exogenously increased.

Dietmar Fehr                                      Kelsey Jack
University of Heidelberg                          University of California, Santa Barbara
Bergheimer Str 58                                 2400 Bren Hall
Heidelberg 69115                                  Santa Barbara, CA 93106-5131
Germany                                           and NBER
dietmar.fehr@awi.uni-heidelberg.de                kelseyjack@ucsb.edu

Günther Fink
Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute
and University of Basel
Socinstrasse 57
Basel CH-4051
Switzerland
guenther.fink@swisstph.ch




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
http://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1111
1     Introduction

A substantial body of evidence documents that individual decision-making is prone to behavioral
biases and deviations from normative rationality (e.g., Camerer et al., 2003; DellaVigna, 2009),
and that such decision biases may be greater among the poor (e.g., Tanaka et al., 2010; Spears,
2011; Bartos et al., 2018). The conceptual relationship between poverty and decision-making is
not obvious. While systematic decision biases contribute to poverty in the long run, scarce finan-
cial resources make the same decisions more consequential. This may help focus attention and
minimize mistakes (Goldin and Homonoff, 2013; Shah et al., 2015; Gabaix, 2019). Rational inatten-
tion models would thus predict decision quality to improve with poverty (Sims, 2003; Ma´
                                                                                       ckowiak
et al., 2018).1 On the other hand, a lack of financial or other liquid resources (which we refer to
as scarcity or resource constraints) may also interfere with cognitive function if an increased fo-
cus on financial matters absorbs cognitive bandwidth (Mani et al., 2013; Mullainathan and Shafir,
2013). A recent and separate literature suggests that cognitive function is related to preference
anomalies, in particular to small-stakes risk aversion and impatient behavior (e.g., Burks et al.,
2009; Oechssler et al., 2009; Dohmen et al., 2010; Benjamin et al., 2013). However, evidence of a
causal effect of poverty on decision-making is largely missing (Kremer et al., 2019).
          This paper presents field evidence on the impact of scarcity on the most basic economic
decision: the exchange of goods. A voluminous literature documents that individuals tend to
place greater value on goods they own than on identical goods they do not own. This gap be-
tween willingness to pay and willingness to accept is commonly referred to as the "endowment
effect."2 It is taken as canonical evidence for loss aversion and implies that preferences depend
on endowments, which violates one of the central axioms of neoclassical economics (see Ericson
and Fuster, 2014, for a review of the recent literature). Besides these fundamental implications,
the endowment effect also has potentially far-reaching implications for economic development.
If people hesitate to give up their existing assets, they may trade too little and forego profitable
investments.3
    1 Building on the premise that attention is typically a scarce resource, theories of rational inattention, pioneered by
Sims (2003), posit that decision makers choose how much attention to pay to a decision depending on its importance.
Arguably, the same decision is higher stakes, relative to income, for a poorer household than a richer household, and
thus receives more attention.
    2 The term "endowment effect" was introduced by Thaler (1980). However, some critics have argued against the use

of this term as it already suggests an interpretation of the observed anomaly (e.g., Plott and Zeiler, 2005, 2007). While
we will primarily use the term "exchange asymmetries" to describe the findings in our experiment, we will also use
the endowment effect terminology in reference to the broad literature.
    3 Unrealized investment opportunities are common in many developing countries despite apparently high returns




                                                            1
         While a large literature has investigated the endowment effect in high-income settings with
items of low value, field evidence from decisions involving more valuable items remains limited.
To gather such evidence and to investigate the relationship between scarcity and decision-making,
we conducted a series of decision experiments with 3,059 small-scale farmers in rural Zambia. In
5,842 trading decisions observed over 14 months, we first show that exchange asymmetries are
remarkably large and robust in this low-income setting. We then take advantage of both natu-
ral and experimental variation in the resource constraints faced by households in our setting to
identify their impact on decision-making. We find that scarcity improves the quality of decision-
making overall, and also show that trades over higher value items move trading behavior closer
to standard economic predictions.
         Our data collection was embedded in an ongoing randomized controlled trial on seasonal
resource constraints and labor supply that involved repeated surveys over multiple years (see
Fink, Jack, and Masiye, 2018). As part of the ongoing surveys, households received a small item
as compensation for their time. We intervened in this standard procedure by randomly endowing
participants with one of two equally-valued items midway through a survey. Items were com-
mon household necessities worth about 1/5th of the daily agricultural wage. At the end of the
survey, surveyors offered participants the opportunity to trade the endowed item for the alter-
native item. Because we randomly assigned the initial item and trading costs were near zero,
neoclassical theory predicts that, for any distribution of preferences, half of participants received
their less preferred item, and should thus have traded the item received for their preferred item.4
         We find strong and robust evidence for the existence of exchange asymmetries in our set-
ting. On average, across all item pairs, some of which involved cash, only 34 percent of partici-
pants traded the endowed item. We test an extensive range of experimental procedures, follow-
ing Plott and Zeiler (2007), to measure the extent to which these large exchange asymmetries are
driven by features of the design, including the assignment procedure, participants' attachment to
the endowed item and uncertainty regarding future trading opportunities, as well as social norms
to capital (e.g., Banerjee and Duflo, 2005; Duflo et al., 2011; Bandiera et al., 2017; Burke et al., 2018). While this empirical
observation is beyond the scope of traditional neo-classical models, it may be explained by a number of market frictions
and failures, or by behavioral anomalies such as present bias and loss aversion (Kremer et al., 2019).
    4 Knetsch (1989) reports strong evidence of an exchange asymmetry for coffee mugs and chocolate bars from a lab

experiment with students. About 89 percent of subjects kept their assigned mug, while only 10 percent of students
traded their assigned chocolate bar for the mug. Most subsequent experimental evidence relies either on the described
exchange paradigm (Knetsch, 1989) or the valuation paradigm (Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler, 1991). In the valu-
ation paradigm, individuals are randomly assigned the role of buyers or seller and have to state their willingness to
pay (WTP) or their willingness to accept (WTA) for an item. A higher WTA than WTP is taken as evidence for the
endowment effect or WTP-WTA gap.



                                                               2
and experimenter demand. None of the procedural variations had a statistically or economically
significant impact on the observed exchange asymmetries in this setting.
            To examine the relationship between resource availability and decision-making, we ex-
plore three sources of variation: (1) we exploit cross-sectional variation in wealth at baseline, (2)
we compare decision-making over one and a half agricultural cycles, measuring outcomes after
the 2014 harvest, before the 2015 harvest ("hungry season") and after the 2015 harvest,5 and (3)
we leverage random variation in the disbursement of small consumption loans before the 2015
harvest. All three sources of variation are associated with meaningful variation in direct proxies
for the availability of liquid resources, such as consumption and grain stocks.
            With all three sources of variation, we show that greater resource constraints are associated
with a higher propensity to trade and therefore smaller exchange asymmetries. First, households
with fewer durable assets at baseline are significantly more likely to trade. Second, we show that
individuals are more likely to trade during the hungry season than after harvest. With a single
rainy season and harvest each year, farming households in Zambia receive most of their annual
income at once, and need to use this income to cover investment and consumption needs over the
following 10-12 months. The result is a pronounced period of scarcity ("hungry season") in the
period leading up to the next harvest. During this time, decision stakes are likely higher because
the marginal utility of consumption is higher and also because it is more difficult for households
to obtain the alternative item or to reverse the experimental decisions in local markets. Conse-
quently, taking one of the two items essentially means giving up the other when resources are
scarce (hungry season), but not when abundant (harvest season). Third, we find that households
are less likely to trade in the weeks following receipt of the consumption loan. Those households
faced a temporary decrease in resource constraints, relative to households that were (randomly)
ineligible for the loan.
            To further investigate mechanisms, we increased the value of the items traded for a subset
of participants. Specifically, we offered these participants a choice between two items worth USD
14 or about 28 percent of monthly household income. In this treatment, the likelihood of trading
increased by about 10 percentage points. Given the recent evidence on poverty-induced cognitive
deficits, we also conducted a range of cognitive assessments with study farmers. Overall, we see
little evidence that variation in cognitive skills or executive function are associated with scarcity
   5 Thisis similar variation to Mani et al. (2013) and Carvalho et al. (2016), though we observe decisions over multiple
harvests or farmer "pay days" and generate separate exogenous variation in experience with the decision over time.




                                                           3
or with the quality of decision-making.6
          Together, these findings indicate that scarcity decreases the magnitude of exchange asym-
metries, both within participant across agricultural seasons and across participants within a sea-
son. The likelihood of trading the endowed item increases by roughly 10 percentage points dur-
ing the hungry season compared to the post-harvest period, reducing the exchange asymmetry
by more than 50 percent, while access to short-term resources through the larger RCT increases
exchange asymmetries by almost the same magnitude (10 percentage points). Strikingly, these
reductions in the magnitude of the exchange asymmetry match the observed reduction in ex-
change asymmetries in our "high value" treatment, which ­ taken literally ­ implies that going
from a time of abundance at harvest to a time of scarcity during the hungry season is equivalent
to a forty-fold increase in the value of the exchange items. Overall, our results highlight a strong
propensity to hold on to endowed items even in settings where people are poor, on average. This
propensity declines substantially when resources are relatively more scarce and when the value
of the goods involved is high, suggesting that exchange asymmetries are decreasing in decision
stakes, a pattern that appears consistent with models of rational inattention.
          Our results make three contributions to the literature at the cross-roads of behavioral and
development economics. First, we contribute to an emerging literature on the psychology of the
poor (e.g., Duflo, 2006; Mullainathan, 2007; Schilbach et al., 2016; Dean et al., 2017; Kremer et al.,
2019). Previous studies suggest that poverty may have a negative causal effect on decision-making
through a number of pathways, including that financial concerns absorb the cognitive bandwidth
needed for other decisions (Shah et al., 2012; Mani et al., 2013; Mullainathan and Shafir, 2013), that
increased prevalence of stress and depression may interfere with decision-making or increase bi-
ases (Haushofer and Fehr, 2014; Haushofer and Shapiro, 2016), or that the living conditions of the
poor may contribute to worse decision-making (Dean, 2019; Lichand and Mani, 2019; Schilbach,
2019). We extend this literature by presenting evidence on common trading decisions that are
marked by systematic deviations from normative behavior despite their immediate payoff, and
by employing a credible research design that relies on repeated observations and a combination
of natural and exogenous sources of variation in resource scarcity. To date, few papers have traced
effects from exogenous variation in scarcity through to real stakes decisions.7 We fill that gap and
   6 We implement a standard set of tests from cognitive psychology in a sub-sample of participants in each survey
round. We see limited correlation between cognitive function and either scarcity or exchange asymmetries; in a simple
measure of attention, we observe that greater attention is associated with a higher trading probability. More nuanced
measures of fluid intelligence or executive function, on the other hand, are uncorrelated with trading probabilities.
   7 Kaur et al. (2019) show a link between scarcity and productivity by varying the timing of causal wage payments in




                                                          4
provide novel evidence suggesting that resource constraints may improve decision-making in a
decision associated with one of the most well-studied behavioral anomalies. Past research sug-
gests that the greatest costs from taxing cognitive bandwidth arise in decisions with longer term
consequences, involving risk or real effort (Alonso et al., 2013; Mullainathan and Shafir, 2013).
Our measure of decision-making represents a salient trade-off between items of immediate and
considerable value, and participants may allocate substantial cognitive resources to the decision
as a result (see Shah et al. (2015) and Lichand and Mani (2019) for related evidence using hypo-
thetical trade-offs). That said, we find large and robust deviations from rational behavior in the
decision we study, that are reduced but not completely eliminated when resources become more
scarce.
          Second, this paper adds to the ongoing debate about the robustness of behavioral biases in
general (Levitt and List, 2008; Falk and Heckman, 2009; Charness and Fehr, 2015; Camerer, 2015;
Kessler and Vesterlund, 2015), and the endowment effect in particular (Ericson and Fuster, 2014).
Despite a large literature on the endowment effect, there is surprisingly little field evidence, in
particular on transactions that are sufficiently large to have a potentially meaningful impact on
household well-being.8 Perhaps the most influential work on the endowment effect outside of
the lab is a series of experiments at sport cards shows in the United States demonstrating the im-
portance of market experience (List, 2003, 2004). On average, trading rates in this specific market
are very similar in magnitude to our pooled results, though professional dealers are significantly
more likely to trade their assigned baseball memorabilia than non-dealers (List, 2003). Unlike
sport card show attendees, our study sample is relatively homogeneous in their degree of trading
experience and were asked to make decisions about familiar items, diminishing the importance of
experience in our context. We also test whether repeated exposure to our trading decision affects
behavior; it does not. In a setting more similar to ours ­ and to our knowledge the only other ex-
perimental measurement of exchange asymmetries in a low-income setting ­ Apicella et al. (2014)
show that, in a population of hunter-gatherers, participants with more exposure to markets dis-
play a stronger endowment effect than those with less market exposure.9 We find no evidence that
access to outside markets affects trading probabilities, though our study population is relatively
India. They find suggestive evidence that lower productivity among subjects who are not paid until the end of the field
experiment ­ as compared to those who receive half of their wages mid-way through ­ is due to reduced attention.
   8 Taking advantage of more easily accessible online surveys, ?, for example, present evidence on a WTP­WTA dis-

parity for small-stake lottery tickets in a representative US sample.
   9 This finding is potentially consistent with the variation that we observe; households with less market exposure face

a higher value decision because the cost of "undoing" their choice is relatively large (they are less exposed to markets).
This leads them to trade at a higher rate.


                                                            5
homogeneous in their (generally high) familiarity with market exchange.
        Finally, a growing number of field studies in developing countries document real-world
behavior consistent with an endowment effect. For example, Anagol et al. (2018) find that win-
ners of an initial public offering (IPO) in India are more likely to hold on to their shares than
non-winners. Gin´
                e and Goldberg (2017) find that prior savings account holders in Malawi are less
likely to switch to a cheaper account than are new customers, but that experience erodes this "en-
dowment effect". The endowment effect may also explain low take-up rates of certain loan types,
in particular if they are collateralized by existing assets (Carney et al., 2018). These studies suggest,
in line with our findings, that the endowment effect is not just an artifact of (laboratory) experi-
ments, but can have important implications for market transactions as it may hamper investment
activities, technology adoption, and loan take-up. Our results highlight that these consequences
depend on economic circumstances and may be more severe during times of abundance.
        The paper proceeds as follows. We turn next to the context and experimental design. Sec-
tion 3 describes our empirical strategy. Our results on the robustness of the exchange asymmetry
in our setting are described in Section 4 and results on the relationship between scarcity and ex-
change asymmetries in Section 5. Section 6 concludes.



2     Study Setting and Experimental Design

2.1   Study Setting

The study was implemented in Chipata District in Eastern Zambia in 2014 and 2015. Most of the
district's population (456,000 inhabitants as of the 2010 census) lives in rural areas, and most rural
households rely on small-scale farming as their primary source of income. Agriculture is rainfed
and agricultural incomes are low. In 2013, average annual household income was around 3,000
Kwacha, which corresponded to approximately USD 600 at the time. With 5-6 household members
on average, income per capita is substantially less than USD 1 per day. The rainfed nature of
production concentrates income in a single harvest season between May and August, and leads to
a pronounced hungry season in the months leading up to harvest, when many households reduce
consumption due to a lack of food. With early crops typically becoming available in April, food
shortages and hunger usually spike between January and March (Fink, Jack, and Masiye, 2018).




                                                   6
2.2     Experimental Design

The experiments reported here were embedded in household surveys conducted as part of a ran-
domized evaluation of a seasonal loan program (see Fink, Jack, and Masiye (2018) for further
detail on the RCT). As part of the evaluation, households were surveyed up to four times per
year. In the first year of the study, all farmers received a small box of commonly used washing
powder (called "Boom" after a local brand name) as compensation for their time at the end of the
survey. In the second year of the study, rather than providing Boom to all households, we imple-
mented a modified version of the Knetsch (1989) exchange paradigm with a subset of households
in each household survey. We conducted the decision experiments between July 2014 and Septem-
ber 2015 with a total of 3,059 households across 175 villages. Households participated between
one and three times in these experiments, resulting in 5,842 individual decisions, and received the
standard compensation (Boom) otherwise.


2.2.1   Experimental Procedures

All household surveys were conducted by trained interviewers with adult household represen-
tatives ­ typically the male or female head of household ­ in their homes, and took between one
and two hours.10 In our baseline experimental procedure (standard assignment), the interviewer
presented two items with roughly equal value to the participant halfway through the survey and
then handed over one of the two items. At the end of the survey, the interviewer showed the non-
assigned item again and asked the participant whether he or she wanted to trade the assigned
item for the other item.11 After recording the decisions and completing trades (if respondents de-
cided to trade), participants were asked a few questions related to the exchange experiment. All
surveys were done using electronic survey devices (tablets), which automatically recorded survey
length and the time between the initial item assignment and the trading opportunity. Note that
transaction costs were minimal in our setting as participants had to answer the trading question
in any case and interviewers immediately completed trades (if desired by participants).
            To identify the extent to which observed exchange asymmetries are driven by procedural
details, we follow the laboratory literature, most notably Plott and Zeiler (2007), and consider
several variants on the baseline procedure described above. First, we varied the method of item
  10 Note that survey respondents sometimes changed across survey rounds, and also included other adult household
members. We use both the respondent ID and the household ID to examine both within-household and within-subject
variation in decision-making over time.
  11 See appendix for the exact wording of all procedures.




                                                       7
assignment. Specifically, we either implemented the randomization of items directly through the
electronic survey devices (standard assignment) or randomized items in front of respondents (lottery
assignment), i.e., either through a coin-flip or by respondents drawing a button out of a bag.12 The
main goal of the lottery assignment is to minimize the risk of possible inference about the relative
valuation of items or signaling by the experimenter associated with the standard assignment.13
          Second, we implemented three sub-procedures designed to reduce participants' attach-
ment to the assigned item: (i) we shortened the time between the endowment of items and the
trading decision, with some participants receiving the endowment only minutes before the trad-
ing opportunity (timing procedure), (ii) we used vouchers redeemable for the specific item, rather
than handing over the item itself (voucher procedure), and (iii) we directly manipulated partici-
pants' expectations about subsequent trading by informing them that they would have an oppor-
tunity to trade at the end of the survey (expectations procedure).
          Third, to address possible experimenter demand effects and concerns that study partic-
ipants would perceive trading as impolite or as causing inconvenience or additional work for
surveyors, we varied the wording when presented with the trading opportunity (wording proce-
dure). Rather than offering the possibility of trading at the end of the interview, participants were
asked to trade the item as an implicit favor to interviewers ("would you be willing...").14
          Our default item pair, implemented across all survey rounds and all procedures consisted
of a package (250g) of washing powder ("Boom") and a package (500g) of table salt (Boom ­
Salt). Both items are household staples with a local price of 3-3.5 Kwacha (USD 0.50), which
corresponded to about one fifth of a typical daily wage at the time of the experiment. We varied the
item pairs in the exchange experiment to test robustness to alternative items. First, we provided
cash of similar value (3.5 Kwacha) as an alternative to Boom (Boom ­ Cash). Second, we offered
durable goods (a mug and a serving spoon; Cup ­ Spoon). Third, we increased the value of the
item pair to over 20 times the value of the default pair, i.e., we used a solar lamp and 80 Kwacha in
cash (Solar ­ Cash). In addition to these item-pair variants, we randomly selected households in
each round for a choice condition, where they could simply pick their preferred item at the end of
the interview. This allows us to measure item- and season-specific preferences for all item pairs.
  12 We  switched from the coin flip to the button roughly 20 percent of the way through round 1, to reduce ambiguity
around the outcome.
  13 For example, if the randomization is non-transparent, respondents might incorrectly infer that the assigned item is

more valuable than the alternative item making them reluctant to trade. Similarly, they may perceive the assigned item
as a gift from the interviewer or researchers in which case trading items may violate norms or social customs.
  14 The idea here is similar to a recently proposed approach to bound experimenter demand by De Quidt et al. (2018),

which deliberately introduces demand effects to measure their impact on experimental outcomes.


                                                           8
Table 1 summarizes all randomly assigned experimental features, and the number of observations
in each, by survey round.


2.2.2     Implementation and Randomization

To understand the impact of the external environment on the robustness of exchange asymmetries,
we conducted the experiments over the complete 2014-2015 agricultural cycle. More precisely, we
ran our exchange experiments after the 2014 harvest when resources were relatively abundant,
during the hungry season 2015, when resources were scarce, and then again after the 2015 har-
vest. To distinguish effects driven by the external environment from learning and priming effects,
we used a randomly assigned phase-in design that generated random variation in participant ex-
perience over the three survey rounds. Households not part of the exchange experiment sample
continued receiving the default compensation of Boom for completing the survey. Randomiza-
tion of item pairs was done at the village level, while the randomization of specific experimental
procedures was done at the household level.15
Experiment round 1 (harvest season 2014): The first round took place after harvest in 2014, and
ran from July through September. We randomly selected 105 villages and 1,513 households, cov-
ering approximately 58 percent of the total study population, to participate in the experiments. In
experiment round 1, we used both the standard and lottery assignment for endowing the item and
varied the item pair (Boom ­ Salt and Cup ­ Spoon). In addition, we assigned a small sub-sample
(n=259, household level randomization) to the choice condition.
Experiment round 2 (hungry season 2015): The second round of experiments took place during
the hungry season, from January to March 2015, with a random subset of households across all
175 study villages (with approximately 10 households per selected village). In total, 1,367 house-
holds participated in the experiments, of which we assigned 143 households to the choice condition
and the remaining households to the exchange experiment. About 40 percent of the households
sampled in the second round of experiments also participated in round 1.
          In experiment round 2, villages were assigned to the Boom ­ Salt or Boom ­ Cash item
pair. Again, we randomly assigned households to the standard assignment or the lottery assignment,
with a subset of each (n = 236) given the wording procedure described above. In addition, we
elicited respondents' (hypothetical) willingness to pay (WTP) and willingness to accept (WTA)
  15 We used block randomization to assign households to procedures and villages to item pairs. Blocks were con-
structed based on the RCT loan treatment, previous round exchange experience, and previous round item pairs.



                                                       9
in the Boom ­ Cash item pair after they made their decision (see Appendix section A.2 for more
details).
Experiment round 3 (harvest season 2015): We conducted the third round of experiments after
the 2015 harvest between July and September 2015 with all households in the sample (N=2,962
households). We used the same item pairs as in round 2 and added the high-value Solar ­ Cash
pair. In addition, we dropped the standard assignment and used only the lottery assignment, varying
timing, voucher and expectations procedures at the household level as described in Section 2.2.1
above. We implemented the high-value Solar ­ Cash item pair with 400 participants (33 of whom
were in the choice condition) in 25 villages. The households in this treatment received the lottery
assignment, with a sub-group given the timing and voucher procedures (n=198). As in round 2, we
also elicited WTP/WTA from households that were randomized to the Boom ­ Cash and Solar ­
Cash item pairs.



3    Empirical strategy

In this section, we describe our approach to estimation and our identifying assumptions. Given
the random assignment of items, testing for exchange asymmetries is relatively straightforward:
for any distribution of preferences, a null hypothesis of no exchange asymmetry predicts that 50
percent of the sample will receive their less preferred item and thus trade the endowed item for
their preferred one. For any item pair, we can estimate the probability of trading and test whether
                          ^ is statistically different from 0.5:
the estimated probability p


                                          ^ (trade) - 0.5 = 0.
                                          p                                                     (1)

        To test whether trading probabilities depend on details of the experimental procedure or
the value of the items involved, we estimate the following linear probability model:


                                  p(trade) =  +  P +  I + X  +                                  (2)

where, in the absence of controls,  is the trading probability of our default item pair (Boom ­
Salt) and default procedure (standard assignment), P is a vector of indicator variables capturing
the procedural variations described above, and I is a vector of indicator variables for alternative
item pairs.  and  are coefficient vectors that capture the estimated changes in the probability


                                                  10
of trading with alternative procedures and item pairs, respectively. X is a vector of additional
household and participant controls, such as gender, age, household composition, wealth, and
harvest value.
           To test for differences in trading asymmetries within an item-pair (A, B), we estimate:


                                     Pr(endA) =  + startAit +      it                                (3)

where endA equals one if the participant ended the procedure with item A and startA equals one
if the participant was randomly assigned item A at the start of the procedure.  is a measure of
the "endowment effect," i.e. the estimated increase in the probability that the participants ends up
with item A when the item was initially assigned. In the absence of controls,  is the likelihood of
ending up with item A among those who start with item B, i.e., the probability of trading item B for
item A. In some specifications, we add controls, in which case  becomes the probability of ending
up with item A among individuals with all covariates equal to the reference category or value.
We also estimate equation (3) in restricted subsamples of individuals who either had free choice
(choice condition) or were assigned item A initially. In these regressions,  can be interpreted as
the additional probability of ending up with an item relative to what the choice condition would
predict.
           We take advantage of the timing of the surveys to test how seasonal variation in scarcity
affects trading probabilities, conditional on experience. Specifically, we estimate:


                                   p(trade) =  +  N +  R + X  +                                      (4)

where N are indicators for the number of times the respondent participated in a trading decision
prior to the current decision, and R are indicators for experimental rounds to capture seasonal
effects.
           In some specifications, we add controls for survey round, participant experience, proce-
dures, item pairs and/or household or respondent characteristics. We cluster standard errors at
the village level throughout, and include household or respondent fixed effects in some analysis.
           To test the exogeneity of the experimental conditions, we regress household controls on
indicators for the survey rounds, item pairs and experimental procedures, and report the results
in Appendix Tables A.1, A.2 and A.3, respectively. The t-statistics in parentheses reflect the dif-
ference in means between each column and the base group. The randomly assigned item pairs


                                                   11
and experimental procedures are balanced and show only three t-statistics above 1.96 out of 100
individual tests. The sample is also balanced across rounds, though the individual-level charac-
teristics ­ respondent gender and age ­ show some differential selection in the hungry season,
though household characteristics remain balanced.



4     Results: Exchange asymmetries

We begin by documenting the extent and robustness of exchange asymmetries in our sample. Our
first test comes from estimating equation (1) in the pooled sample. The overall likelihood that
a participant traded the item that they started with is 0.34, which rejects the null hypothesis of
p(trade) = 0.5, with a p-value < 0.0001. Interestingly, the magnitude of the pooled trading rate
is similar to the pooled results of other field studies (e.g., List, 2003, 2004). These pooled results
mask, however, potential heterogeneity in our results across items, experimental procedures, and
participant experience with the trading procedure. In the remainder of this section, we examine
each of these factors in more detail. We focus on the results from our "standard value" item pairs
(Boom ­ Salt, Boom ­ Cash and Cup ­ Spoon), and save discussion of the results on the high value
item pair (Solar ­ Cash) for Section 5, where we discuss mechanisms.


4.1   Robustness across and within item-pairs

Table 2 provides an overview of results by item pair. The first column presents the results from the
choice condition, which directly measures participants' relative preferences for each item. For each
item pair, we observe variation in preferences across the items (if all were indifferent, we would
expect roughly 50 percent to choose each item). Participants had the most imbalanced preferences
in the cup vs. spoon treatment, with three quarters of participants preferring a cup over a spoon
(despite similar market value). Preferences were less stark for the other two standard-value item
pairs. For each item pair, we also tabulate the number of participants starting and ending with
each item. For example, in the Boom ­ Salt pair, we observe that a majority of participants leave
our experiment with Boom (about 60 percent). Finally, the table also shows the overall likelihood
that participants traded the item they started with and a t-test for whether the trading probability
is different than 0.5. In all pairs the likelihood of trading is significantly below 0.5.
        Panel A of Table 3 shows the results from estimating equation (2) where the exogenous
variables of interest are item pairs. We focus on the results for our three standard-value item


                                                   12
pairs, i.e., Boom ­ Salt, Cup ­ Spoon, and Boom ­ Cash. Column 1 includes no controls. Each
estimated coefficient is therefore the estimated effect on the likelihood of trading relative to the
trading probability in Boom ­ Salt. To adjust for the fact that different item pairs were offered
during the three seasons (for example, Boom ­ Salt was offered in all experiment rounds, while
Boom ­ Cash was offered only in the hungry season and last harvest season, i.e., rounds 2 and
3), we add a round indicator to the specification, so that the reference category now becomes the
Boom ­ Salt item pair in the first round (harvest season 2014). There is little difference in trading
rates between item pairs with the addition of round controls, or other covariates (columns 2-4).
       We also analyze the directionality of trade within item pair, following estimating equation
(3). The results are displayed in Figure 1, which shows the probability of participants ending
up with item A when it is (randomly) assigned relative to the probability of choosing item A
in the choice condition (always with respect to the same item B). We see that the effect of initial
assignment is similar across the three standard value item pairs with an average increase in the
probability of ending up with the assigned item of 15-20 percentage points compared to the choice
condition. Appendix Table A.4 summarizes the regression results underlying this figure.
       All of the items in the experiment are common household necessities that many house-
holds purchase in the market on a regular basis. If all items are inframarginal, i.e., all households
would have purchased them anyway, then even a very small friction associated with trading could
generate large results. We address this concern in two ways. First, we include the Cup ­ Spoon
item pair, which consists of household durables, making it less likely that households would all
be in need of both items and therefore indifferent. We observe the largest exchange asymmetry
for this item pair. Second, we asked questions about household stock of our experimental items
(buried in a longer list of household items) in rounds 1 and 3 of the survey. When regressing the
probability of trading on the stock of the endowed item in the household (in logs), we observe that
trading decisions reflect downward sloping demand. That is, a one percent increase in the stock
of the endowed item in the home leads to about a 1.4 to 2 percent increase in the likelihood of
trading (see Appendix Table A.5). Subjects do, therefore, incorporate decreasing marginal returns
from the items into their trading decisions, which is also inconsistent with inframarginal goods
driving the exchange asymmetry.




                                                 13
4.2   Robustness to experimental procedures and experimenter demand effects

Prior work suggests that exchange asymmetries may be an artifact of experimental procedures
that prevent participants from trading (see, for example, Plott and Zeiler 2005, 2007).16 To ad-
dress this concern, we implemented several variations of our standard experimental procedures
as described in Section 2.2.1. Panel B of Table 3 presents results from estimating equation (2),
with experimental procedures on the righthand side. We estimate differences in trading probabil-
ities relative to the standard assignment procedure, i.e., the not-transparent randomization of initial
items. Column 1 of Table 3 includes no controls. In columns 2-4, we add controls to the model,
including round effects, household characteristics, and item pair indicators.
         We find no evidence that the assignment method (lottery vs. standard assignment) changes
behavior. The coefficient estimates are close to zero in all specifications. Recall that, to reduce
potential attachment to the assigned object over time, we manipulated the time of ownership by
reducing the time span between initial assignment and the trading opportunity from approxi-
mately 60 minutes to 5 minutes (timing procedure) and varied physical proximity of the assigned
item by handing over vouchers (that could be exchanged for the assigned or alternative item at the
end of the survey) rather than the actual items at the time of assignment (voucher procedure). We
find no indication of an increase in trading with shorter time spans between initial assignment and
the trading opportunity, or when participants get a voucher instead of the actual item. When we
combine both procedures (voucher and timing procedure) we see a significant 6.5 percentage point
increase in trading probabilities in column 1, which, however, becomes smaller and statistically
insignificant when we control for experiment round in columns 2-4.
         Next, we investigate the possibility that participants refuse to trade their assigned item
because of social norms or experimenter demand effects. A first indication that social norms (and
demand effects) play little role in explaining the results is the lack of a measurable effect of the
lottery assignment, which transparently randomized the item assignment in front of participants,
and thus should have reduced demand effects relative to the standard assignment procedure. To
more directly test for the relevance of social norms and experimenter demand effects, we imple-
mented an experimental treatment where we explicitly asked, rather than offered, respondent to
trade their assigned item (wording procedure). If participants refused to trade because of polite-
ness, we would expect this inverted script to increase trading probabilities. As shown in Panel B
  16 Thereis also debate about whether the WTP­WTA disparity is the result of experimental elicitation procedures
(Knetsch and Wong, 2009; Isoni et al., 2011; Cason and Plott, 2014; Bartling et al., 2015; Fehr et al., 2015).



                                                       14
of Table 3, this change in wording had no measurable effect on trading probabilities.
           As an additional test of a (social) experimenter demand effect, we implemented an adapted
version of the Marlow-Crowne scale from social psychology (Marlow and Crowne, 1961) to mea-
sure socially appropriate behavior.17 A higher score on this social desirability scale is indicative of
a greater desire to appear socially appropriate. We test whether this score is positively associated
with trading behavior. As Appendix Table A.6 shows, we find no evidence that socially desirable
reporting influences decision-making in our setting.


4.3   Robustness to experience and expectations

Participants may be reluctant to trade if they lack experience with similar trading situations (see
e.g., List, 2003; Engelmann and Hollard, 2010). The longitudinal nature of our data collection,
which randomly phased in households, allows us to directly examine the effect of experience.
To measure the impact of experience on trading, we analyze trading decisions as a function of
previous trade experience, controlling for the item pair, experimental procedures and household
controls. The results are shown in Appendix Figure A.1, which is restricted to the third round
of data collection, when we observe households randomly selected for zero, one and two prior
trading experiences. Experience appears to play a negligible role in improving decision-making,
at least over the intervals at which our data collection was spaced and the number of repeated
decisions that we observe.
           The literature has also highlighted expectations as potential explanation for exchange asym-
metries. Arguably, participants with more experience with our experiment may expect this trading
opportunity with a higher probability than less experienced or inexperienced participants. If such
expectations shape their reference point, we would observe more trading among experienced par-
ticipants (Koszegi and Rabin, 2006). To more directly test the importance of participants' priors
regarding future trading opportunities, we manipulated participants' expectations about future
trading (expectations procedure). Explicitly informing participants about a possible trade at the
end of the interview should have reduced the uncertainty about subsequent trading and shifted
potential reference points. The coefficient estimate for our expectations procedure shown in Panel
B of Table 3 is close to zero, suggesting that trading probabilities are not affected by the perceived
likelihood of subsequent trades.
  17 TheMarlow-Crowne module includes a series of questions that can be answered in a socially appropriate or inap-
propriate way, such as "Are you always courteous, even to people who are disagreeable?"



                                                        15
5     Results: Scarcity

Our results up to this point show evidence for substantial exchange asymmetries in our sample of
poor, rural households, which are robust to changes in experimental procedures or participants'
experience. This implies that exchange asymmetries are a relevant decision bias in our study pop-
ulation, and therefore a relevant setting for investigating how these asymmetries are affected by
variation in resource constraints within this sample. We organize our results around three sources
of variation in resource scarcity, imposing increasingly strict (exogeneity) requirements on the
source of variation. For each source of variation, we first show the empirical relationship between
the scarcity measure and the level of consumption to establish that these sources of variation do,
in fact, affect resource availability. Next, we test how the three scarcity measures relate to trading
probabilities. Finally, we shed some light on possible mechanisms for our result by investigating
behavior in the high-value decision treatment, the role of cognition in the relationship between
scarcity and decision-making, and variation in market access.


5.1   Cross sectional variation in wealth

As a first indication of the correlation between scarcity and decision-making, we examine cross-
sectional heterogeneity in asset ownership at baseline. As shown in Appendix Figure A.2, asset
ownership is directly linked to consumption, with wealthier households significantly less likely to
skip meals during the hungry season. Next, we plot the baseline ownership of durable goods as
a proxy for wealth against the average probability of trading, controlling for the item pair, exper-
imental conditions and household and individual controls, in Figure A.3. The negative gradient
indicates more trading in poorer households, though the confidence intervals are large (p-value
on the difference between the first and fifth quintile is 0.12). Since numerous other factors corre-
lated with wealth may affect trading behavior, we turn to more plausibly exogenous sources of
variation in the value of the traded item and participants' available resources below.


5.2   Seasonal variation in wealth and income

As described above, pronounced seasonality in income, savings and consumption is one of the
most salient features of the study setting, and thus provides a natural source of variation that we
use to analyze how scarcity shapes trading asymmetries. The second round of our experiment
coincided with the hungry season, while the other two rounds took place in times of relative


                                                 16
abundance, immediately following harvest. In our sample, the average cash savings during the
hungry season is around 100 Kwacha, or 17 USD, while the average cash savings at harvest is over
600 Kwacha. The share of households in our sample reporting food shortages increases from less
than 10 percent around harvest time to over 60 percent in the hungry season (Appendix Figure
A.2). We exploit this variation in seasonal resource availability and compare trading decision
during the hungry season with decisions in two harvest seasons, conditional on random variation
in participant experience.
          Figure 2 and Table 4 show the estimated marginal effect of the season on trading probabil-
ities. As shown in the Figure, around 30 percent of participants make trades in the 2014 harvest
season. During the hungry season, the likelihood of trading increases by between 9 and 14 per-
centage points (Table 4). The point estimate is largest in columns 5 and 6, which include individual
fixed effects and limit the sample to inexperienced respondents, respectively. Importantly, the ef-
fect is specific to the hungry season: the trading probability in the following harvest season are
insignificantly different from those in the first harvest season (columns 4-6). At the risk of over-
interpreting the data, we note that the slightly higher trading rates in the 2015 harvest season are
consistent with a greater likelihood of trading following lower yields during the 2015 harvest (see
Fink, Jack, and Masiye, 2018, for details).
          Finally, it is important to highlight that the observed variation in trading behavior by sea-
son does not reflect seasonal differences in preferences. Data from the choice condition for Boom
­ Salt, used in all three rounds, shows that preferences for the two items do not vary much by
season. While Boom seems to be slightly more attractive in the hungry season (i.e., 65 percent
of participants choose Boom over Salt) than in the harvest season 2014 (60 percent) or 2015 (57
percent), the differences are far from statistical significance (Fisher's exact test, p-value > 0.3).18


5.3   Experimental variation in liquidity

While the seasonal variation in trading asymmetries is suggestive of a causal effect of scarcity on
trading behavior, several other factors may vary across seasons and influence trading decisions.
To address these endogeneity concerns, we leverage random variation in liquidity associated with
access to hungry-season consumption loans. The larger RCT, in which we embedded the exchange
experiments, relaxed liquidity constraints in 80 randomly selected villages during the hungry
  18 We
      observe a similar pattern for the Boom ­ Cash item pair. In the hungry season, 67 percent of farmers choose
Boom over cash in the choice condition. In the harvest season (2015), 65 percent of participants choose Boom over cash.



                                                          17
season by providing selected households with 200 Kwacha (around 35 USD) in cash or maize.
We compare trading probabilities for households with and without access to the loans prior to
their trading decision. Loans were delivered in early to mid January 2015, while the exchange
experiments began in early February, about two weeks later. Appendix Figure A.2 shows that the
biggest effect on consumption occurred very shortly after receiving the loan.19 Figure 3 plots the
effect of the loan on trading probabilities, as a function how recently it was received (in weekly
bins). The pattern is striking, though standard errors are large: two weeks after receiving a loan the
likelihood that a participant trades her endowed item falls by over 30 percentage points relative
to the control group. However, this effect wears off quickly. Three weeks after loan delivery the
likelihood of trading is 16 percentage points lower than in the control group and levels off at a 10
percent lower trading likelihood in the weeks after.
         Table 5 shows a series of loan dropoff impact estimates, conditioned on different sets of
control variables. On average, we find that a loan dropoff within the last month increased ex-
change asymmetries by around 10 percentage points, which is remarkably similar to the seasonal
variation found in the previous section (columns 3 and 4). The last two columns show the esti-
mates underlying Figure 3, and illustrate that the estimates are robust to the inclusion of a full set
of controls.


5.4     Mechanisms

5.4.1   Value of the traded goods

All of the items used in the experiments were chosen to be useful and of value to the average study
participant. However, for more resource constrained households, a "mistake" in the trading deci-
sion is more difficult to undo, raising the decision stakes, even if the market value or preference
gap between items does not change. To more precisely estimate this mechanism, we introduced
a high-value item pair (Solar ­ Cash condition) in the last round of our experiments. More pre-
cisely, we offer participants the choice between a solar lamp or an equivalent value cash transfer
of 80 Kwacha (USD 14). While trading over higher value items does not necessarily imply higher
stakes ­ especially if differences in item features are small (e.g. a red vs. a blue car) ­ higher value
items may still garner greater attention or focus, because they make the trade off more salient. As
shown in Table 3 (Panel A), relative to the estimated trading probability for lower value items, we
  19 These figures show effects relative to all control households (whose dropoff week is undefined) and are conditioned

on survey week fixed effects.


                                                          18
find a large and significant increase in the trading probability for the high-value item pair. While
only 34 percent of participants traded in the three standard-value item pairs, 44 percent traded
in the Solar-Cash treatment. This increase in trading is particularly noticeable because we im-
plemented this treatment after harvest when participants were relatively rich and thus displayed
larger exchange asymmetries, on average.
        For additional insight into the trading behavior with high value items, we separately an-
alyze the Solar ­ Cash condition. We estimate equation (3) with the likelihood of ending up with
the solar lamp as the outcome and present the results in Table 6. Participants assigned a solar
lamp at the outset were 10 percentage points more likely to end up with a solar lamp than partici-
pants assigned cash. This is robust to controlling for variation in experimental procedures (voucher
procedure) in column 3, but becomes statistically insignificant once we control for experience and
household characteristics (columns 2 and 4). These findings are supported by participants' hy-
pothetical item valuations. Estimating the impact of item assignment on WTP/WTA shows no
differences in valuations, suggesting that raising the value of items leads to more rational behav-
ior (see Appendix Table A.9).
        Overall, the exchange asymmetries observed in the high value decisions are about one
third of the magnitude of the asymmetries observed in the standard value decisions and generally
indistinguishable from zero. These findings lend empirical support to the proposed mechanism
that resource scarcity increases the relative value of goods, which increases focus, resulting in
more rational behavior.


5.4.2   Cognitive ability

The results on trading presented in the previous section consistently point to more rational be-
havior when resources are more scarce. While this is consistent with predictions from rational
inattention models (Sims, 2003; Ma´
                                  ckowiak et al., 2018), other research suggests that scarcity may
improve decision-making in some domains (Shah et al., 2015), while worsening it in others, by
taxing cognitive bandwidth (Mani et al., 2013; Mullainathan and Shafir, 2013; Dean et al., 2017).
To investigate the relevance of this channel, we explore both the relationship between cognition
and resource scarcity in our setting and between cognition and trading probabilities.
        We administered two commonly used tests to measure cognitive and executive function to
a randomly selected subsample of participants in each survey round: a numerical version of the



                                                19
Stroop test and Raven's Progressive Matrices (RPM).20 As described in further detail in Appendix
A.3, the RPM is a measure of abstract reasoning skills or fluid, non-verbal intelligence. The test
consists of a series of pictures with geometric shapes where participants choose the missing shape
from a set of alternatives. We pilot-tested and calibrated the test elements such that they were of
medium difficulty for the average respondent. The Stroop test is a measure for inhibitory control,
which is one particular domain of executive function that regulates attention and the ability to
control impulsive reactions (Diamond, 2013). We use a modified Stroop test that consists of three
tasks in which participants have to first identify the number of the displayed circles and crosses
(task 1 - neutral task), and then have to identify the number of displayed digits (tasks 2 and 3).
In task 2, the displayed digits match their number (e.g., 4444, congruent task); in task 3, they do
not (e.g., 444, incongruent task). Task 3 thus requires that participants suppress the automatic
response (e.g., 4). We examine each of the tasks separately, focusing on tasks 2 and 3, and interpret
the congruent task as a measure of attention and the incongruent task as a measure of inhibitory
control.21 All outcomes are normalized to a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, with a
higher score corresponding to better performance. None of the tasks were incentivized.
         We begin by testing whether cognitive ability varies with scarcity. We follow the three
relevant scarcity measures in the order they are investigated above. Figure 4 summarizes the
results. The top panel shows that higher asset households have significantly higher scores on
the Raven's Progressive Matrices test and on the main two Stroop measures. In the cross sec-
tion, wealthier households perform consistently better on these cognitive measures. Second, the
middle panel shows little consistency between performance on cognitive tests and season (the
coefficients are estimated conditional on individual fixed effects; see Appendix Table A.7 for the
underlying regression results). The congruent task from the Stroop test shows a similar pattern
to trading behavior, with scores that increase during the hungry season, while the RPM score and
incongruent Stoop test show much less pronounced variation. Third, the bottom figure shows
effects of loan drop off, relative to the control group and conditional on survey-week fixed effects.
Here, performance on the two Stroop tasks is slightly better immediately following loan drop off.
These patterns are suggestive at best; confidence intervals overlap zero (the control group) for all
weeks and all outcomes. Overall, these results suggest an inconsistent relationship between our
  20 According to the taxonomy provided in Dean et al. (2017), the Raven's test offers a measure of fluid intelligence
while the Stroop test is a measure of inhibitory control or executive function.
  21 The Stroop test is sometimes scored by normalizing the score on the incongruent task (task 3) by the score on the

congruent task (task 2) (e.g., Scarpina and Tagini, 2017). We observe considerably more variation in performance on the
congruent task 2 within-subject, and so prefer to analyze them separately.


                                                          20
alternative measures of scarcity and cognitive performance.
         Finally, we test whether trading probabilities are correlated with cognitive function. Table
7 shows no significant relationship in the pooled analysis (Panel A), which is unsurprising given
the contradictory results on the relationship between cognitive performance and scarcity. How-
ever, if we focus on the within-respondent variation in cognition and trading probabilities, we see
a positive correlation between the neutral and congruent Stroop tasks and trading probabilities.
This is driven by seasonal variation in both, where we find a consistent improvement both in these
simple attentional measures of cognition and in decision-making.


5.4.3   Market access

Another possible explanation for the observed exchange asymmetries, both in our setting and
in other studies, is market access. In settings where participants can easily exchange one item
for the other at low cost, experimental choices may be perceived as inconsequential. While this
hypothesis is not obvious in our setting where most villages are remote (average distance to the
district capital is 30 miles on dirt roads), many goods can be traded in local markets (through
either purchase or barter).22 If this is the case, we should see that easier access to market or local
trading partners should increase the measured exchange asymmetry.
         To investigate this hypothesis, we regress trading outcomes on a series of market access
proxies, and summarize results in Appendix Table A.8. Living in a small village (25th percentile of
village population size) and living in a village with above median walking times to the market or
nearest road served by public transportation increases the likelihood of trading between 1 and 2.5
percentage points, but neither estimate is statistically different from zero (columns 1-3). Being in a
village where more households were given the opportunity to make trades, conditional on village
size (column 4) and conditional on the total number of households in the village in the larger
study sample (who received Boom if they were not trading, column 5) has no effect on trading
probabilities. While several of the market access proxies go in the expected direction, effect sizes
are all small and statistically insignificant.
  22 This hypothesis is directionally consistent with the finding in Apicella et al. (2014), who show that tribes in Tanzania

with more market access display greater exchange asymmetries.




                                                            21
6    Conclusion

Although the endowment effect has been extensively documented in laboratory settings, its rele-
vance in day-to-day decision-making remains unclear. Focusing on the trading of common house-
hold items in a low income setting, we document two key findings in this paper. First, we show
that exchange asymmetries are substantial and remarkably robust to the items involved and to
the experimental procedures. The overall propensity to trade familiar household items is about
16 percentage points lower than predicted by standard theory in our low income sample, and
remarkably similar in magnitude to previous studies conducted in high-income settings. This
suggests that the psychological and behavioral principles underlying exchange asymmetries cut
across cultures and levels of educational attainment. Second, we show that despite the substantial
average deviations from rationality, the magnitude of the bias moves in predictable ways, de-
creasing when decision stakes are higher. In particular, we show that exchange asymmetries are
significantly smaller when resources are more scarce and when the value of traded goods is high.
This suggests that poverty can actually improve decision-making in contexts like the one studied
in this paper involving simple trading decisions with immediate payoffs.
         Our results also have potentially wide-ranging implications for markets in general, and
for development in particular. Reluctance to give up existing or endowed assets, goods or ac-
quired rights may at least partially explain (small) business owners or farmers foregoing prof-
itable exchanges or investments (Kremer et al., 2013; Carney et al., 2018), individuals resisting
policy changes (Alesina and Passarelli, 2017), and low rates of new technology adoption (Liu,
         e and Goldberg, 2017).23 The results we present in this paper indicate that this bias is
2013; Gin´
highest in times of relative abundance, a point in time when, for example, investments are most
viable. Accordingly, opportunities to implement behavior change or to adopt new technologies
may not only be population specific, but may also be strongly influenced by temporal and seasonal
variation in scarcity. Recognition of this variation may introduce new ways to harness prevalent
exchange asymmetries or design policies that help households avoid related biases.
   23 A prominent but much debated psychological explanation for exchange asymmetries put forward in the behavioral

literature is loss aversion, i.e., the notion that the disutility from giving up a good is higher than the utility gain from
obtaining it (Ericson and Fuster, 2014; O'Donoghue and Sprenger, 2018). Taken at face value, our results suggest
that scarcity reduces the scope of loss aversion during the hungry season, as farmers appear to put greater focus on
the trade-off between the two items and may treat the trading decision as opportunity cost rather than a loss of the
endowed item.




                                                            22
References

A LESINA , A.   AND   F. PASSARELLI (2017): "Loss aversion in politics," NBER Working Paper 21077.

A LONSO , R., I. B ROCAS ,   AND   J. D. C ARRILLO (2013): "Resource allocation in the brain," Review
  of Economic Studies, 81, 501­534.

A NAGOL , S., V. B ALASUBRAMANIAM ,         AND   T. R AMADORAI (2018): "Endowment effects in the
  field: Evidence from India's IPO lotteries," Review of Economic Studies, 85, 1971­2004.

A PICELLA , C. L., E. M. A ZEVEDO , N. A. C HRISTAKIS ,     AND   J. H. F OWLER (2014): "Evolutionary
  origins of the endowment effect: evidence from hunter-gatherers," American Economic Review,
  104, 1793­1805.

B ANDIERA , O., R. B URGESS , N. D AS , S. G ULESCI , I. R ASUL ,   AND   M. S ULAIMAN (2017): "Labor
  markets and poverty in village economies," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132, 811­870.

B ANERJEE , A. V.   AND   E. D UFLO (2005): "Growth theory through the lens of development eco-
  nomics," Handbook of Economic Growth, 1, 473­552.

B ARTLING , B., F. E NGL , AND R. A. W EBER (2015): "Game form misconceptions are not necessary
  for a willingness-to-pay vs. willingness-to-accept gap," Journal of the Economic Science Associa-
  tion, 1, 72­85.

        , V., M. B AUER , J. C HYTILOVA ,
B ARTO S                                     AND   I. L EVELY (2018): "The effets of poverty on impa-
  tience: Preferences or inattention?" Working Paper.

B ENJAMIN , D. J., S. A. B ROWN ,     AND   J. M. S HAPIRO (2013): "Who is "behavioral"? Cognitive
  ability and anomalous preferences," Journal of the European Economic Association, 11, 1231­1255.

B URKE , M., L. F. B ERGQUIST, AND E. M IGUEL (2018): "Sell low and buy high: Arbitrage and local
  price effects in Kenyan markets," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134, 785­842.

B URKS , S. V., J. P. C ARPENTER , L. G OETTE ,    AND   A. R USTICHINI (2009): "Cognitive skills af-
  fect economic preferences, strategic behavior, and job attachment," Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 106, 7745­7750.




                                                   23
C AMERER , C. (2015): "The promise of lab-field generalizability in experimental economics: A
  critical reply to Levitt and List," in Handbook of Experimental Economic Methodology, ed. by
  G. Frechette and A. Schotter, Oxford University Press.

C AMERER , C. F., G. L OEWENSTEIN ,       AND   M. R ABIN (2003): Advances in behavioral economics,
  Princeton University Press.

C ARNEY, K., X. L IN , M. K REMER , AND G. R AO (2018): "The endowment effect and collateralized
  loans," Working Paper.

C ARVALHO , L. S., S. M EIER ,   AND   S. W. WANG (2016): "Poverty and economic decision-making:
  Evidence from changes in financial resources at payday," American Economic Review, 106, 260­84.

C ASON , T. N.   AND   C. R. P LOTT (2014): "Misconceptions and game form recognition: Challenges
  to theories of revealed preference and framing," Journal of Political Economy, 122, 1235­1270.

C HARNESS , G.   AND   E. F EHR (2015): "From the lab to the real world," Science, 350, 512­513.

D E Q UIDT, J., J. H AUSHOFER ,    AND   C. R OTH (2018): "Measuring and bounding experimenter
  demand," American Economic Review, 108, 3266­3302.

D EAN , E. B., F. S CHILBACH , AND H. S CHOFIELD (2017): "Poverty and cognitive function," in The
  Economics of Poverty Traps, ed. by C. Barrett, M. Carter, and J.-P. Chavas, University of Chicago
  Press.

D EAN , J. (2019): "Noise, cognitive function, and worker productivity," Working Paper.

D ELLAV IGNA , S. (2009): "Psychology and economics: Evidence from the field," Journal of Economic
  Literature, 47, 315­372.

D IAMOND , A. (2013): "Executive functions," Annual Review of Psychology, 64, 135­168.

D OHMEN , T., A. FALK , D. H UFFMAN ,     AND   U. S UNDE (2010): "Are risk aversion and impatience
  related to cognitive ability?" American Economic Review, 100, 1238­1260.

D UFLO , E. (2006): "Poor but rational?" in Understanding poverty, ed. by D. M. Abhijit Banerjee,
  Roland Benabou, Oxford University Press, 367­78.

D UFLO , E., M. K REMER ,    AND   J. R OBINSON (2011): "Nudging farmers to use fertilizer: Theory
  and experimental evidence from Kenya," American Economic Review, 101, 2350­90.

                                                  24
E NGELMANN , D. AND G. H OLLARD (2010): "Reconsidering the effect of market experience on the
  endowment effect," Econometrica, 78, 2005­2019.

E RICSON , K. M.     AND   A. F USTER (2014): "The endowment effect," Annual Review of Economics, 6,
  555­579.

FALK , A.     AND   J. H ECKMAN (2009): "Lab experiments are a major source of knowledge in the
  social sciences," Science, 326, 535­538.

F EHR , D., R. H AKIMOV,      AND        ¨
                                    D. K UBLER (2015): "The willingness to pay­willingness to accept
  gap: A failed replication of Plott and Zeiler," European Economic Review, 78, 120­128.

F INK , G., B. K. J ACK , AND F. M ASIYE (2018): "Seasonal liquidity, rural labor markets and agricul-
  tural production," Working Paper.

G ABAIX , X. (2019): "Behavioral Inattention," in Handbook of Behavioral Economics, ed. by D. Bern-
  heim, S. DellaVigna, and D. Laibson, Elsevier, vol. 2.

     ´ , X.
G IN E        AND   J. G OLDBERG (2017): "Endowment effects and usage of financial products: Evi-
  dence from Malawi," Working Paper.

G OLDIN , J.   AND    T. H OMONOFF (2013): "Smoke gets in your eyes: Cigarette tax salience and
  regressivity," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5, 302­36.

H AUSHOFER , J. AND E. F EHR (2014): "On the psychology of poverty," Science, 344, 862­867.

H AUSHOFER , J.      AND   J. S HAPIRO (2016): "The short-term impact of unconditional cash transfers
  to the poor: experimental evidence from Kenya," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131, 1973­2042.

I SONI , A., G. L OOMES ,    AND   R. S UGDEN (2011): "The willingness to pay ­ willingness to accept
  gap, the "endowment effect," subject misconceptions, and experimental procedures for eliciting
  valuations: Comment," American Economic Review, 101, 991­1011.

K AHNEMAN , D., J. L. K NETSCH , AND R. H. T HALER (1991): "Anomalies: The endowment effect,
  loss aversion, and status quo bias," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5, 193­206.

K AUR , S., S. M ULLAINATHAN , F. S CHILBACH ,       AND   S. O H (2019): "Does financial strain lower
  worker productivity?" Working Paper.



                                                    25
K ESSLER , J.   AND   L. V ESTERLUND (2015): "The external validity of laboratory experiments: The
  misleading emphasis on quantitative effects," in Handbook of Experimental Economic Methodology,
  ed. by G. Frechette and A. Schotter, Oxford University Press, 392­405.

K NETSCH , J. L. (1989): "The endowment effect and evidence of nonreversible indifference
  curves," American Economic Review, 79, 1277­1284.

K NETSCH , J. L.   AND   W.-K. W ONG (2009): "The endowment effect and the reference state: Evi-
  dence and manipulations," Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 71, 407­413.

  
K OSZEGI , B.    AND   M. R ABIN (2006): "A model of reference-dependent preferences," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 121, 1133­1165.

K REMER , M., J. L EE , J. R OBINSON ,   AND   O. R OSTAPSHOVA (2013): "Behavioral biases and firm
  behavior: Evidence from Kenyan retail shops," American Economic Review, 103, 362­68.

K REMER , M., G. R AO , AND F. S CHILBACH (2019): "Behavioral development economics," in Hand-
  book of Behavioral Economics, ed. by D. Bernheim, S. DellaVigna, and D. Laibson, Elsevier, vol. 2.

L EVITT, S. D.   AND   J. A. L IST (2008): "Homo economicus evolves," Science, 319, 909­910.

L ICHAND , G.    AND   A. M ANI (2019): "Cognitive droughts," Working Paper.

L IST, J. A. (2003): "Does market experience eliminate market anomalies?" Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 118, 41­71.

------ (2004): "Neoclassical theory versus prospect theory: Evidence from the marketplace,"
  Econometrica, 72, 615­625.

L IU , E. M. (2013): "Time to change what to sow: Risk preferences and technology adoption deci-
  sions of cotton farmers in China," Review of Economics and Statistics, 95, 1386­1403.

    ´
M A CKOWIAK                JKA ,
            , B., F. M AT E         AND   M. W IEDERHOLT (2018): "Survey: Rational inattention, a
  disciplined behavioral model," Working Paper.

M ANI , A., S. M ULLAINATHAN , E. S HAFIR ,       AND   J. Z HAO (2013): "Poverty impedes cognitive
  function," Science, 341, 976­980.

M ARLOW, D. AND D. P. C ROWNE (1961): "Social desirability and response to perceived situational
  demands." Journal of Consulting Psychology, 25, 109.

                                                   26
M ULLAINATHAN , S. (2007): "Psychology and development economics," in Behavioral economics
  and its applications, ed. by D. P. and V. H., Princeton University Press Princeton, NJ, 85­113.

M ULLAINATHAN , S.      AND    E. S HAFIR (2013): Scarcity: Why having too little means so much, Macmil-
  lan.

O'D ONOGHUE , T.       AND   C. S PRENGER (2018): "Reference-dependent preferences," in Handbook of
  Behavioral Economics, ed. by D. Bernheim, S. DellaVigna, and D. Laibson, Elsevier, vol. 1, 1­77.

O ECHSSLER , J., A. R OIDER ,    AND   P. W. S CHMITZ (2009): "Cognitive abilities and behavioral bi-
  ases," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 72, 147­152.

P LOTT, C. R.    AND   K. Z EILER (2005): "The willingness to pay­willingness to accept gap, the en-
  dowment effect, subject misconceptions, and experimental procedures for eliciting valuations,"
  American Economic Review, 95, 530­545.

------ (2007): "Exchange asymmetries incorrectly interpreted as evidence of endowment effect
  theory and prospect theory?" American Economic Review, 97, 1449­1466.

R AVEN , J. C. (1983): Manual for Raven's progressive matrices and vocabulary scales, HK Lewis & Co
  Ltd.

S CARPINA , F.   AND   S. TAGINI (2017): "The Stroop color and word test," Frontiers in Psychology, 8,
  557.

S CHILBACH , F. (2019): "Alcohol and self-control: A field experiment in India," American Economic
  Review, 109, 1290­1322.

S CHILBACH , F., H. S CHOFIELD ,     AND   S. M ULLAINATHAN (2016): "The psychological lives of the
  poor," American Economic Review, 106, 435­40.

S HAH , A. K., S. M ULLAINATHAN ,        AND   E. S HAFIR (2012): "Some consequences of having too
  little," Science, 338, 682­685.

S HAH , A. K., E. S HAFIR ,   AND   S. M ULLAINATHAN (2015): "Scarcity frames value." Psychological
  Science, 26, 402­412.

S IMS , C. A. (2003): "Implications of rational inattention," Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 665­
  690.

                                                    27
S PEARS , D. (2011): "Economic decision-making in poverty depletes behavioral control," The BE
  Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 11.

S TROOP, J. R. (1935): "Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions." Journal of Experimental
  Psychology, 18, 643.

TANAKA , T., C. F. C AMERER ,   AND   Q. N GUYEN (2010): "Risk and time preferences: Linking ex-
  perimental and household survey data from Vietnam," American Economic Review, 100, 557­71.

T HALER , R. H. (1980): "Toward a positive theory of consumer choice," Journal of Economic Behavior
  & Organization, 1, 39­60.




                                                28
           Item               Preferred                                            ES (95% CI)




           Boom (vs. Salt)    60                                                   0.15 (0.09, 0.21)

           Salt (vs. Boom)    40                                                   0.15 (0.10, 0.21)

           Boom (vs. Cash)    65.9                                                 0.07 (-0.00, 0.14)

           Cash (vs. Boom)    34.1                                                 0.19 (0.11, 0.26)

           Cup (vs. Spoon)    69.4                                                 0.19 (0.03, 0.34)

           Spoon (vs. Cup)    30.6                                                 0.17 (0.00, 0.35)

           Solar (vs. Cash)   54.5                                                 -0.02 (-0.20, 0.17)

           Cash (vs. Solar)   45.5                                                 0.14 (-0.03, 0.31)




                                       -.345                     0              .345
                                                  Effect of assignment



                                     Figure 1: Asymmetries by item preference

Notes: Estimated change in the likelihood of ending with the assigned item as a result of trading,
relative to the choice condition. Preferred column shows the percentage of subjects in the choice
condition who prefer item to the alternative item. The last column shows the estimated coefficient
along with the 95% confidence interval.




                                                         29
              .45
              .4
          Pr(trade)
             .35
              .3
              .25




                      Harvest 2014                Hungry season 2015                    Harvest 2015


                               Figure 2: Probability of trading start item, by season

Notes: Relationship between season of survey and trading probabilities, conditional on individual
experience with the trading decision. Analysis is conditional on item pair and procedure indica-
tors and individual and household controls. 95% confidence intervals are based on standard errors
clustered at the village level.




                                                        30
              .2
              0
          Pr(trade)
             -.2
              -.4
              -.6




                      1         2              3              4              5                  6
                                            Time since loan dropoff


            Figure 3: Relationship between weeks since loan receipt and trading probabilities

Notes: Effect of loan timing on trading probabilities, where time since loan dropoff is measured in
weeks. The omitted category is the control (no loan) group and results are conditional on week of
survey fixed effects, and a full set of procedure, experience and item pair indicators and individual
and household controls. 95% confidence intervals are based on standard errors clustered at the
village level.




                                                   31
                                           .4
                            Cognitive performance z-score
                             -.2           0
                                           -.4        .2


                                                            1        2                3               4           5
                                                                                Asset quintile
                                           .4
                            Cognitive performance z-score
                            -.2            0
                                           -.4        .2




                                                      Harvest 2014              Hungry 2015                 Harvest 2015
                                           1.5
                            Cognitive performance z-score
                             -.5      0    -1 .5      1




                                                            2        3               4                5           6
                                                                          Weeks since loan drop off

                                                                     Ravens PM             Congruent task
                                                                     Incongruent task




             Figure 4: Relationship between scarcity measures and cognitive performance

Notes: Each figure shows how performance on cognitive tasks (measured as z-scores) varies with
a different source of variation in scarcity. The top figure uses baseline variation in assets. The
middle figure uses variation across survey rounds (seasons) and is estimated using individual
fixed effects. The bottom figure uses time since loan drop off, measured in weeks. The omitted
category is the control (no loan) group and results are conditioned on week of survey fixed effects.
All analyses control for for individual and household characteristics (or individual fixed effects),
season, and participant experience with the cognitive tests. 95% confidence intervals are based on
standard errors clustered at the village level.



                                                                                 32
                       Table 1: Experimental Setup: Scripts and Sub-treatments

                                                     Round 2:
                                Round 1: Post                          Round 3: Post
Item pair        Procedure                         Hungry Season                       Total
                                Harvest 2014                           Harvest 2015
                                                       2015
Boom vs. Salt
            Free Choice               141                 85                 108
            Assigned                  416                318                  0
            Lottery                   242                276                 376
            Timing                     0                   0                 172
            Voucher                    0                   0                 190
            Timing + Voucher           0                   0                 169
            Expectations               0                   0                 273
                                                                                       2766
Boom vs. Cash
            Free Choice                0                  58                 127
            Assigned                   0                 302                  0
            Lottery                    0                 328                 391
            Timing                     0                   0                 179
            Voucher                    0                   0                 182
            Timing + Voucher           0                   0                 172
            Expectations               0                   0                 223
                                                                                       1962
Cup vs. Spoon
            Free Choice               118                  0                     0
            Assigned                  345                  0                     0
            Lottery                   251                  0                     0
            Timing                     0                   0                     0
            Voucher                    0                   0                     0
            Timing + Voucher           0                   0                     0
            Expectations               0                   0                     0
                                                                                       714
Cash vs. Solar
            Free Choice                0                   0                  33
            Assigned                   0                   0                   0
            Lottery                    0                   0                 169
            Timing                     0                   0                   0
            Voucher                    0                   0                   0
            Timing + Voucher           0                   0                 198
            Expectations               0                   0                   0
                                                                                       400
Total                                   1513         1367              2962           5842
Notes: Summary of randomly assigned item pairs and experimental procedures, by survey
round. See text for additional details.
                                                 33
                              Table 2: Descriptive statistics by item pair

Boom-Salt                N = 2766

  Choice condition                                          End item                    Overall
  Pr(chosen)                             Start item      Boom       Salt
  Boom                      0.60         Boom             934       315           Pr(trade)       0.34
  Salt                      0.40         Salt             514       669           p-val (H0)      0.00

Boom-Cash                N = 1962

  Choice condition                                          End item                    Overall
  Pr(chosen)                             Start item      Boom       Cash
  Boom                      0.66         Boom             701       260           Pr(trade)       0.36
  Cash                      0.34         Cash             385       431           p-val (H0)      0.00

Cup-Spoon                N = 564

  Choice condition                                          End item                    Overall
  Pr(chosen)                                              Cup      Spoon
  Cup                       0.75         Cup              286        42           Pr(trade)        0.3
  Spoon                     0.25         Spoon            135       133           p-val (H0)      0.00

Cash-Solar               N = 400

   Choice condition                                         End item                    Overall
   Pr(chosen)                             Start item     Cash        Solar
   Cash                     0.45          Cash            97           66         Pr(trade)        0.44
   Solar                    0.55          Solar           96          108         p-val (H0)       0.08
Notes: Summary of choice outcomes by item pair. The Pr(chosen) tabulation shows the likelihood
that each item in the pair was selected when subjects were given a free choice. Start item and end
item tabulates the frequency that subjects started and ended with each item in the pair in one of the
trading decisions. The overall probability that a subject traded the item he or she started with and
the p-value from a test that the trading probability is equal to 0.5 is presented in the final column
(with standard errors clustered at the village level).




                                                  34
       Table 3: Probability of trading start item, by item pair and experimental procedure

                                     Probability that subject traded start item
                             (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)
Panel A. By item pair
Boom-Cash                 0.022              0.004              0.006              0.007
                         (0.016)            (0.017)            (0.016)            (0.016)
Cup-Spoon               -0.044*              0.004              0.001              0.002
                         (0.024)            (0.031)            (0.030)            (0.030)
Solar-Cash             0.101***            0.095***           0.096***            0.094**
                         (0.033)            (0.034)            (0.035)            (0.037)
Panel B. By experimental procedure
Lottery                   0.005              -0.007            -0.015          -0.015
                         (0.019)             (0.021)           (0.021)         (0.021)
Timing                   -0.007              -0.024            -0.028          -0.012
                         (0.030)             (0.034)           (0.035)         (0.035)
Voucher                   0.036               0.019             0.015           0.032
                         (0.033)             (0.039)           (0.039)         (0.039)
Timing + Voucher        0.065**               0.048             0.043           0.026
                         (0.026)             (0.031)           (0.030)         (0.030)
Wording                   0.012              -0.040            -0.035          -0.035
                         (0.033)             (0.035)           (0.035)         (0.035)
Expectations              0.018               0.001            -0.006           0.010
                         (0.026)             (0.033)           (0.033)         (0.034)
                                                                           round + hh +
Controls                     none           round         round + hh            items/
                                                                             procedures
Observations                 5172            5172            5171                5171
Notes: Linear regressions of an indicator for whether the subject traded the start item, by
item pair (Panel A) and experimental procedure (Panel B). The omitted category in Panel
A is Boom-Salt and in Panel B is assignment. Each column adds control variables. See
text for further discussion.




                                               35
                                    Table 4: Probability of trading start item, by season




                                                  Probability that subject traded start item
                                 (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)               (5)        (6)
     Hungry Season            0.089***     0.096***    0.100***        0.107***          0.121**    0.123***
                               (0.022)      (0.022)     (0.021)         (0.031)           (0.056)    (0.031)
     Endline                  0.066***     0.074***    0.077***          0.054             0.053      0.062
                               (0.019)      (0.019)     (0.020)         (0.033)           (0.077)    (0.041)
                                                                         hh +        experience +     hh +
                                                         hh +        experience + procedure + experience
     Controls                   none          hh      experience       procedure            FE     + procedure
     Observations               5172         5171        5171            5171              5172       2987
     Notes: Linear regressions of an indicator for whether the subject traded the start item, by season.
     Individual fixed effects are included in column 5. Column 6 excludes households with past experience




36
     with the exchange experiment from each round. Standard errors clustered at the village level.
                   Table 5: Probability of trading start item, by loan delivery




                                              Probability that subject traded start item
                            (1)             (2)          (3)             (4)            (5)      (6)
Loan                      -0.004         -0.001         0.025         0.021
                          (0.028)        (0.028)       (0.030)       (0.031)
Recent loan (1 month)                                -0.109**        -0.106*
                                                       (0.050)       (0.058)
Loan 2 weeks ago                                                                    -0.254**   -0.328**
                                                                                      (0.100)   (0.126)
Loan 3 weeks ago                                                                     -0.125*    -0.161
                                                                                      (0.065)   (0.098)
Loan 4 weeks ago                                                                      -0.103    -0.083
                                                                                      (0.082)   (0.087)
Loan 5 weeks ago                                                                      -0.091    -0.090
                                                                                      (0.059)   (0.073)
Loan 6 weeks ago                                                                      -0.042    -0.073
                                                                                      (0.072)   (0.078)
Loan 7 weeks ago                                                                      -0.027    -0.045
                                                                                      (0.073)   (0.082)
Loan 8 weeks ago                                                                      -0.111    -0.149
                                                                                      (0.081)   (0.091)
                                                                                                 hh +
                                          hh +                       hh +
                                                                                              experience
                                       experience                 experience       survey
Controls                                                                                     + procedure
                                      + procedure               + procedure         week
                                                                                              + items +
                                         + items                    + items
                                                                                             survey week
Observations                 1224         1224          1224         1224           1224         1224
Notes: Linear regressions of an indicator for whether the subject traded the start item on loan treatment
variables. Loan treatment equals one if the household was in a loan treatment village. Recent loan is the
additional effect if the loan was received in the past month. Columns 5 and 6 estimate separate effects
by week since loan dropoff, conditional on week of survey. See text for further discussion.




                                               37
         Table 6: Probability of trading start item, high value treatment

                                Probability that subject ends with solar lamp
                                   Cash/Solar high stakes treatment only
                                 (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
Start item = solar lamp       0.101*         0.087        0.102*         0.088
                              (0.059)       (0.059)       (0.059)       (0.059)
Voucher assignment                                        -0.043        -0.028
                                                          (0.050)       (0.049)
                                              hh +                       hh +
Controls                       none                        none
                                          experience                  experience
Observations                    400           400           400           400
Notes: Linear regressions of an indicator for whether the subject ends the
procedure with a solar lamp, restricted to the high stakes treatment (Cash-
Solar). Column 1 includes an indicator for starting with the solar lamp.
Columns 2 and 4 add household and experience controls. Column 3 and 4
add an indicator for whether a voucher was used instead of the actual item.
See text for further discussion.




                                       38
             Table 7: Cognitive ability and probability of trading

                                Probability that subject traded start item
                             Ravens      Stroop        Stroop         Stroop
Cognitive measure:            score       task 1         task 2         task 3
                               (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)
Panel A: Pooled OLS
Cognitive measure            -0.006          0.001       -0.003        -0.003
                             (0.007)        (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.009)

Panel B: Individual fixed effects
Cognitive measure              0.006       0.050**      0.036*         0.024
                              (0.015)      (0.020)      (0.019)       (0.019)
Observations                    4280        4039         4082          4063
Notes: Linear regressions of an indicator for whether the subject traded the
start item. All cognitive measures are normalized Z-scores where a higher
score implies better performance. Regressions are restricted to a subsample
of participants who completed both Raven's and Stroop tests. Standard
errors clustered at the village level. All regressions control for item pairs,
experimental procedures and experience with both trading and the cognitive
test. Panel A also controls for household and individual characteristics.




                                       39
                   Appendix to
Poverty, Seasonal Scarcity and Exchange Asymmetries




                        A.1
A.1     Appendix: Tables and figures


               .42
               .4.38
           Pr(trade)
               .36
               .34
               .32




                       0                               1                                       2
                                              Rounds of experience


      Figure A.1: Probability of trading start item in Boom ­ Salt pair, by rounds of participant expe-
                  rience

Notes: Relationship between subject experience with the trading decision and trading probabil-
ities, conditional on season of survey. Analysis is restricted to the third round of data collection
(Harvest 2015). Results are conditional on item pair and procedure indicators and individual and
household controls. 95% confidence intervals are based on standard errors clustered at the village
level.




                                                    A.2
                                             .7
                              Fewer meals in hungry season
                                .4         .5.3       .6
                                                              1                           2                     3                          4                    5
                                                                                                          Asset quintile

                                                                                     Mean                      95 % Confidence intervals
                                             .8
                              Household short of food
                               .2      .4    0     .6
                                                             ly

                                                                       st


                                                                                 r

                                                                                          er


                                                                                                    r


                                                                                                             r

                                                                                                                      y

                                                                                                                               ry

                                                                                                                                      ch


                                                                                                                                                ril

                                                                                                                                                      ay

                                                                                                                                                            ne
                                                                             be




                                                                                                   be


                                                                                                          be


                                                                                                                    ar
                                                   Ju

                                                                   gu




                                                                                                                                               Ap
                                                                                                                           ua
                                                                                         ob




                                                                                                                                    ar




                                                                                                                                                      M

                                                                                                                                                           Ju
                                                                                                                 nu
                                                                            em




                                                                                               em


                                                                                                        em
                                                                  Au




                                                                                                                          br


                                                                                                                                    M
                                                                                   ct




                                                                                                               Ja
                                                                                  O
                                                                        pt




                                                                                              ov


                                                                                                     ec




                                                                                                                      Fe
                                                                       Se




                                                                                          N


                                                                                                    D




                                                                                                    Control                     Treatment
                                             .2
                              Ate fewer meals in past week
                                -.4        -.2
                                             -.6        0




                                                              1                      2                 3              4                         5               6
                                                                                                    Time since loan dropoff



       Figure A.2: Variation in consumption and food availability by source of variation in scarcity

Notes: Consumption and food availability measures as a function of different sources of variation
in scarcity. The top figure uses baseline variation in assets. The middle figure uses variation across
months (seasons), where the first and third survey rounds took place between July and September
while the second survey round took place from January to March. The bottom figure uses time
since loan drop off, measured in weeks. The omitted category is the control (no loan) group and
results are conditioned on week of survey fixed effects.




                                                                                                          A.3
                     .45
                     .4
          P(trade)
                     .35
                     .3




                           1                  2                  3                   4            5
                                                           Asset quintile

                                     Mean probability                95 % Confidence intervals


                               Figure A.3: Probability of trading start item by baseline assets

Notes: Trading probability by quintile of the household asset distribution. 95% confidence inter-
vals are based on standard errors clustered at the village level. 95% confidence intervals are based
on standard errors clustered at the village level.




                                                             A.4
                            Table A.1: Balance: Rounds



                                Round 1        Round 2       Round 3
                                    (1)            (2)            (3)
Age of hh head                    42.71          -0.14           0.15
                                 [14.74]        (-0.32)         (0.45)
Female headed hh                   0.24           0.02           0.01
                                  [0.43]         (1.35)         (1.54)
Children under 5                   0.96          -0.04          -0.01
                                  [0.93]        (-1.78)        (-0.74)
Children 5-14                      1.81          -0.03          -0.04
                                  [1.50]        (-0.83)        (-1.27)
Adults 15-64                       2.45           0.03           0.01
                                  [1.25]         (0.90)         (0.28)
Adults over 64                     0.17          -0.01           0.01
                                  [0.44]        (-0.48)         (0.93)
Baseline assets                    3.00           0.03           0.02
                                  [1.42]         (0.72)         (0.54)
Baseline harvest value          3132.24         -36.05         -52.19
                               [2802.57]        (-0.40)        (-0.67)
Female respondent                  0.29           0.12           0.03
                                  [0.45]         (7.04)         (2.49)
Respondent age                    44.07          -1.37          -0.09
                                 [14.84]        (-2.89)        (-0.26)
Notes: Means and standard deviations of baseline variables for the
Round 1 sample shown in column 1. Columns 2-4 show mean
differences across rounds, relative to round 1, for each variable,
with t-statistics, adjusted for clustering at the village level, printed
below in parentheses.




                                        A.5
                          Table A.2: Balance: Item pairs



                               Boom-Salt Boom-Cash Cup-Spoon Solar-Cash
                                     (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)
Age of hh head                     42.69          0.48        -0.83           0.08
                                  [14.95]        (0.95)      (-1.13)         (0.08)
Female headed hh                    0.25          0.01        -0.03          -0.01
                                   [0.43]        (0.99)      (-1.63)        (-0.61)
Children under 5                    0.94         -0.03         0.07           0.03
                                   [0.90]       (-1.15)       (1.71)         (0.37)
Children 5-14                       1.77          0.03         0.02          -0.00
                                   [1.51]        (0.56)       (0.30)        (-0.02)
Adults 15-64                        2.43          0.06         0.06           0.12
                                   [1.23]        (1.54)       (1.13)         (1.77)
Adults over 64                      0.17          0.01        -0.01           0.02
                                   [0.45]        (0.92)      (-0.57)         (0.83)
Baseline assets                     3.05         -0.06        -0.09          -0.04
                                   [1.42]       (-1.03)      (-1.23)        (-0.32)
Baseline harvest value           3142.76       -140.74        45.85         -54.78
                                [2803.15]       (-1.03)       (0.29)        (-0.25)
Female respondent                   0.33          0.03        -0.06          -0.02
                                   [0.47]        (2.13)      (-2.67)        (-0.78)
Respondent age                     43.55          0.46        -0.30           0.58
                                  [15.10]        (0.92)      (-0.42)         (0.65)
Notes: Means and standard deviations of baseline variables for the Boom-Salt
item pair shown in column 1. Columns 2-4 show mean differences across item
pairs, relative to the Boom-Salt pair, for each variable, with t-statistics, adjusted
for clustering at the village level, printed below in parentheses.




                                       A.6
                                                           Table A.3: Balance: Procedures



                                                                                                               Timing +
                                       Choice        Assigned       Lottery       Timing        Voucher                      Expectations Wording
                                                                                                                Voucher
                                           (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)           (6)             (7)           (8)
      Age of hh head                     43.04        -0.56         -0.39            0.15            0.14         -0.11           -0.79         -0.61
                                        [15.33]      (-0.69)       (-0.51)          (0.18)          (0.15)       (-0.11)         (-0.78)       (-0.49)
      Female headed hh                    0.25         0.01         -0.00            0.04            0.03          0.04           -0.00          0.08
                                         [0.43]       (0.38)       (-0.25)          (1.62)          (1.18)        (1.63)         (-0.01)        (2.15)
      Children under 5                    0.93         0.03          0.00            0.06           -0.01          0.03            0.03         -0.08
                                         [1.01]       (0.74)        (0.11)          (1.07)         (-0.22)        (0.59)          (0.45)       (-1.20)
      Children 5-14                       1.78         0.02          0.01           -0.00           -0.01         -0.02           -0.06         -0.01
                                         [1.55]       (0.22)        (0.13)         (-0.03)         (-0.14)       (-0.18)         (-0.66)       (-0.08)
      Adults 15-64                        2.39         0.08          0.09            0.11            0.06          0.06            0.04          0.04




A.7
                                         [1.24]       (1.36)        (1.48)          (1.67)          (0.91)        (0.81)          (0.53)        (0.41)
      Adults over 64                      0.19        -0.03         -0.03           -0.02            0.00          0.00           -0.01         -0.02
                                         [0.46]      (-1.19)       (-1.08)         (-0.79)          (0.03)        (0.02)         (-0.18)       (-0.67)
      Baseline assets                     3.03         0.03         -0.03            0.00           -0.04         -0.05           -0.02         -0.04
                                         [1.39]       (0.39)       (-0.41)          (0.02)         (-0.51)       (-0.52)         (-0.27)       (-0.34)
      Baseline harvest value           3137.25       -25.17        -56.63          -39.10         -155.35       -165.80            7.46        -77.68
                                      [2605.25]      (-0.17)       (-0.41)         (-0.25)         (-1.00)       (-0.87)          (0.04)       (-0.33)
      Female respondent                   0.32         0.04          0.02            0.00            0.01          0.02            0.00          0.16
                                         [0.47]       (1.47)        (0.94)          (0.13)          (0.35)        (0.64)          (0.02)        (4.54)
      Respondent age                     44.02        -0.77         -0.43            0.02            0.55         -0.09           -0.95         -1.22
                                        [15.28]      (-0.96)       (-0.58)          (0.03)          (0.64)       (-0.09)         (-0.92)       (-0.98)
      Notes: Means and standard deviations of baseline variables for the choice treatment shown in column 1. Columns 2-8 show mean
      differences relative to the choice treatment for each variable, with t-statistics, adjusted for clustering at the village level, printed below in
      parentheses.
                                                Table A.4: Item-specific asymmetries




                                             Probability that subject ended with item A
      Item A                 Boom      Salt    Boom       Cash         Cup       Spoon   Solar   Cash
      Item B                  Salt    Boom     Cash       Boom        Spoon       Cup    Cash    Solar
                               (1)      (2)      (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)     (7)     (8)
      Assigned item A      0.149*** 0.164*** 0.070* 0.188*** 0.126* 0.242*** -0.016              0.141
                            (0.029)  (0.030)  (0.038)    (0.039)     (0.066)    (0.073) (0.093) (0.087)
      Constant             0.599*** 0.401*** 0.659*** 0.341*** 0.746*** 0.254*** 0.545*** 0.455***
                            (0.027)  (0.027)  (0.035)    (0.035)     (0.063)    (0.063) (0.092) (0.092)
      Observations           1583     1517     1146       1001         446        386     237     196
      Notes: Linear regressions of an indicator for whether the subject ended up with the item rather than the
      alternative. Regressions in each column are restricted to experiments where subjects either were given the
      choice or assigned the item of interest. The coefficient on the item received captures the additional probability
      of ending up with the item compared to the free choice condition which is captured in the constant. Standard




A.8
      errors are clustered at the village level.
                           Table A.5: Stock of the start item in the home




                                   Probability that subject traded start item
                          (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)
Stock of start item 0.018***        0.014***       0.014***       0.020***     0.020***
                       (0.006)       (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.006)      (0.006)
                                                                round + hh round + hh
Controls                none          round      round + hh
                                                                + procedure + procedure
Observations            3008           3008          3007           3007         3007
Notes: Rounds 1 and 3 only. Linear regressions of an indicator for whether the subject
traded the start item on the log measured stock of the start item in the household. Each
column adds control variables. Standard errors clustered at the village level.




                                                A.9
                                  Table A.6: Social desirability bias



                                                 Probability that subject traded start item
                                     (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)          (5)
Social desirability bias score     0.002           0.002            0.002           0.002         0.002
                                  (0.003)         (0.003)          (0.004)         (0.004)       (0.004)
                                                                                              round + hh
                                                                               round + hh
Controls                             none         round        round + hh                      + items +
                                                                                  + items
                                                                                               procedure
Observations                         3906          3906            3905             3905          3905
Notes: Linear regressions of an indicator for whether the subject traded the start item on a continuous
measure of social desirability bias. Each column adds control variables. See text for further discussion.




                                                 A.10
                  Table A.7: Seasonal variation in cognitive ability

                         Ravens         Stroop          Stroop         Stroop
                          score          task 1          task 2         task 3
                           (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)
Panel A: Pooled OLS
Hungry Season            -0.099*       0.297***        0.373***         0.091*
                          (0.056)       (0.051)         (0.055)         (0.052)
Endline                 -0.135**         0.019           0.031         -0.115**
                          (0.055)       (0.054)         (0.052)         (0.048)
Test experience         0.110***       0.206***        0.177***        0.150***
                          (0.025)       (0.027)         (0.026)         (0.026)

Panel B: Individual fixed effects
Hungry Season             -0.062      0.362***      0.405***       0.149**
                          (0.066)      (0.067)       (0.071)        (0.068)
Endline                   -0.045        0.190        0.201*          0.118
                          (0.093)      (0.117)       (0.111)        (0.103)
Test experience            0.031        0.086         0.037         -0.026
                          (0.050)      (0.066)       (0.062)        (0.061)
Observations               4771         4503          4549           4529
Notes: Linear regressions of cognition scores on season. All outcomes are
normalized Z-scores where a higher score indicates better performance.
Analysis is restricted to a subsample of participants who completed both
Raven's and Stroop tests. Test experience indicates the respondent was in a
previous round of cognition testing. Standard errors clustered at the village
level.




                                        A.11
                   Table A.8: Probability of trading start item, by access to local trade



                                                       Probability that subject traded start item
                                             (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)        (5)

Small village (<28 hh)                      0.025
                                           (0.016)
Far from market (>90 min)                                  0.021
                                                          (0.013)
Far from road (>15 min)                                                   0.010
                                                                         (0.015)
Number of hh making trades                                                              -0.003    -0.003
                                                                                        (0.003)   (0.004)
Number of households in village                                                         -0.000    -0.000
                                                                                        (0.000)   (0.000)
Number of households in sample                                                                    -0.000
                                                                                                  (0.004)
Observations                                5171           5171           5171          4953       4953
Notes: Linear regressions of an indicator for whether the subject traded the start item on measures of
access to local trading opportunities. Village size and walking distance (in minutes) to the nearest market
and to a road with transport were estimated by village head person. The indicator for village size
corresponds to the bottom quartile of villages, while the indicators for distance correspond to above
median distances. Columns 4-5 show the effect of within village trading opportunities, conditional on
village size. All columns include the full set of controls (round, household, experience, procedure and
item pair) and cluster standard errors at the village level. See text for further detail.




                                                   A.12
A.2    Appendix: Willingness-to-pay and willingness-to-accept

In survey round 2 and 3 in the item pairs involving cash, we elicited participants' (hypothetical)
willingness to pay (WTP) and willingness to accept (WTA) after they made their decision. This
allows us to obtain a lower and upper bound on participants' actual valuation of items in these
two item pairs. More precisely, we presented participants whose start item was Boom (Solar) a
decreasing sequence of hypothetical prices if they traded Boom (Solar) for cash and an increasing
sequence of prices if they kept Boom (Solar). In both cases they had to state the lowest price for
which they would have changed their decision (WTA). Analogously, participants assigned cash
either faced a decreasing sequence of prices (if they kept cash) or an increasing sequence of prices
(if they traded cash for Boom or Solar). In both cases they had to state their maximum willingness
to pay for Boom or Solar (WTP). We assume monotonic preferences and only elicited a unique
switching point for each individual, which is a common procedure to avoid multiple switching in
experiments with choice lists (e.g., Dohmen et al., 2010).
       In Table A.9 we estimate the impact of item assignment on participants' hypothetical
WTP/WTA. The regressions show two key results. First, we observe that the constant in columns
1 and 3 (no other controls), which reflects participants' willingness to pay for an item, is close to
its market price (i.e., 3-3.5 Kwacha for Boom and 80 Kwacha for the solar lamp). Second, the initial
assignment matters for the low-value item (Boom) but not for the high value item (Solar). Specif-
ically, respondents initially endowed with Boom require a significantly higher price to part with
their item. The estimated differences between a participant's WTA and WTP is on average 1.5
Kwacha, which corresponds to an increase of about 50 percent of the average WTP of participants
who are initially assigned cash. This finding is in contrast to the results for the high-value item.
Participants who are initially endowed with the solar light do not display a higher WTA. In fact,
their WTA is approximately the same as the WTP of participants starting with cash. Results are
similar when we condition on all controls (columns 2 and 4).




                                                A.13
                            Table A.9: Willingness to pay/accept

                                          Willingness to pay/accept for
                                       Boom                           Solar
                                (1)            (2)             (3)                (4)

Start item: Boom            1.520***         1.522***
                             (0.094)          (0.093)
Start item: Solar                                              -0.383           -1.253
                                                               (9.446)         (9.116)
                                          hh + round +                           hh +
       Controls                           experience +                       experience +
                                           procedure                          procedure
     Observations             1777            1777              259              259
Notes: Censored normal regression of reported willingess to pay or accept for item. After
the final item selection, subjects with the item where asked a series of questions to elicit
their willingness to accept for the items. Subjecsts choosing cash were asked as series of
questions to elicit their willingness to pay for the item in question. In some cases, WTA
and WTP values were outside of the designed brackets. Censored normal regression
models were used to account for the censored nature of these observation. All prices are
in Zambian Kwacha.




                                            A.14
A.3    Appendix: Assessments of cognitive and executive functioning

We use two commonly used measures for cognitive function: the Stroop test and Raven's Progres-
sive Matrices (see Dean, Schilbach, and Schofield, 2017, for an overview of cognitive functions and
tools to measure them). The Stroop test (Stroop, 1935) is designed to measure a person's selective
attention capacity and their processing speed, and has gained popularity as an easy-to-apply test
for executive functioning skills in recent years (Diamond, 2013; Dean, Schilbach, and Schofield,
2017; Scarpina and Tagini, 2017). Stroop tests exist in a variety of formats, including colors, shapes
and day-night variations. For the purpose of this study, we used a numeric version of the Stroop
test, which required participants be able to read numbers 1-7, but did not require an ability to read
or write more broadly.
       To assess basic cognitive functioning, we also administered a subset of 10 items from
Raven's Progressive Matrices (RPM) test battery (Raven, 1983). These items were pilot-tested and
calibrated to be of medium difficulty for the average respondent. RPM are a nonverbal test de-
signed to measure fluid intelligence, which is the ability to solve novel problems and recognize
patterns and relationships independent of acquired knowledge. Prior to the RPM, all participants
went through four practice examples. In each case ­ both for the practice rounds and for the ac-
tual test items ­ an image with a basic pattern was first shown to the study participant, and they
had to choose a matching shape and pattern from six possible answers. A sample decision task is
provided in Figure A.4.
       For the analysis, we used a two-parameter logistic model (2PL) to construct a single score
for each participant. Internal consistency of the 10 item scale is high, with an estimated Cron-
bach's alpha of 0.75. We also assessed a simpler linear score, summing up all correct responses.
The correlation between the latent factor model score and the linear scale score is 0.99. To facili-
tate interpretation of regression coefficients, we normalize both scores to mean zero and standard
deviation 1. Appendix Figure A.5 illustrates the overall distribution of the scores.
       The numeric Stroop test involved two steps in our study. In a first step, we verified partic-
ipants' ability to read numbers by presenting them with 6 single digit numbers. Participants who
were able to identify the majority of these numbers were then allowed to take the main Stroop
test. Out of 4,719 participants, we excluded 282 participants (6 percent) due to lacking numeracy.
The second step was the main Stroop test which involved three tasks with 25 trials each. In the
first task (neutral task), participants were asked to state the number of objects they saw in a trial.



                                                A.15
Objects were circles and crosses; each trial contained between 1 and 7 identical objects. In the sec-
ond task, objects were replaced with numbers; once again, participants had to count the number
of digits in each trial. In this second task of the Stroop test, printed numbers always matched the
number of objects (e.g. four "4"s or six "6"s) - a congruent stimulus condition, with both informa-
tion sources providing the same information. In the last round, participants had to count objects
once again, but this time the objects were single digit numbers that did not match the number of
objects in each trial (incongruent task). Figure A.6 excerpts four trials from each task.
       As highlighted in a recent review on the Stroop test, researchers have used a wide vari-
ety of approaches to score Stroop tests (Scarpina and Tagini, 2017). Follow the scoring modalities
outlined in Stroop (1935), an error-corrected score can be calculated as the total time plus the num-
ber of mistakes times the penalty. The penalty for each incorrect question proposed by Stroop is
twice the median time needed for each row (1.8 seconds in our sample), and the median number
of mistakes was 1 in the neutral condition, 0 in the congruent condition, and 2 in the incongru-
ent stimuli condition. To compute participants' ability to control interference, we deducted the
error-corrected time for completing the neutral task from the error-corrected time for completing
the incongruent task. To facilitate interpretation, we normalized all four scores to mean 0 and
standard deviation 1. In order to ensure our results were not driven by specific coding choices,
we also independently analyzed the raw scores foreach of the three sub-tasks (neutral, congruent,
incongruent). The median time for completing the incongruent task was 42 seconds (mean 45),
while the median number of mistakes was 2 (mean 2.4). Appendix Figure A.7 shows the corre-
lation between total time needed for this task and the inhibitory-control score. The correlation
between task time and inhibitory-control score is -0.38 in our sample.




                                                A.16
                 Figure A.4: Ravens Matrices: Sample decision task
   .4
   .3
Density
 .2.1
   0




            -2               -1               0                  1                  2
                                      Raven z-score


     Figure A.5: Distribution of scores in the Raven's Progressive Matrices (RPM)




                                        A.17
Congruent Task 1
     1                     OOOO
     2                      XX
     3                     OOO
     4                     XXXX

Congruent Task 2
     5                        1
     6                       333
     7                      55555
     8                        1

Incongruent Task
     9                     1111111
    10                       66
    11                      22222
    12                     444444
  Figure A.6: Stroop: Sample decision tasks




                    A.18
                    2
     Stroop Incongruent Task Time
          -2        -4   0




                                    -5       0                       5           10
                                         Stroop inference control score


Figure A.7: Correlation between time needed in the incongruent task 3 and the inhibitory-
            control score (both coded as z-scores)




                                                  A.19
A.4      Appendix: Scripts and Protocols

A.4.1     Scripts

Round 1: Harvest Survey (July 2014)
Initial allocation:

   · [Standard assignment] READ: For doing the survey with us today, we would like to show
        our appreciation for the time that you have shared with us. We have ${first item} and
        ${second item} and you will get item ${item} today. This item is yours to keep, you own it.

   · [Lottery assignment] READ: For doing the survey with us today, we would like to show
        our appreciation for the time that you have shared with us. We have ${first item} and
        ${second item}. It will be randomly determined which item you get. [Flip a coin: Head
        is ${second item}, Tail is ${first item} ]. The coin came up [Tails/Head] so the item you get
        is [ITEM]. It is yours to keep, you own it.

Trading opportunity: (only one script)

   · READ: You now have the option to exchange your [ITEM] for [OTHER ITEM], if you so
        desire. So that you own [OTHER ITEM], but not [ITEM]. Please make your choice.


Round 2: "Midline" survey (Feb-March 2015)
Initial allocation:

   · [Standard assignment] READ: For doing the survey with us today, we would like to show
        our appreciation for the time that you have shared with us. We have ${first item} and
        ${second item} and you will get item ${item} today. This item is yours to keep, you own it.

   · [Lottery assignment] READ: For doing the survey with us today, we would like to show
        our appreciation for the time that you have shared with us. We have ${first item} and
        ${second item}. We will now let you pick a button from this bag to decide which of the
        two you will get. In the bag are 8 buttons. 4 of the buttons are color1 and 4 are color2. (Show
        buttons and show putting them in the bag.) You will reach into the bag and without look-
        ing, select a button. If you pick a color1 button, it means you will get ${first item}; if you
        pick a color2 button you will get ${second item}. Since exactly half the buttons are color1



                                                  A.20
      and the other half are color2, you have the same chance of selecting each color. (Have re-
      spondent draw a button) You have drawn a [color1, color2] button, so you get [first item,
      second item]. (Hand respondent their item). This item is yours to keep, you own it.

Trading opportunity: (two scripts: standard and wording)

   · [standard] READ: You now have the option to exchange your [ITEM] for [OTHER ITEM].
      So that you own [OTHER ITEM], but not [ITEM]. Would you like to keep your [ITEM] or
      exchange it for [OTHER ITEM]?

   · [wording] READ: Just one question before I go. I know that I gave you [ITEM] today ­ would
      you be willing to take [OTHERITEM] instead?


Round 3: Harvest survey (July-Sept 2015)
Initial allocation:

   · [Lottery assignment] READ: For doing the survey with us today, we would like to show
      our appreciation for the time that you have shared with us. We have ${first item} and
      ${second item}. We will now let you pick a button from this bag to decide which of the
      two you will get. You see here that we have a bag and inside are 8 buttons. 4 of the buttons
      are white and 4 are blue. (Show buttons and show putting them in the bag.) You will reach
      into the bag and without looking, select a button. If you pick a white button, it means you
      will get ${first item}; if you pick a blue button you will get ${second item}. Since exactly
      half the buttons are white and the other half are blue, you have the same chance of selecting
      each color. (Have respondent draw a button) You have drawn a [color1, color2] button, so
      you get [first item, second item]. (Hand respondent their item). This item is yours to keep,
      you own it.

   · [Expectations procedure]: same as lottery assignment , endowment midway through sur-
      vey, add announcement after 1) READ and participants got item: READ: "At the end of the
      survey you will be able to exchange your {first item} for {second item}, if you want."

   · [Voucher procedure]: script & timing same as above, except last paragraph, which says 1)
      READ [once participants has drawn the button]: You have drawn a white button, so you get
      ${first item}. (Hand respondent the voucher) I am giving you a voucher for the item and



                                               A.21
     then when the survey is done, I will give you the actual item. This item is then yours to
     keep.

Trading opportunity:

   · READ: You now have the option to exchange your [ITEM] for [OTHER ITEM]. So that you
     own [OTHER ITEM], but not [ITEM]. Would you like to keep your [ITEM] or exchange it for
     [OTHER ITEM]?




                                            A.22
