                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




EXPLORING THE ROLE OF LIMITED COMMITMENT CONSTRAINTS IN ARGENTINA'S
                          "MISSING CAPITAL"

                                        Marek Kapicka
                                         Finn Kydland
                                        Carlos Zarazaga

                                      Working Paper 26359
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26359


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December 2019, Revised January 2020




We are grateful to Manuel Amador, Federico Guerrero, Andrew Foerster, Grey Gordon, Sewon
Hur, Fernando Leibovici, Rodolfo Manuelli, Andrés Neumeyer, Ignacio Presno, Erick Sager,
Anna Sokolova, Mehmet Tosun, Mark Wynne, participants at the 2019 meeting of the Society for
Economic Dynamics, at the 2019 Federal Reserve System Committee Meeting on International
Economic Analysis at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, and seminar participants at the
University of Nevada at Reno, for useful and constructive comments on an earlier version of this
paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, of the Federal Reserve System, or of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Marek Kapicka, Finn Kydland, and Carlos Zarazaga. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Exploring The Role of Limited Commitment Constraints in Argentina's "Missing Capital"
Marek Kapicka, Finn Kydland, and Carlos Zarazaga
NBER Working Paper No. 26359
December 2019, Revised January 2020
JEL No. F34,F41,F42,F43,O19,O54

                                          ABSTRACT

We study why capital accumulation in Argentina was slow in the 1990s and 2000s, despite high
productivity growth and low international interest rates. We show that limited commitment
constraints introduce two mechanisms. First, the response of investment to a total factor
productivity increase is muted and short-lived, while the response to a decrease is large and
persistent. Second, unlike in a first-best economy, low international interest rates may reduce
capital accumulation, because they increase the relevance of future commitment constraints. A
quantitative implementation of the model economy shows that the two mechanisms are
quantitatively important for the dynamics of Argentina's capital accumulation. The model
accounts for between 50% and 85% of the capital missing from Argentina in the two decades
mentioned above, relative to what it would be in the absence of the limited commitment frictions.

Marek Kapicka                                  Carlos Zarazaga
CERGE-EI, a joint workplace of                 Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
Charles University and                         Research Department
the Economics Institute of                     2200 N. Pearl St
the Czech Academy of Sciences                  Dallas, TX 75201
Politických vz 7                               USA
111 21 Prague                                  carlos.zarazaga@dal.frb.org
Czech Republic
mkapicka@gmail.com

Finn Kydland
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-9210
and NBER
kydland@econ.ucsb.edu
1     Introduction
The relegation of Argentina from among the top ten nations in output per capita at the
beginning of the 20th century to around 65th place a hundred years later has fascinated
researchers and accordingly inspired innumerable studies. The relative decline is espe-
cially apparent during the so-called "lost decade" in the 1980s. Equally relevant for any
attempt to account for Argentina's stagnation is the observation that in the subsequent
decade, and the mid 2000s, total factor productivity (TFP) grew rapidly, yet the capital
stock remained almost flat. Figure 1a documents the levels of the capital stock and of
TFP in the period 1980-2008. The weakness of capital accumulation during periods of
high productivity growth stands in contrast to the 1980s, when capital stock responded
to low productivity growth by adjusting rapidly downwards. As a result, GDP growth
was also relatively slow, as shown in Figure 1b.
    The muted response of the capital stock in the mid 1990s and 2000s is even more
puzzling when one takes into account that the then prevailing international real interest
rates were low. International real interest rates, shown in Figure 2,1 were about three
percentage points lower in the mid-1990s than in the 1980s. Through the mid-2000s even
lower rates failed to boost capital accumulation. Capital thus appears to be "missing"
from Argentina's economy despite a favorable development of both productivity and
international interest rates.
    The goal of this paper is to investigate to what extent limited enforcement constraints
can account for that "missing capital" puzzle, including the asymmetric response of that
country's capital stock to productivity shocks and its apparent insensitivity to declines of
the international interest rate. The conjecture that Argentina has faced limited enforce-
ment constraints is plausible, given that Argentina defaulted on its external obligations
at the beginning of the 1980s and that its capital stock was at a historical record high
then. This may have convinced foreign investors that Argentina is inclined to repudiate
foreign debt by strategic "opportunistic" considerations when capital and productivity
are relatively high. As shown by Kehoe and Perri (2002) and others, governments will
be particularly inclined to repudiate foreign debt precisely under those conditions.
    Aware of the incentive to repudiate foreign debt, foreign investors will not fully
exploit high returns to capital that they would take advantage of in the absence of en-
    1 The quarterly frequency counterpart of this series is similar to that reported by Neumeyer and Perri
(2005), figure 5, for the period over which they overlap.



                                                    1
1.1                                                                 0
                                      Detrended Capital Stock
                                      Detrended TFP

                                                                -0.1
 1



                                                                -0.2
0.9


                                                                -0.3

0.8

                                                                -0.4


0.7
                                                                -0.5



0.6
                                                                -0.6

                                                                          Detrended Output
                                                                          Detrended TFP
0.5                                                             -0.7
 1980        1985    1990     1995     2000          2005          1980   1985          1990   1995   2000   2005

        (a) Capital Stock and TFP. Index, 1980=100.                          (b) GDP and TFP. Log index.

               Figure 1: TFP, capital stock and GDP for Argentina, 1980-2008, detrended.


forcement problems. As a result the capital stock will not increase as much in times of
high productivity. On the other hand, when productivity is low, the enforcement fric-
tion doesn't matter, because foreign investors have no interest in investing in a country
offering a low return to capital which, precisely for that reason, falls. The capital stock
thus responds asymmetrically to a productivity shock.
    We show that the limited enforcement frictions can also account for the unresponsive-
ness of the capital stock to low international real interest rates. Specifically, we show that
lower international interest rates can reduce, instead of increase, foreigners' incentives
to invest in a small open economy whose rate of return on capital is particularly high
after a sequence of high realizations of TFP. The economic intuition behind that mech-
anism is that the lower interest rates tend to make the limited enforcement constraints
more severe, because they tend to shift consumption from the future to the present. As a
result, consumption distortions associated with binding limited enforcement constraints
are larger for lower international rates. This decreases the capital stock, because lower
capital stock partially alleviates the limited enforcement constraints. This "second best"
effect can even dominate the direct effect that lower international rates have on the re-
quired rate of return. We examine this mechanism in a simple special case that permits


                                                                2
                 1.12



                 1.11



                  1.1



                 1.09



                 1.08



                 1.07



                 1.06



                 1.05



                 1.04
                    1980     1985       1990       1995     2000      2005


Figure 2: Gross international real interest rate: yields from Merrill Lynch's High Yield 175 U.S.
Bond Index series and its successor, the Merrill Lynch's Low-Grade Corporate Bond series, minus
expected inflation. Source: authors' calculations.


a closed-form solution and in a series of numerical examples.
    Our quantitative exploration calibrates a deterministic growth model with enforce-
ment frictions to Argentina's data.2 The key requirement for a successful quantitative
exploration are reliable data about Argentina's capital stock. Since Argentina's capital
stock is not regularly produced by the country's official statistical agencies, we extend
the capital stock series constructed by Kydland and Zarazaga (2007) for the 1980-1997
period to the year 2008 with investment data by applying their same perpetual inventory
method approach. For comparison, we use also the capital stock series from the Penn-
World Tables 9.1. As discussed later, the differences between both series are substantial,
but don't alter the fundamental message of the paper.
    We find that the calibrated model traces the decline that that country's capital stock
experienced during the 1980s with remarkable accuracy because, as predicted by the the-
ory, the limited commitment constraints were almost never binding during that decade.
At the same time, the limited enforcement frictions were often binding in the subse-
quent two decades, accounting therefore for between 50% and 85% of the capital stock
  2 Kehoeand Perri (2004) and Aguiar and Amador (2011) also use a deterministic perfect foresight
environment.



                                               3
missing from the Argentine economy, when compared with that which would have been
observed in a small open economy not afflicted by such a limited commitment friction.
The model is successful also in replicating Argentina's capital stock asymmetric response
to positive and negative changes of its total factor productivity and to its seemingly
subdued reaction to lower international interest rates. The relatively good quantitative
performance of the model is especially noteworthy given that the paper stays away from
introducing exogenous costs of default to improve the matching between the model pre-
dictions and the data, as most of the existing literature does.
    To check the quantitative implications of the limited commitment constraints, the
paper performs numerical experiments that assume that those constraints disappear,
first after 1991 and then after 2002. The capital stock predicted by these exercises turns
out to be, on average, about 40% higher between 1991 and 2008 than in the model
with the constraints. This result implies that workers would have enjoyed 13% higher
real wages on average if Argentina did not have enforcement problems. That same
calibration implies that, in steady state, real wages would be permanently higher by
about that same percentage in a small open economy with commitment than without it.
   The remaining sections of the paper are structured as follows. Section 2 overviews
the related literature. Section 3 presents the small open economy environment. Section 4
characterizes the constrained efficient allocation implied by the optimal contract between
the small open economy and the risk-neutral foreign lender.3 Section 5 investigates
the mechanisms that generate the asymmetric responses of the capital stock to changes
in productivity and its insensitivity to the international real interest rates. Section 6
provides details of the data sources, construction of the capital stock series, calibrates the
model economy to Argentina's data and studies the role of both asymmetries. Section 7
elaborates on the benefits to Argentina of getting rid of the limited commitment friction.
Section 8 studies the sensitivity of the results to an alternative calibration of the model
economy. Section 9 offers concluding remarks.



2     Related Literature
The quantitative implementation of the model economy to Argentina was motivated by
Kydland and Zarazaga (2007), who investigated, in the context of a closed economy,
    3 Decentralization   of the efficient allocation can be found in Appendix A.


                                                        4
the role that total factor productivity, taken as an exogenous stochastic process, had in
that country's secular stagnation. They were the first to point out that Argentina might
suffer from a "missing capital puzzle," which they largely traced to their finding that
that country's capital stock also exhibited an asymmetric response of its capital stock to
negative and positive productivity shocks in the 1980-1997 period they studied. They
conjectured that the puzzle could be better established, and eventually resolved, in a
small open economy uncommitted to honor its external debt obligations, except under
the threat of permanent exclusion from international financial markets.
    The model economy of this paper is related to the literature that studies allocations
that are constrained by the fact that at least some contractual debt obligations cannot be
enforced, and economic agents have no incentives to honor them, except for the threat
of exclusion from credit markets. Thomas and Worrall (1994) were among the first to
demonstrate formally that limited commitment constraints have a negative impact on
foreign direct investment. Marcet and Marimon (1992) analyze the implications of those
frictions in a stochastic growth model and show, numerically, that enforcement con-
straints substantially impair capital accumulation, investment, and economic growth.
Similar results for firm dynamics are obtained by Albuquerque and Hopenhayn (2004).
Kehoe and Perri (2002) study the quantitative implications of those constraints when
present in both countries of a two-country model, but their focus is on the features that
the commitment friction induces in the resulting international business cycle statistics.
Kehoe and Perri (2004) examine that model economy under the same perfect foresight
assumption adopted in this paper, with the purpose of characterizing the constrained
efficient allocation emerging from the optimal contract between the two limited com-
mitment economies. Aguiar and Amador (2011) study the consequences along several
dimensions of introducing limited commitment constraints in a small open economy.
Like us, they appeal to a deterministic framework in order to examine the role of polit-
ical frictions in slowing the economy's convergence to the steady state of a small open
economy where such frictions die down in the long run.
    None of the papers cited above allow the small open economy to discount future
payoffs at a weakly higher rate than the international interest rate. There is, however,
a fairly long list of papers that, like this one, contemplate the possibility that the small
open economy, uncommitted to honor its outstanding debt obligations, discounts the
future at a rate permitted also to be higher than the international real interest rate. They
include those by Aguiar et al. (2009), Tsyrennikov (2013), Dovis (2018), and Restrepo-


                                             5
Echavarria (2019). These papers can be divided, in turn, into those whose contributions
are more theoretical in nature and those who examine the model predictions with the
data along different dimensions.
    That by Dovis (2018) falls in the first category, providing a rich set of theoretical
implications by adding a private information friction to a small open economy with
limited commitment constraints, but in the context of an open economy without capital.
The empirical implications of a similar environment is examined by Tsyrennikov (2013),
but his conclusion, that limited commitment constraints are not quantitatively important
when moral hazard is also present, may be biased by the assumption that investment
fully depreciates in one period. It should be noted that, following standard practice and
in contrast with this paper, his introduces exogenous costs of default in the model.
    In line with findings of this paper, a more favorable assessment of the empirical rel-
evance of limited commitment constraints emerges from those papers with an empirical
orientation that do include capital in the analysis. That is the case of the model economy
studied by Aguiar et al. (2009) who show that, in combination with a small open econ-
omy's government discount factor lower than the international interest rate, the limited
commitment friction accounts for the "debt overhang" effect, that is, for the fact that in
many emerging market economies, a higher government debt comes hand-in-hand with
lower investment levels.
    Restrepo-Echavarria (2019) offers an even more positive view of the role of limited
commitment constraints in accounting for important aspects of the evidence for Latin
American economies. Her model economy is a stochastic version of the one in this pa-
per, except for the presence of endogenous labor input and the absence of adjustment
costs to investment. Ignoring the adjustment costs is justifiable given her focus on repli-
cating the observed consumption patterns, but is important for matching capital stock
patterns. The success of her model along the consumption dimension complements that
of this paper along the capital stock dimension. The substantial differences in the values
of parameters that both papers calibrate to Argentina's data, especially the deprecia-
tion rate, are not inconsequential for the results, however, and therefore deserve further
scrutiny.
    Also related to this paper is that of Neumeyer and Perri (2005), who investigate the
role of international real interest rates and default risk in emerging market economies.
In addition to substantial modelling differences, they also don't address the question
of why capital accumulation was weak in Argentina in the mid 1990's, when the inter-


                                            6
national real interest rates had substantially come down from the peaks reached in the
prior decade.
    Finally, it is worth mentioning that limited commitment constraints are included also
in the analyses of Gordon and Guerron-Quintana (2018) and Rebelo et al. (2018), al-
though the environment in which their small open economies operate is rather removed
from the one in this paper. In particular, their small open economy's external debt obli-
gations don't emerge from the solution to an optimal contract with a foreign lender.
Rather, they are determined by that economy's optimal portfolio decisions, which ex-
ploits to that end the availability of securities offering insurance against different risks
at actuarially fair prices. Both papers, in contrast with this one, include exogenous costs
of defaults and assume that the small open economy is not permanently excluded from
international credit markets after failing to honor foreign debt contractual obligations.
Although both papers use data from Argentina to calibrate some parameter values, that
country's evidence is not otherwise relevant for the questions they address.


3    Environment
The economy is deterministic. It consists of a risk neutral international lender and of a
small open economy whose population of identical working age individuals, of size Nt
in period t, grows exogenously at rate  , Nt = (1 +  )t N0 . The representative household
standing in for all of them consumes Ct  0 in period t and evaluates sequences of
consumption according to

                                             
                                                          Ct
                              V ({Ct }) =    t Nt U       Nt
                                                                  ,                      (1)
                                            t =0

where 0 <  < 1 is the discount factor. We assume that the utility function U exhibits a
constant relative risk aversion:
                                                 C 1- 
                                       U (C ) =        ,
                                                1-
where  > 0 is the coefficient of relative risk aversion. The aggregate production function
of the country is

                                                          1- 
                                F ( At , Kt , Nt ) = At Kt Nt ,                          (2)



                                              7
where Kt  0 is the beginning-of-period t capital stock, At > 0 is total factor productivity
in period t, and   [0, 1] is the capital share. The total factor productivity sequence is
exogenous. We assume that after some sufficiently distant period T , it grows at rate  .
   The law of motion for capital is

                                          Kt+1 = (1 - )Kt + It ,

where It is investment and  is the depreciation rate. The initial capital stock K0 is given.
    As is standard in open economy models, capital stock adjustments are costly. We
assume that the adjustment costs are given by (Kt , Kt+1 ). The function  is quadratic
in the growth rate of the capital stock, and proportional to the current capital stock:

                                                                               2
                                                               K t +1 -  K t
                                  ( K t , K t +1 ) =                               Kt .
                                                       2             Kt

where the parameter  measures the strength of the adjustment costs. The function 
reaches a minimum of zero for capital growth Kt+1 /Kt =  . We will later set it so
that, along the balanced growth path, the adjustment costs are equal to zero. Given this
normalization, the adjustment cost will modify the model dynamics, but will have the
same balanced growth path as a model without adjustment costs.
    The country can borrow from (or save with) the international lender. The lender is
risk neutral and fully commits to the contract. That includes the commitment not to
renegotiate in case the borrower deviates from the contract. The lender discounts cash
flows between periods t - 1 and t by an international interest rate R    t  0. The sequence
                                   
of international interest rates { Rt+1 } is exogenous. It can be time varying, but is constant
after a sufficiently distant period T at a level R .


Balanced Growth. The properties of the utility, production, and adjustment cost func-
tions imply that the economy has a balanced growth, where all variables grow at a
constant rate. Output, consumption and capital stock grow at rate (1 +  )(1 + ), where
                1
1 +  = (1 +  ) 1- is the growth of per capita values. We detrend the variables by setting

           At                       Kt                                  Ct                              It
 at =             ,   kt =                       ,     ct =                          ,    it =                     .
        (1 +  ) t            (1 +  ) t (1 +  ) t                 (1 +  ) t (1 +  ) t             (1 +  ) (1 +  ) t
                                                                                                        t




                                                           8
Since A grows at rate  after period T , the normalized TFP sequence { at } is bounded and
is equal to some constant a after period T . After the normalization, the representative
agent's utility function is now written as

                                                      
                                        v({ct }) =   ^ t U ( c t ),                                     (3)
                                                     t =0


where the discount factor is modified by ^ = (1 +  )(1 + )1- . The law of motion for
capital is now
                           (1 +  )(1 + )k t+1 = (1 - )k t + it .

    We also set the adjustment cost parameter  = (1 + )(1 +  ) to make sure that, along
the balanced growth path, where k t is constant, the adjustment costs are zero. For clarity
of the presentation, we will use a general notation for the the adjustment cost function
                                     2
 ( k t , k t +1 ) = 2 ( k t+1 - k t ) / k t , as well as for the production function f ( at , k t ) = at k t
                                                                                                           

wherever possible.
    We make two assumptions about the long-run international interest rates:

Assumption 1.

                                                              (1 +  ) 
                                  (1 +  )(1 + ) < R                    .                                (4)
                                                                  

    The first inequality implies that the present value of any bounded sequence of re-
sources is finite. This assumption is our equivalent of what is called "high implied inter-
est rates" in the general equilibrium versions of the limited commitment models (Kehoe
and Perri (2004)), and is imposed in order to ensure that the efficient allocations can
be decentralized as a competitive equilibrium. The second assumption means that the
borrower is weakly more impatient than the lender.4 It can be justified for example by
political economy frictions in the domestic country, as in Aguiar et al. (2009) or Aguiar
and Amador (2011), something that is likely to be relevant for a country like Argentina.
   4 As one can deduce from the assumption, we call both parties equally patient in the growth economy
if the modified discount factor of the lender (1 +  )(1 + )/ Rt equals to the modified discount factor of
the borrower, (1 +  )(1 + )1- .




                                                     9
4    Constrained Efficient Allocations
We first consider the constrained efficient allocations for this economy. At time zero,
the country and the lender sign a contract that specifies sequences of transfers from the
borrower to the lender, {trt }, consumption {ct } and capital stock {k t+1 }. The transfers
can be positive or negative. The resource constraint for the economy is

             ct + (1 +  )(1 + )k t+1 = f ( at , k t ) + (1 - )k t - (k t , k t+1 ) - trt .           (5)

   We require that the lender gets a present value of transfers of at least b0 . Define the
                                                                 t
implied discount factor between period 0 and t to be Q                               
                                                         t =  j=1 1/ R j , with Q0 = 1.
Then the requirement is

                                    
                                 t =0 Q          t       t
                                        t (1 +  ) (1 +  ) trt  b0 .                                  (6)

The present value of transfers b0 is a parameter of the contract. As usual, by varying the
value of b0 , we can trace out the whole Pareto frontier for the problem.
    The country faces a commitment problem. At any time, it can renege on the contract,
and refuse to repay its debt. If that happens, the contract is terminated, and the country
moves to autarky. Autarky is permanent, and the country will never again have a chance
to sign a new contract, although it can accumulate capital on its own. The lender, on
the other hand, has no commitment problems and always fulfills its contract obligations.
The value of autarky in period t is given by

                                                                  
                               vaut
                                t (k t ) =        max
                                                              }
                                                                ^ jU
                                             { c t + j , k t +1+ j j =0
                                                                          ct+ j .


subject to the nonnegativity constraints ct  0, k t+1  0, and the closed economy re-
source constraints

        ct+ j = f ( at+ j , k t+ j ) + (1 - )k t+ j -  k t+ j , k t+ j+1 - (1 +  )(1 + )k t+ j+1 .

    Without loss of generality, the contract requires that, in any period, the value of the




                                                        10
contract cannot be smaller than the value of being in autarky:

                               
                              ^ j U (ct+ j )  vaut
                                               t ( k t ),     t  0.                            (7)
                              j =0


Definition 1. Given exogenous sequences { at , R      t }, lender's profits b0 and initial capi-
tal k0 , the optimal contract consists of feasible sequences {ct , k t+1 , trt } that maximize the
country's lifetime utility (1) subject to the resource constraint (5), promise-keeping con-
straint for the lender (6) and the limited commitment constraint (7).

    We define the relative discount factor of the lender, relative to that of the borrower,
to be
                                         Q t (1 +  )
                                                     t
                                    pt =               .
                                               t
Assumption 1 implies that pt is ultimately weakly increasing over time, reflecting the
fact that, as time goes on, the difference between lender's and borrower's discounts
grows. Let  > 0 be the Lagrange multiplier on the promise-keeping constraint and
t µt  0 be the Lagrange multiplier on the limited commitment constraint in period t.
The first-order condition with respect to consumption is

                                                  t
                                  U ( c t ) 1 +  s =0 µ s =  p t .                             (8)

The optimal consumption sequence has standard properties of economies with limited
commitment. An increase in consumption in period t not only increases the agents'
utility directly, but also relaxes all limited commitment constraints up to period t. It
is, however, costly for the lender, and tightens the promise keeping constraint (6), with
period-t cost  pt . Evaluating the first-order condition (8) at two consecutive periods
yields the following intertemporal condition that must hold in the optimum:

                                        R           t +1
                                          t +1 1 +  s =0 µ s
                          U (ct ) =                          U ( c t +1 ) .                    (9)
                                      (1 +  )  1 +  t
                                                    s =0 µ s

If the limited commitment constraint (7) does not bind, the marginal utility of consump-
tion increases at rate (1 + ) /(  Rt+1 ) - 1, and consumption correspondingly decreases.
If the limited commitment constraint binds, µt > 0 and consumption permanently in-
creases, in order to prevent the country from reneging on the contract.


                                                 11
   The optimal capital stock is characterized by two conditions. One is the first-order
condition in capital,

                                                                  µt+1 dvaut
                                                                          t +1 ( k t +1 )
                Rt+1 (1 + 2,t ) = f k,t+1 + 1 -  - 1,t+1 -                                ,      (10)
                                                                   p t +1   dk t+1

where the derivatives of the adjustment cost function are

                                                                                   2
                                                   k   - k t  k t +1 - k t
                     1,t   = 1 (k t , k t+1 ) = - t+1       -                          ,
                                                      kt      2        kt
                                                              k t +1 - k t
                     2,t   = 2 (k t , k t+1 ) =                            .
                                                (1 +  )(1 + )      kt

    Equation (10) shows that an increase in the capital stock in period t has an additional
negative effect in that it raises the value of autarky in the next period, and so tightens
the limited commitment constraint. This decreases the optimal capital stock and current
investment.5 The adjustment costs have three effects on the optimal level of capital
costs. The first two are standard: along the transition path where the capital stock is
growing, the future marginal benefit of investment is increased by -1 > 0, because
a higher investment today will decrease the adjustment cost incurred tomorrow. The
future marginal benefit is discounted by 1/ R   t+1 . On the other hand, the marginal cost
of investment today increases by 2 > 0, because the current adjustment cost increases.
Depending on the size of both effects, the investment will decrease or increase. In a
limited commitment economy, there is an additional third effect on the value of capital
in autarky. By differentiation of the value function in autarky, we obtain

                           dvaut
                             t (k t )        aut                         aut
                                      =U    gt   (k t )   f k,t + 1 -  - 1, t ,
                              dk t

where gt aut ( k ) is the optimal consumption policy in autarky, and aut are the resulting
                t
adjustment costs. Note that 1,     aut will in general be different from  , because capital
                                    t                                    1,t
stock in autarky follows a different path than along the contract.
  5 In a two-country model of Kehoe and Perri (2004), there is an additional effect that works in the
opposite direction: binding limited commitment constraints increase future consumption and, given lim-
ited resources, encourage current investment. This effect is absent in our model, where the lender has
unlimited resources.




                                                   12
   The second optimality condition for capital is the transversality condition

                                                        t
                                   (1 + )(1 +  )
                               lim                          k t+1 = 0.                     (11)
                               t        R

The first-order conditions in consumption and capital stock (8) and (10), the comple-
mentary slackness conditions, the transversality conditon (11), and the constraints (5),
(6) and (7) completely characterize the optimal allocations.


The Euler Equation. Combining the equations above to eliminate the rate of return
Rt+1 yields the following expression for the Euler equation:



                 U (ct )
                                    (1 + 2,t ) = (1 - t+1 ) ( f k,t+1 + 1 -  - 1,t+1 ) ,   (12)
            (1 +  ) -  U ( c t +1 )

where the intertemporal wedge t+1 is given by

                                                                   aut
                            µ t +1      U caut
                                            t+1 f k,t+1 + 1 -  - 1,t+1
                t +1 =                                                   -1
                         1 + t
                             s =0 µ s   U (ct+1 ) f k,t+1 + 1 -  - 1,t+1

    If the limited commitment constraint does not bind tomorrow, then  = 0 and the
Euler equation reduces to its standard frictionless form. If the limited commitment
constraint binds tomorrow, then the wedge  will in general be nonzero. There are,
however, two opposing forces on the intertemporal wedge, and so the wedge can be
positive or negative. A positive force behind the intertemporal wedge is due to the
fact that higher capital stock makes the value of autarky more attractive. This makes
a higher capital stock less valuable. A negative force behind the intertemporal wedge
comes from fact that the binding limited commitment constraint increases consumption
tomorrow and increases the left-hand side of (12), which is the inverse of the marginal
rate of intertemporal substitution.
    If the adjustment costs are zero, then the bracketed term in the expression for the
intertemporal wedge reduces to U caut   t+1 /U ( ct+1 ) - 1, and its sign depends only on
the relative consumption in autarky and in the contract. If consumption in the autarky
falls below consumption in the contract, then the value of capital in autarky is relatively
high, the first effect dominates, and the intertemporal wedge is positive. Otherwise, the


                                                13
intertemporal wedge is negative.


4.1   Steady State
What happens when the economy converges to the steady state? We will now show that
the result depends critically on whether the borrower is strictly more impatient than
lender or not in the long run. If both are equally patient, then the economy converges
to a first-best limit, while if the borrower is strictly more impatient, it converges to the
steady state of a closed economy.

Proposition 1. Suppose that the adjustment costs are zero. If  R = (1 + ) then k t converges
to the first best steady state level of capital. If  R < (1 + ) then k t and ct converge to their
closed economy steady state levels.

Proof. First note that the dynamics of consumption and capital in autarky is the same as
in a closed economy. The steady state level of capital in autarky kaut
                                                                   ss satisfies


                                f k (kaut
                                      ss ) + 1 -  = (1 +  ) / .
                                                           
                                                                                            (13)

Consumption in autarky after period T is given by the optimal policy function gaut (k )
which solves a standard dynamic programming problem of optimal growth and is
strictly increasing. In particular, consumption immediately after defaulting in steady
state is caut
           1  = gaut (k ss ), while consumption in the steady state of the autarky is caut
                                                                                        ss =
 aut   aut                   aut     aut 
g (k ss ). In between, c = ( g ) (k ss ), where  denotes the number of periods spent
in autarky. The consumption sequence in autarky {caut                    aut              aut
                                                          } is between c1 and its limit css ,
to which it monotonically converges.
    To simplify notation, let  = (1 + ) /(  R )  1. In the steady state, consumption
and capital are constant at css and k ss and the first-order conditions (9) and (10) converge
to
                                         +1
                                   1 + t
                                       s =0 µ s
                          = lim                                                             (14)
                              t    1 + t
                                       s =0 µ s
                                                         U ( gaut (k ss ))
                        R = [ f k (k ss ) + 1 - ] 1 -                      ,                (15)
                                                               

where  is the steady state value of the ratio µt+1 / pt+1 .



                                               14
   Consider first the case when  = 1. Then equation (14) implies that µt+1 must
converge to zero. Hence  = 0 and the marginal product of capital satisfies f k (k ss ) + 1 -
 = R , which is its first-best level.
   Consider now the case when  > 1. Write µt = t . Solving for  from (14) and
using (8) yields
                                      -1 
                                   =            > 0.
                                       U (css )
That is, the limited commitment constraint must bind in the steady state. As a result,
the steady state transfer to the lender trss cannot be strictly negative. If it were, the
continuation present value of lender's profits is strictly negative and the lender is better
off by mimicking autarky in steady state, which delivers zero profits and leaves the
lifetime utility of the borrower unchanged. The steady state transfer to the lender trss
cannot be strictly positive either. If it were, moving to autarky increases the borrower's
resources in every future period and must yield strictly higher lifetime utility than the
optimal contract, violating the limited commitment constraint (7). Hence, trss must be
zero. The optimal steady state consumption is given by the resource constraint (5),

                           css = f ( a, k ss ) - ( +  +  + )k ss .                        (16)

It is obvious that the steady state level of capital must be below its golden rule level, oth-
erwise one can increase the borrower's consumption and utility by reducing the capital
stock and saving resources.
     We will now show that k ss = kaut                                            aut
                                     ss . Suppose, by contradiction, that k ss > k ss . Then


     css = f ( a, k ss ) - ( +  +  + )k ss > f ( a, kaut                   aut    aut
                                                     ss ) - (  +  +  +  ) k ss = css ,


where the first equality follows from (16), the inequality from the fact that k ss is below
its golden rule level and the proposition that is to be contradicted, and the last equality
follows from the steady state of the closed economy. Substitute now  out of equation
(15) and rewrite it as

                 (1 +  )                                    U ( gaut (k ss ))
                          = [ f k (k ss ) + 1 - ]  + (1 - )                   .           (17)
                                                              U (css )




                                              15
For (17) to hold simultaneously with (13), it must be that

                                       css > gaut (k ss ) = caut
                                                             1 .


Since the consumption sequence in autarky monotonically converges from caut          aut
                                                                               1 to css ,
it must satisfy css > caut for all   0. But then the limited commitment constraint (7)
must be slack, a contradiction. An analogous argument rules out k ss < kautss by showing
that the limited commitment constraint must then be violated.6 Hence, it must be that
k ss = kaut                                                           aut
        ss . It then follows from the resource constraint that css = css .



    Proposition 1 shows that, as long as the borrowers are relatively more impatient
than lenders, the first-best and the second-best economy have different implications in
the long run. While the capital stock in the first-best economy remains at its first-best
level, capital stock in the second-best economy converges to the closed economy level.
Moreover, borrowing constraints prevent consumption from falling, and so consumption
settles at a closed economy level in the long run as well. As a result, the steady state
will be independent of the international risk free rate R . Lower international interest
rates may have a transitory effect on the capital stock, but will have no effect on it in
the long run. Proposition 1 also implies optimal capital and consumption sequences are
both bounded, and so is the transfer sequence.
    Proposition 1 is also useful for calibration of the model. If the target steady state
capital-output ratio is smaller than the one implied by the first best economy, given by
 /( R +  - 1), then the borrowers must be more impatient than the lender, and the
steady state of the economy can be calibrated as if the economy were closed, indepen-
dently of the risk-free rate R .


4.2    Decentralizing the Efficient Allocations
The Pareto efficient allocations can be decentralized as a self-enforcing equilibrium
where individuals in the country borrow and lend directly from abroad using one-period
bonds, the government appropriately chooses capital income tax rates (to satisfy the Eu-
ler equation (9) and so induce the optimal capital stock), collects debt payments from
   6 Theassumption of zero adjustment costs is useful in this step, because the adjustment costs reduce
the value of autarky, but not the value of the contract, where the capital stock is constant.



                                                  16
the agents to pass them to foreigners, and makes default decisions on the collected debt
(so as to make sure that the limited commitment constraint (7) holds). The self-enforcing
equilibrium is itself an outcome of a sustainable equilibrium, in the language of Chari
and Kehoe (1990) and Kehoe and Perri (2004), where the government chooses its policies
optimally for any given history of past policies, consumers take policies as given, and
the government chooses policies consistent with autarky for off-equilibrium histories.
While the decentralization is obviously necessary to justify our focus on the constrained
efficient allocations, it is relatively standard, and is relegated to an online Appendix A.


5     Inspecting the mechanism
To understand the workings of the model, and the forces that determine capital ac-
cumulation as well as the dynamics of consumption, we now consider several simple
numerical examples. Unless stated otherwise, all examples assume that the utility is
logarithmic, capital share  is one third, there is full depreciation ( = 1), there is no
population and TFP growth, and the discount factor  equals 0.96. We fist assume that
there are no adjustment costs and that  R                       7
                                           t = 1 in all periods. We focus on two aspects:
how capital stock responds to a positive versus negative productivity shock, and how it
responds to a change in the interest rate.


5.1    Response to a productivity shock.
Consider an anticipated one-time increase in the total factor productivity a. The total
factor productivity increases in period 5 and then reverts back to its original level, as
in Panel 3a. Panel 3b shows how the capital stock responds in a closed economy, in an
economy with commitment, and in an economy with limited commitment. In the first-
best and the second-best economy, capital and consumption decisions are separated,
because the economy can borrow and save. In both economies, capital stock is at its
steady state level in all periods except in period 5. In both the first-best and the second-
best economy, capital stock increases when the marginal product of capital is high. The
increase in capital stock thus happens one period earlier than in a closed economy,
   7 We solve the model by solving the corresponding first-order conditions (8) and (10). We iterate on the

set of binding limited commitment constraints by dropping the ones that are slack and by adding those
that are violated, until convergence. We then iterate on the Lagrange multiplier  until the model yields
the required initial debt d0 .


                                                    17
                                                               0.34                                                            0.6
                                                                                           closed economy                                                closed economy
       1.5                                                                                 full commitment                                               full commitment
                                                                                           limited commitment                                            limited commitment
                                                               0.32

                                                                                                                              0.55
                                                                0.3
       1.4


                                                               0.28
                                                                                                                               0.5




                                                                                                                consumption
                                               capital stock
       1.3
 TFP




                                                               0.26


                                                                                                                              0.45
       1.2                                                     0.24



                                                               0.22
                                                                                                                               0.4
       1.1

                                                                0.2



        1                                                      0.18                                                           0.35
             2   4   6    8     10   12   14                          2    4   6     8      10     12     14                         2    4   6    8      10     12     14
                         time                                                       time                                                          time

        (a) Total Factor Productivity                                     (b) Capital Stock                                              (c) Consumption

Figure 3: Response to a temporary positive TFP shock without adjustment costs. Red dots in
panel (a) denote periods when the limited commitment constraint binds.


because the mechanism behind the increase in capital stock is different: In a closed
economy, the desire to smooth consumption prevents the agents to increase capital stock
in period 5, because that would require high investment in period 4, and a drop in
consumption. Instead, investment only happens in period 5 when the economy has
more resources, and the effect on capital stock is purely transitory.
    In the second best economy, the desire to invest in capital stock is reduced by the lim-
ited commitment constraint considerations. As panel 3a shows, the limited commitment
constraint binds in period 5. That is, the first-best level of capital stock would prompt
the agents to default and move to autarky. This reduces the capital stock in period 5.
The level of consumption, shown in panel 3c is, however, pushed upward. This stands
in contrast to the closed economy, where consumption decreases after the shock.
    Figure 4 shows a response to a one-time decrease in the productivity shock in period
5. The response of the second-best economy is now different in two aspects. First, since
the limited commitment constraint does not bind at the time of the negative productivity
shock, capital stock decreases by the same amount as in the first-best economy. Second,
the limiting commitment constraint now binds in all the periods following the decrease
in productivity. To see why, note that the agents consume more than their production
in period 5. Thus, they need to transfer resources back to the lender after period 5.

                                                                                   18
        1                                                       0.2                                                            0.4




                                                               0.18
       0.9
                                                                                                                              0.35


                                                               0.16

       0.8
                                                                                                                               0.3




                                                                                                                consumption
                                               capital stock
                                                               0.14
 TFP




       0.7
                                                               0.12
                                                                                                                              0.25



                                                                0.1
       0.6

                                                                                                                               0.2

                                                               0.08
                                                                                           closed economy                                                closed economy
       0.5                                                                                 full commitment                                               full commitment
                                                                                           limited commitment                                            limited commitment
                                                               0.06                                                           0.15
             2   4   6    8     10   12   14                          2    4   6     8      10     12     14                         2    4   6    8      10     12     14
                         time                                                       time                                                          time

        (a) Total Factor Productivity                                     (b) Capital Stock                                              (c) Consumption

Figure 4: Response to a temporary negative TFP shock without adjustment costs. Red dots in
Figure 1 denote periods when the limited commitment constraint binds.


There are no future shocks, and so no benefit from future insurance. If the capital
stock immediately reverted back to the first-best level, they would prefer to default. To
prevent them from defaulting, the value of autarky needs to be decreased by decreasing
the capital stock. The recovery of the capital stock is now sluggish compared to the
first-best economy, although the decline in period 5 is identical.
    Overall, figures 3 and 4 show that the limited commitment constraints introduced
an asymmetry to the capital accumulation process. The response to a positive shock is
muted, and the reversal to the steady state level is rapid, while a response to a negative
shock is large, and the reversal to the steady state level is slow.
    When the adjustment costs are introduced, the dynamics of the capital stocks differs
in certain aspects: the build-up of the capital stock is gradual in all three economies, and
starts before the productivity shock happens. Similarly, the return to the steady state
level of the capital stock is slower. But the asymmetric response of the capital stock in
the second best economy to a positive and negative productivity shock is still there, and
the mechanism is identical to the one explained above.




                                                                                   19
5.2   The role of international interest rates.
Previous examples were simulated under the assumption that  R       t = 1, and so the
required rate of return on capital investment exactly offsets the discount rate. What
happens if the investors require a lower rate of return?


An example solved. To understand how the international interest rates interact with
capital accumulation, we first consider an example where  = 0 and so the period utility
is linear. As in Aguiar and Amador (2011), a case with linear utility has a simple closed
form dynamics. To simplify the problem further, we continue assuming that there are
no adjustment costs, and that  =  = 0. For simplicity, we consider a case when the
nonnegativity constraint on consumption is not binding.
     The first-order condition for consumption (8) now simplifies to µ0 =  - 1, and

                                  µt
                                     = (1 -  R t ) ,         t  1.
                                  pt

The Lagrange multiplier µt is always strictly positive if the lender is more patient and
 R t < 1, and is zero only if both parties are equally patient. Moreover, µt always
moves in the opposite direction than the international interest rate. That is, the limited
commitment problems become more severe if the world interest rate decreases (in a
sense that the normalized Lagrange multiplier µt / pt increases). This has important
consequences for the dynamics of investment and capital stock. The first-order condition
(10) now becomes

                                           µ t +1
        Rt +1 = ( f k ,t +1 + 1 -  ) 1 -              = ( f k ,t +1 + 1 -  ) 1 - (1 -  R t +1 )   (18)
                                            p t +1

The first term in the last bracket represents a direct effect of the international interest
rates on the marginal product of capital: lower international interest rates decrease the
required marginal product of capital, and increase the capital stock. This is a standard
"first-best" result. The second term in the last bracket represents the effect of the limited
commitment constraints on the capital stock. Rearranging the expression (18) yields

                                                         1
                                       f k ,t +1 =  - 1 + .
                                                         

The international interest rate Rt+1 has cancelled out, and the marginal product of capital


                                                     20
equals  - 1 + 1/ , a steady state closed economy level. In this case, the positive direct
effect of lower international interest rates is exactly offset by a negative effect of the
limited commitment constraints. The second best capital stock is independent of the
international interest rate, not only in the steady state, but in every period except period
zero.


Numerical examples with concave utility. To investigate how robust the results from
the linear utility case are, we now consider numerical examples for various degrees of
risk aversion.
    Figure 5 shows the capital stock response to a one-time increase in productivity in
period 5 for various values of the international rate of return R    t , and for  = 0.5, 1 and
5. In this numerical example, the limited commitment constraint always binds in period
5. In other periods shown in figure 5, the limited commitment constraint does not bind,
and the capital stock is at its first best level. Panel 5b shows the capital stock in period 5,
which is the period when productivity increases. In the first-best economy, the response
of capital stock to the increase in the interest rate is unambiguous. Foreign investors
require a higher rate of return, which decreases the capital stock.
    In the second-best economy, the optimal capital stock reacts very differently. Lower
interest rates lead to a decrease, rather than increase, of the capital stock. Compared
to the linear utility case, the indirect effects of the limited commitment constraints are
strengthened. To understand why this is the case, specialize the optimality condition
(10) for zero adjustment costs to obtain an alternative equation for the optimal capital
stock:
                                                                       aut ( k
                                                        µ t +1    U   gt +1 t +1 )
                Rt +1 = ( f k ,t +1 + 1 -  ) 1 -         +1
                                                                                     .    (19)
                                                   1 + t
                                                       s =0 µ s
                                                                      U ( c t +1 )

Relative to the linear utility case, the wedge between the return to capital f k,t+1 + 1 - 
and the international rate R   t+1 is given not only by the severity of the limited commit-
ment constraints, but also by the difference between the marginal utility of consumption
in autarky and on the contract. The new term typically weakens the importance of lim-
ited commitment: The limited commitment constraints usually bind in good states, and
in good states the consumption in autarky gt      aut ( k ) tends to exceed the consumption
                                                         t
on the contract. The marginal value of capital in autarky is thus diminished. How-
ever, this term turns out to be relatively unimportant in the numerical exercises we have

                                                   21
       1.12                                                     0.23                                                               0.425
                                                                                    full commitment
                                                                                    limited commitment,   =0.5                                          R =0.965    R =1.000
                                                                                    limited commitment,   =1                        0.42
                                                                                    limited commitment,   =5
        1.1                                                     0.22

                                                                                                                                   0.415


       1.08                                                     0.21                                                                0.41




                                                capital stock




                                                                                                                     consumption
                                                                                                                                   0.405
 TFP




       1.06                                                      0.2

                                                                                                                                     0.4


       1.04                                                     0.19                                                               0.395


                                                                                                                                    0.39
       1.02                                                     0.18

                                                                                                                                   0.385


         1                                                      0.17                                                                0.38
              2   4   6    8     10   12   14                          0.97      0.98         0.99               1                          2   4   6    8     10   12   14
                          time                                                          R                                                               time

        (a) Total Factor Productivity                            (b) Capital Stock in period 5                                             (c) Consumption,  = 1

Figure 5: Left panel: Total factor productivity. Middle panel: Capital stock in period 5 as a
function of  R , no adjustment costs. Right panel: consumption dynamics for various values of
R and  = 1; darker color represents lower R .


performed.
   The key term is the first term in the bracket that involves the Lagrange multipliers
on the limited commitment constraint. It can be written as

                                                            µ t +1                                   U ( c t +1 )
                                                  +1
                                                                              = 1 -  Rt +1                        .                                                       (20)
                                            1 + t
                                                s =0 µ s
                                                                                                      U (ct )

For linear utility, this term is equal to 1 -  R                               
                                                 t+1 and so decreases with Rt+1 at rate . For
concave utility, it decreases with R  t+1 at a faster rate for the following reason. Low inter-
national interest rates are associated with a decreasing consumption when the limited
commitment constraints are slack. The lower the international rate, the faster is the de-
cline in consumption, as in Panel 5c, where darker color represents lower R . To satisfy
the binding limited commitment constraint in period t + 1, consumption ct+1 must there-
fore be relatively higher for lower international rates. As a result, low international rates
are associated with low marginal rate of substitution U (ct+1 )/U (ct ). This magnifies
the effect of the international rates on the left-hand side of (20), which now decreases
with R  t+1 at a rate higher than . This dominates the last term in (19) and completely
overturns the first-best result. As Panel 5b shows, this is true for all three levels of .


                                                                                 22
However, the effect is stronger for lower elasticity of intertemporal substitution 1/, as
expected.
   In the presence of incomplete capital stock depreciation or adjustment costs, capital
stock in other periods will be affected as well, stretching the impact of low interest rates
to other periods, but the main result was unchanged in our examples. We have also
constructed examples, where lower interest rate increases the set of binding incentive
constraints. In such case, lower interest rates generate an additional downward pressure
on capital stock in other periods.


6    Data and Calibration
Capital stock data. Empirical implementations of the neoclassical growth model for
Argentina, as for many other countries, has been hindered by the lack of a capital stock
series that could be trusted. In fact, Argentina's government statistical agencies do not
report an official series for the capital stock. Thus, researchers need to construct their
own series using the perpetual inventory method, starting from a year in the sufficiently
distant past, for which it can be safely assumed that the capital stock was virtually zero.
The extent to which the resulting capital stock series can be trusted hinges critically,
however, on the availability of a sufficiently long investment series for the different com-
ponents of the capital stock. In its absence, one needs to estimate the capital stock for
a particular year in the not-too-distant past and then exploit more recently available in-
vestment data to construct the series for that stock going forward with the perpetual
inventory method.
    Kydland and Zarazaga (2007) used the first approach to construct a capital stock time
series for the period 1950-1997. We adopt their capital stock series in our benchmark cal-
ibration. The details of their method can be consulted in the Appendix B of their paper.
Here it suffices to say that those authors exploited the availability of investment series for
machinery and equipment, as well as for structures, for Argentina since the year 1900, to
build up the capital stock with the perpetual inventory method, assuming that its initial
level that year was zero and applying "truncated geometric depreciation" schedule used
by the Economic Commission for Latin America (ECLAC hereafter) in several studies
for a similar purpose. Hofman (2000) has argued that, with such depreciation scheme,
investment series that go back to the year 1900 can start delivering reliable series of the
capital stock fifty years later, that is, since 1950.

                                             23
    Since that original capital stock series, referred hereafter as the KZ series, goes only
until the year 1997, it was necessary to extend it for our purposes to the years 1998-
2008, applying the same perpetual inventory methodology to the investment data in
1993 prices for the period 1997-2008 published by Argentina's official statistical agency,
the Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas y Censos (INDEC). The paper refrains from using
the investment series for subsequent years because, as is well known, in 2007 the agency
lost its autonomy and the national accounts started to be manipulated for political con-
siderations, to the point of raising serious suspicions about their accuracy.8 Since the
investment series for the 1997-2008 period were reported in 1993 prices, it was neces-
sary to convert to those prices the investment series in 1986 prices used by Kydland
and Zarazaga. This was accomplished by applying retroactively to the value of each
component of the investment series, that is, to the level of investment in machinery and
equipment, residential structures and non-residential structures in the year 1997, the
growth rates between consecutive years in the original series in 1986 prices.
   The second approach for construction of the capital stock series has been used in
the Penn World Tables, version 9.1. We use the alternative Penn World Table capital
stock series, referred hereafter as the PWT series as a robustness check. The PWT series
also applies the perpetual inventory method, but using investment series only since
1950, starting from the level of capital stock estimated for that year with the procedure
described in Appendix C of Feenstra et al. (2015).
   Figure 6a plots both estimates of the detrended capital stock for the 1980-2008 period.
There are two obvious differences between those capital stock estimates. The first is that
the capital stock of the PWT series is considerably higher than in the KZ series. The
second is that the PWT series is smoother than the KZ series, and declines at a faster
pace.
   The reasons for these rather striking discrepancies are twofold. First, the procedure
applied in the PWT to obtain the capital stock for 1950 delivers a value that is about 22
percent higher than the corresponding value induced in the KZ series by the perpetual
inventory method. Second, the depreciation rates for the different components of the
investment series assumed by the PWT are considerably lower than those implied by
the ECLAC truncated geometric depreciation scheme that is used in constructing the
   8 The  efforts of the following administration to correct the problem seem to have largely failed, judging
from the warning posted as of September 23, 2019 in the INDEC's website, cryptically warning readers
that "...the series published after January 2007 and until December 2015 must be treated with reservations..."


                                                     24
2.8                                                                -1



2.6
                                                                  -1.2

2.4

                                                                  -1.4
2.2



 2                                                                -1.6



1.8
                                                                  -1.8

1.6

                                                                   -2
1.4
             Detrended Capital Stock, KZ series                                Detrended TFP, KZ series
             Detrended Capital Stock, PWT series                               Detrended TFP, PWT series
1.2                                                               -2.2
 1980        1985          1990          1995      2000   2005       1980       1985        1990           1995   2000   2005

                          (a) Capital Stock                                 (b) Total Factor Productivity. Log index.

Figure 6: Total Factor Productivity and Capital Stock for Argentina, 1980-2008, detrended. KZ
series versus Penn World Tables 9.1 series


KZ series. The reason is that, according to the ECLAC methodology, different assets
cease to be productive after a certain number of years. In particular, that methodology
assumes a useful life of 50 years for residential structures, 40 years for nonresidential
structures, and 15 years for machinery and equipment.9 The finite lifetime assumption
implies that, while still productive, machinery and equipment, nonresidential structures,
and residential structures depreciate at the geometric rates of 16.5 percent, 8.81 percent,
and 7.53 percent, respectively.10 As a result, the depreciation rate for any given year is a
weighted average of the three depreciation rates just identified, with the weights equal
to the share of the corresponding component on total investment. The resulting average
depreciation rate over the period 1980-2008 adopted for the calibration is 11.7 percent.
Note that this value is not far from that adopted in several papers in the business cycle
      9 As
         pointed out by Hofman in the abovementioned paper, these asset-life estimates are not too far from
those that the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis has used in the past to estimate that country's capital
stock.
   10 These depreciation rates stem from the fact that the residual value at a given period t of an asset of type

i installed j periods ago is given by It (1 - i ) j , where i is the depreciation rate of the asset, Iti the period t
investment in the asset, and jT. Since the residual value of asset i in the last year of its useful life is Iti / T ,
                                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                                It
its geometric depreciation rate while still productive is obtained by solving the equation Iti (1 - i ) T =                     T.



                                                                 25
literature, such as that by Kydland and Prescott (1982) and King and Rebelo (1999),
among others.
    In contrast, the PWT assumes that the different types of assets that make up to-
tal investment remain forever productive and, in addition, it applies to most of them
geometric depreciation rates that are much lower than those implied by the ECLAC pro-
cedure. Of course, as in the case of the KZ series, the depreciation rate for every year
is a weighted average of that of the different categories of assets included in total in-
vestment. The resulting PWT average depreciation rate for the period 1980-2008 under
study is about 3.4 percent. The fact that this rate of obsolescence is less than a third of
that of the KZ capital stock and moreover, that the source of investment data is the same
for the underlying corresponding methodologies, explains why the PWT capital stock
series doesn't fall as fast as the KZ series: the lower the depreciation rate, the more the
same flow of investment adds to the not-yet-depreciated capital stock.


Working Age Population. Working age population, defined as individuals 20 to 69
years old, is also published by the INDEC. Since that source provides only quinquennial
population estimates, the data for the intermediate years were obtained by geometric
interpolation.


Output. We extended the output series from Kydland and Zarazaga (2007) for the years
1998-2008, with the data published by the INDEC in 1993 prices and expressed the entire
series for the period 1980-2008 with the same procedure applied to the investment series
outlined above.


Total Factor Productivity. This series was obtained from the output and capital stock
series by applying to the production function (2) the standard growth accounting proce-
dure, one for each of the two alternative values of the capital income share and capital
stock series considered in the quantitative implementation of the model. The detrended
TFP series were normalized by setting its value in 1980 to that which makes the average
value of those series over the period 1980-2008 equal to the value of TFP in steady state,
assumed to be 1 following standard practice. The corresponding detrended output and
capital series were normalized by a common constant, such that the value of output
would be 1 if the capital stock were at its steady state value in any particular year of the
1980-2008 period. Figure 6b plots the resulting TFP time series for both estimates of the


                                            26
capital stock. Apart from the level shift, both estimates are similar.


International Real Interest Rates. The real international interest rates were constructed
from the same data sources used by Neumeyer and Perri (2005) and with their same
procedure. Accordingly, the nominal interest rates series are the yields of the Merrrill
Lynch's High Yield 175 U.S. Bond Index series and its successor, the Merrill Lynch's Low-
Grade Corporate Bond yields at different frequencies. The average quarterly values of
these series between the first quarter of 1980 and the last one of 2008 were deflated by
expected inflation with the approach followed by Neumeyer and Perri, that is, by the
inflation rate of the GDP deflator in the corresponding quarter and the three preceding
ones. The annual real international interest rates were calculated as the average of the
four quarters of the corresponding year. The resulting time series for the international
interest rate has been shown in Figure 2 in the introductory section.


6.1   Calibration
We calibrate the model for the Argentine economy as follows. We set the coefficient of
relative risk aversion  = 2 and capital share  = 0.4. Based on the 1980-2008 period, we
compute the depreciation rate  = 0.117, net growth rate of technology  = 0.015 and
working age population growth rate  = 0.014.
    The steady state international risk free rate R  ss is set to its average over the 1980-
2008 period, which is 8.5 percent. We calibrate the discount factor  to be such that the
steady state capital-output ratio is equal to 1.656, its average over the 1980-2008 period.
The capital-output ratio has varied considerably over time, and we will later provide
robustness results for alternative values. The steady state capital-output ratio is lower
than what can be supported in a first-best economy. As suggested by Proposition 1, the
limited commitment constraints will bind in the steady state. The resulting equilibrium
interest rate Rss faced by Argentina is 12.4 percent, which means that the steady state
default rate is 3.53 percent. The steady state equilibrium interest rate in turn yields the
discount factor  = 0.916. Finally, we set the adjustment cost parameter  so as to match
the volatility of investment over the 1980-2008 period to the data. This yields  = 0.397.
The benchmark parameters are summarized in Table 1.
    We run the experiment for the 1980-2008 period. We set the initial level of debt d0 in
1980 to be zero, which is close to 3.2 percent of GDP, as computed by Lane and Milesi-


                                             27
Ferretti (2017). We feed in the actual time series for TFP, { at } and assume that, after
2008, it reverts back to its mean value.

                              Table 1: Benchmark Parameters

                                                      Rss             d1980 /y1980
              2.000   0.916   0.117   0.015   0.014   1.085   0.397   0



    Figure 7a shows the total factor productivity in Argentina for 1980-2008. After a
relatively rapid decrease in the 1980's, Argentine TFP recovered for most of 1990s, with
a mild exception in 1995, when TFP temporarily declined. The crisis between 1998
and 2002 is visible by another drastic decline in TFP. After that, TFP recovered again.
Red dots in figure 7b show periods when the limited commitment constraints bind:
between 1991 and 1998, with the exception of 1995, and then after 2004. Those are
periods when TFP is relatively high. As figure 7b shows, binding limited commitment
constraints imply that the capital stock is relatively low. In contrast, in the first-best
economy, investors accumulate a large amount of capital: in the absence of the limited
commitment constraints, capital stock would be about 40% higher, on average, between
1990 and 2008.
    In other words, the calibrated model traces the decline that Argentina's capital stock
experienced during the 1980s with remarkable accuracy because, as predicted by theory,
the limited commitment constraints were almost never binding during that decade. At
the same time, the limited enforcement frictions were often binding in the subsequent
two decades, resulting in a capital stock, represented by the red line in Figure 7b, that
accounts for between 50% and 85% of that stock missing from the Argentine economy
in 1990s and 2000s, as captured by the distance between the blue and black lines in that
same figure.
    Notice also, as discussed in detail below, that the calibrated model is successful
at replicating Argentina's capital stock asymmetric response to positive and negative
changes of its total factor productivity and to its seemingly subdued reaction to lower
international interest rates.


Response to TFP changes. Figure 7b also shows how the capital stock responds asym-
metrically to changes in productivity. While the decline in the 1980s is about the same as


                                              28
0.38                                                   3
                                                           data
                                                           full commitment
0.36                                               2.8     limited commitment
                                                           closed economy


0.34                                               2.6


0.32                                               2.4


 0.3                                               2.2


0.28                                                   2


0.26                                               1.8


0.24                                               1.6


0.22                                               1.4


 0.2                                               1.2
  1980   1985     1990    1995     2000    2005     1980   1985          1990    1995       2000   2005

           (a) Total Factor Productivity                                (b) Capital Stock

Figure 7: TFP and capital stock for Argentina, 1980-2008, benchmark calibration. Red dots in
panel (a) denote years when the limited commitment constraint binds.


in a full commitment economy, the reversal in 1990s is substantially stronger in the full
commitment economy. By 1994, capital stock in the full commitment economy has fully
recovered to its 1980 level, but remains 24 percent below the 1980 level in the limited
commitment economy. A similar pattern is repeated after 2002, when the capital stock
increases rapidly above its 2002 level under full commitment, while under limited com-
mitment it reaches its 2002 level only in 2008. The asymmetric response of the limited
commitment economy is reminiscent of the closed economy, also depicted in Figure 7b,
although both economies exhibit differences in its capital stock dynamics, especially in
periods when the limited commitment constraint does not bind.


The role of international rates. Figure 7a shows that the limited commitment con-
straints were binding between 1992 and 1999, and then again between 2004 and 2008.
Those time periods coincide with periods of low international interest rates, as shown
in Figure 8a, which replicates the data from Figure 2 for convenience. The examples in
section 5 suggest that the low interest rates should contribute to the decline of the capital
stock, rather than increase it, as in an economy without commitment problems. To in-
vestigate this hypothesis, we consider an experiment where the interest rates after 1990

                                                  29
1.12                                                            3
                                                                    data
                                                                    full commitment, benchmark
                                                            2.8     full commitment, high international rates
1.11
                                                                    limited commitment, benchmark
                                                                    limited commitment, high international rates
                                                            2.6
 1.1

                                                            2.4
1.09

                                                            2.2
1.08
                                                                2

1.07
                                                            1.8

1.06
                                                            1.6


1.05
                                                            1.4
          benchmark
          high international rates
1.04                                                        1.2
   1980   1985            1990       1995    2000   2005     1980   1985            1990           1995            2000   2005

                         (a) Interest Rate                                        (b) Capital Stock

   Figure 8: Capital stock in an economy with high international rates between 1991 and 2008.


stay forever at their 1990 level of 11.5 percent, higher than any interest rate afterwards.
Figure 8b shows the resulting capital stock. As conjectured, the capital stock between
1990 and 1997, and then between 2005 and 2008, would be higher than in a benchmark
economy, even if marginally (for example, by 2 percent in 1997). Low interest rates thus
contributed to the decrease of the capital stock, rather than its increase. In contrast, in
the absence of the limited commitment friction, low interest rates would increase the
capital stock substantially, for example by 30 percent in 1997.
    Interestingly, the pattern is reversed in the interim period between 1999 and 2003,
when the limited commitment constraints do not bind, and only the direct effect of
interest rates is present.11 Lower interest rates increase the capital stock both in a limited
commitment economy and in a full commitment economy. Note, however, that the
increase is substantially larger in the economy with full commitment. That is because of
the adjustment costs. Knowing that capital stock will decrease again in the near future,
the agents in the limited commitment economy are reluctant to increase the capital stock
by more. Thus, the second best effects "spill over" even to the periods when the limited
  11 In1998, 1999 and 2004, the limited commitment constraints bind in the benchmark economy, but not
in the economy with high interest rates.



                                                           30
                  3


                 2.8


                 2.6


                 2.4


                 2.2


                  2


                 1.8


                 1.6

                                                              data
                 1.4                                          limited commitment
                                                              full commitment after 2002
                                                              full commitment after 1991
                 1.2
                  1990     1995     2000     2005      2010           2015                 2020


Figure 9: Capital stock in a second best economy, and in an economy where the limited commit-
ment constraints are unexpectedly relaxed either in 1991 or in 2002.


commitment constraints do not bind and reduce the response of the capital stock.


7    What if Argentina gains commitment?
To the extent that the inability to commit to honor its external debt obligations is a feature
inherent to Argentina's economy, that country seems doomed to stagnation. But the lim-
ited commitment constraints in the model economy can be thought of as a shortcut for a
poor institutional configuration or social norms that prevent Argentina's governments,
and the citizens who vote for them, to visualize the benefits of no longer belonging to
the list of nations perceived as prone to "opportunistic defaults." Knowledge of the gains
brought about by that change of perception in international credit markets could help to
gather support for the structural reforms needed to remove Argentina from such a list.
    Thus, suppose now that that nation, magically as it were, had implemented in 2003
those reforms. How much more capital would it have accumulated as a result? The
answer is shown in Figure 9. There would be a gradual buildup of capital stock after
2000. The build-up would be substantial but, due to the adjustment cost, it would take
about 15 years to get to the new steady state. The new steady state would have about
40 percent more capital stock than it would be in the presence of limited commitment

                                             31
constraints.
    In the interim period, moreover, the capital stock would have been substantially
higher, propped up by the surge of TFP observed over the period 2003-2008. In fact,
in 2007, the capital stock would have been almost 80% above that of the economy with
the limited commitment friction. The implication for workers is that their real wages,
assuming the capital share of 0.4 adopted in the benchmark calibration, would have been
that year a whopping 25% higher. Of course, this gain would have subsided over time,
as TFP reverted to its average. Real wages would have been, nevertheless, permanently
higher by about 13% after the economy converged to the steady state of the economy
with commitment.
    A similar message emerges from performing the same exercise after 1991. In the year
2007 the capital stock and real wages would have been 40% and 15% higher, respectively,
in the economy with commitment than without it. In fact, Argentine workers would have
enjoyed real wages on average 13% higher over the period 1992-2008, a gain that would
persist over time, because it is the same associated with the higher capital stock of the
economy free of the limited commitment friction.


8    Sensitivity Analysis
In this section we explore the robustness of our results to alternative assumptions about
the capital-output ratio and about the capital stock.
    Since the results are sensitive to the target capital-output ratio, we have targeted the
steady-state capital-output ratio to 1.539, which is the average capital-output ratio over
the 1990-2008 period. This requires a slightly lower discount factor of 0.901. As a result,
the limited commitment constraints now bind more often. Unlike in the benchmark
scenario, they also bind in 1983, 1991, 2000 and 2003, and the difference between limited
commitment economy and the closed economy is smaller. The capital stock is now closer
to the data, however: in 2008, for example, it is about 10 percent higher than in the data,
while the benchmark economy overshoots the data by about 20 percent. The remaining
features of the capital stock dynamics are similar to the benchmark economy.
    Second, we use capital stock estimates from the Penn World Tables 9.1 dataset. The
differences from our benchmark dataset were described in Section 6. This requires a
recalibration of the model: the depreciation rate is now 3.39 percent instead of 11.7


                                            32
 0.3                                                2.75
                                                                                           data
                                                                                           limited commitment
0.28                                                 2.7                                   closed economy


                                                    2.65
0.26

                                                     2.6
0.24

                                                    2.55
0.22
                                                     2.5
 0.2
                                                    2.45

0.18
                                                     2.4

0.16
                                                    2.35


0.14                                                 2.3


0.12                                                2.25
   1980   1985     1990    1995     2000    2005       1980   1985    1990    1995       2000        2005

            (a) Total Factor Productivity                            (b) Capital Stock

Figure 10: TFP and capital stock for Argentina, 1980-2008, Penn World Tables 9.1 data. Red dots
in panel (a) denote years when the limited commitment constraint binds.


percent, and the steady state capital to output ratio is 2.896 instead of 1.656. In addition,
the long-run growth rate  is reduced to 1 percent instead of 1.5 percent. This requires
a substantial recalibration of the adjustment costs, that are now equal to 5.777, about 15
times higher than in the benchmark calibration, and of the discount factor, which is now
0.870.
    Figure 10 shows the results. Due to a higher discount factor, the limited commitment
constraints are now binding significantly more often. The only periods when they do not
bind are 1985, 1989 and then 2001 and 2002. The capital stock is now much closer to the
capital stock in the closed economy, with small deviations around 1985 and 2000. Nev-
ertheless, the alternative calibration is still able to explain a substantial decrease of the
capital stock in the 1980's, and the growth rate of the capital stock in the 1990's is about
as fast as in the data, in contrast to the full commitment economy, which substantially
overshoots the capital stock throughout the whole period (not shown in the picture).




                                                   33
9    Final remarks
This paper has been motivated by the desire to identify some of the factors potentially
responsible for the secular economic decline of Argentina, a country that belonged to
the exclusive club of the top ten richest nations in the world at the beginning of the 20th
century, only to descend to the status of mediocrity at the end of it.
    A useful clue in this endeavor were empirical regularities observed in the responses of
that country's capital stock to changes in total factor productivity and international real
interest rates in the period 1980-2008. Particularly noticeable is the asymmetric nature
of those responses to decreases and increases of TFP, and the fact that the international
real interest rates declined contemporaneously with the rising TFP observed in the mid
1990s and mid 2000s, yet they failed to boost capital accumulation in Argentina.
    Our findings show that a model with limited commitment constraints, calibrated to
Argentina's economy, can account for both of those features, and replicate Argentina's
capital stock rather well. Sepcifically, the model can account not only for that country's
capital shallowing in the lost decade of the 1980s, but also for the failure of its capital
stock to show any significant recovery between 1992-1998 and 2002-2008, when TFP
grew strongly and international interest rates were low by historical standards. The
relatively good quantitative performance of the model is especially noteworthy given
that the paper stays away from introducing exogenous costs of default to improve the
matching between the model predictions and the data, as most of the existing literature
does.
    At the same time, the model generates several predictions that do not fit data well.
First, it produces the counterfactural result that net exports will be procyclical, when they
are acyclical or countercyclical in the data. The inability of limited commitment models
to match data along this dimension is well known. Second, as the decentralization of
the model shows, the intertemporal wedge t+1 must be implemented by means of a
capital income tax. We do not have any evidence that such a tax has been implemented.
However, the quantitative analysis has revealed that the intertemporal wedge is rather
small. It is therefore likely that a version without the capital wedge will produce results
that are quantitatively similar.
    In any case, the paper demonstrates the overall ability of the limited commitment
constraints to account for the capital that seems to be typically missing from Argentina's
economy under unusually favorable domestic and international conditions. This finding


                                             34
questions the often-expressed view that the limited enforcement friction doesn't play
a quantitatively important role in accounting for important aspects of the evidence of
small open economies.
   A future research agenda should examine if a stochastic version of the model econ-
omy studied in this paper, appropriately extended to include, for example, endogenous
labor input, can do an equally good job at accounting for other dimensions of the evi-
dence not explicitly considered in this paper.


References
Aguiar, M. and M. Amador (2011). Growth in the shadow of expropriation. The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics 126(2), 651­697. 3, 5, 9, 20

Aguiar, M., M. Amador, and G. Gopinath (2009). Investment cycles and sovereign debt
 overhang. Review of Economic Studies 76(1), 1­31. 5, 6, 9

Albuquerque, R. and H. A. Hopenhayn (2004). Optimal lending contracts and firm
  dynamics. Review of Economic Studies 71(2), 285­315. 5

Chari, V. V. and P. J. Kehoe (1990). Sustainable plans. Journal of Political Economy 98,
 783­802. 17

Dovis, A. (2018). Efficient sovereign default. The Review of Economic Studies 86(1), 282­312.
 5, 6

Feenstra, R. C., R. Inklaar, and M. P. Timmer (2015). The next generation of the penn
  world table. American economic review 105(10), 3150­82. 24

Gordon, G. and P. A. Guerron-Quintana (2018). Dynamics of investment, debt, and
 default. Review of Economic Dynamics 28, 71­95. 7

Hofman, A. A. (2000). Standardised capital stock estimates in latin america: a 1950-94
 update. Cambridge Journal of Economics 24(1), 45­86. 23

Kehoe, P. J. and F. Perri (2002). International business cycles with endogenous incomplete
  markets. Econometrica 70(3), 907­928. 1, 5




                                             35
Kehoe, P. J. and F. Perri (2004). Competitive equilibria with limited enforcement. Journal
  of Economic Theory 119, 184­206. 3, 5, 9, 12, 17, 37, 42

King, R. G. and S. T. Rebelo (1999). Resuscitating real business cycles. Handbook of
  macroeconomics 1, 927­1007. 26

Kydland, F. E. and E. C. Prescott (1982). Time to build and aggregate fluctuations.
 Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 1345­1370. 26

Kydland, F. E. and C. E. Zarazaga (2007). Argentina's lost decade and the subsequent
 recovery puzzle. In T. J. Kehoe and E.C.Prescott (Eds.), Great Depressions of the Twentieth
 Century, pp. 191­216. Minneapolis, MN: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. 3, 23,
 26

Lane, P. R. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2017). International financial integration in the
  aftermath of the global financial crisis. IMF Working Paper (WP/17/115), 223 ­ 250. 27

Marcet, A. and R. Marimon (1992). Communication, commitment, and growth. Journal
 of Economic Theory 58, 219­249. 5

Neumeyer, P. A. and F. Perri (2005). Business cycles in emerging economies: the role of
 interest rates. Journal of Monetary Economics 52(2), 345­380. 1, 6, 27, 37

Rebelo, S., N. Wang, and J. Yang (2018). Rare disasters, financial development, and
  sovereign debt. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research. 7

Restrepo-Echavarria, P. (2019). Endogenous borrowing constraints and stagnation in
  Latin America. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control (forthcoming). 5, 6

Thomas, J. and T. Worrall (1994). Foreign direct investment and the risk of expropriation.
  Review of Economic Studies 61, 81­108. 5

Tsyrennikov, V. (2013). Capital flows under moral hazard. Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics 60(1), 92­108. 5, 6




                                            36
A     Appendix For Online Publication: Equilibrium Con-
      cepts

A.1    Self Enforcing Equilibrium
We assume that individuals in the country borrow and lend directly from abroad using
one period bonds. Let bt denote the country's outside debt borrowed in period t and due
in period t + 1. If bt+1 > 0 then the representative agent is borrowing, while if bt+1 < 0,
the representative agent is saving. The initial debt position b0 is exogenously given. The
resource constraint for the country is

      ct + (1 + )(1 +  )(k t+1 - bt+1 ) + (k t , k t+1 ) = f ( at , k t ) + (1 - )k t - Rt bt .   (21)

    To introduce default decisions, we follow Kehoe and Perri (2004) and Neumeyer and
Perri (2005) by assuming that the government collects repayments from the agents to
pass them on to foreigners, and can default on them if it chooses so. If it defaults,
the proceeds are rebated back to the agents. The default rate rule for the next period,
t+1  [0, 1], specifies a fraction of the debt that the country does not repay. Since the
government defaults when the representative is borrowing, we restrict attention to cases
when t+1 is zero for bt+1 < 0. At the beginning of the next period the debt net of the
defaulted amount is thus given by (1 - t+1 )bt+1 .
    In addition to the default decisions, the government can tax capital in period t at
a rate tK  1. The government's budget is balanced each period and the government
transfers the confiscated portion of debt back, as well as the capital tax revenue, to its
citizens via a lump-sum transfer Tt . The government's budget constraint is

                                     Tt = t Rt bt + tK ( f k,t - ),                               (22)

where Rt is the interest rate that Argentina faces (possibly distinct from the international
interest rate Rt ).


Households. The representative agents choose consumption ct , next period capital
k t+1 , and the amount of foreign borrowing bt+1 . They supply one unit of labor inelasti-
cally, and rent capital to the representative firm. The interest rate on the debt between
period t and t + 1 is denoted by Rt+1 , and the agents earn a return on capital after cap-

                                                   37
ital taxes and depreciation rt , and a wage rate wt . The representative agent takes the
sequence of wages {wt }, returns to capital {rt } and interest rates { Rt+1 } as given.
    The representative agent enters the period with the net debt Rt bt . Since the agent is
not allowed to default himself, he repays the full amount of the debt. As will be clear
later, the interest rate Rt will, however, reflect the default decisions of the government.
The budget constraint is

          ct + (1 +  )(1 + ) (k t+1 - bt+1 ) + (k t , k t+1 ) = wt + rt k t - Rt bt + Tt .    (23)

Note that, since the representative agent, and not the firm, own the capital, the adjust-
ment costs are borne directly by the representative agent. The household's problem is
to maximize their lifetime utility (3) subject to the sequence of budget constraints (23),
taking the initial capital stock k0 and debt b0 as given.


Firms. The representative firm maximizes profits taking the wage rates and rental rates
of capital as given. As usual, the profit maximization can be characterized by the first
order conditions in capital and labor. This yields the following conditions for the wage
rate and the return to capital:

                              wt = f ( a t , k t ) - k t f k ( a t , k t )                   (24a)
                               rt = 1 + (1 - tk ) ( f k ( at , k t ) - ) .                   (24b)


International lender. The risk neutral lender can transform resources at the risk free
rate Rt over time. However, he faces the possibility that the country will default on its
debt. The lender maximizes the present value of profits, given by

                
              t =0 Q          t       t
                     t (1 +  ) (1 +  ) [ - (1 +  )(1 +  ) bt+1 + Rt (1 - t ) bt ] .


The lender takes the government's policy, as well as the interest rate { Rt } and b0 as
given, similarly to the agents. The equilibrium interest rate must equate the marginal
                  
cost of lending Rr +1 to the marginal benefit: (1 - t+1 ) Rt+1

                                                           Rt +1
                                           R t +1 =              .                            (25)
                                                         1 - t+1



                                                       38
Equilibrium. In what follows, we consider self-enforcing equilibria, where the equilib-
rium value of consumption is equal or exceeds the value of moving to autarky, and so
the limited commitment constraint (7) holds. To simplify notation, let  = {t } where
t = (t , tK ) be the government policy, x = { xt } where xt = (ct , k t+1 , bt+1 ) be the allo-
cation, and p = { pt } where pt = (wt , rt , Rt ) be the prices. We define the self-enforcing
equilibrium as follows:

Definition 2. A self-enforcing equilibrium consists of sequences ( , x, p) such that, given
exogenous sequences { at , R t }, initial debt b0 , and initial capital k 0 ,

   i. x solves the representative agent's problem taking  and p as given,

  ii. p satisfies the representative firm's conditions (24), and the lender's condition (25),

  iii. government budget constraint (22) holds,

  iv. the limited commitment constraint (7) holds.

   There are four conditions that characterize the representative agent's problem in the
competitive equilibrium. The first-order condition in bonds gives the Euler equation for
consumption:

                                              
                              U (ct ) =           R U ( c t +1 )                          (26)
                                          (1 +  )  t +1

For the capital sequence to be chosen optimally by the agents, the net after-tax return on
capital has to be equal to the return on bonds,

                    Rt+1 (1 + 2,t ) = 1 + (1 - tk+1 )( f k,t+1 - ) - 1,t+1 ,              (27)

and the transversality condition for capital must hold

                                                      t
                                    (1 + )(1 +  )
                              lim                         k t+1 = 0.                      (28)
                              t          R

Finally, the no-Ponzi condition for debt must hold in equilibrium:

                                                      t
                                  (1 + )(1 +  )
                              lim                         bt+1 = 0.                       (29)
                              t        R


                                              39
A.2    Decentralizing the efficient allocations.
Suppose that the allocation {ct , k t+1 , trt }, as well as the corresponding Lagrange mul-
tipliers {µt } are Pareto efficient, and consider the following government policy. The
country's government defaults next period at a rate

                                                      µ t +1
                                        t+1 =         +1
                                                               .                                 (30)
                                                1 + t
                                                    s =0 µ s

The default rate sequence {t } is always between zero and one. It is zero if the limited
commitment constraint does not bind, and strictly positive otherwise. If the default
rate is set according to (30), the Pareto efficient consumption sequence will satisfy the
competitive equilibrium Euler equation (26), with Rt+1 determined by (25). The default
rate (30) is designed in a way that the equilibrium interest rate Rt+1 is high exactly in
the periods when the limited commitment constraint binds, and the marginal rate of
substitution of the country's agents is low. The inverse of the interest rate 1/ Rt+1 then
exactly matches the low marginal rate of intertemporal substitution of the borrower.
    The capital income tax rate sequence {tk } is defined to satisfy the following equality:

                   U (ct )
                     -
                                   (1 + 2,t ) = 1 + (1 - tk+1 )( f k,t+1 - ) - 1,t+1 .           (31)
              (1 +  ) U ( c t +1 )
                       



   We will now decentralize the Pareto efficient allocation as a competitive equilibrium
with government policy  = {t , tk }. The candidate price system is given by (24) and
(25). What remains to be defined is the initial debt b0 , and debt positions {bt+1 }. We set

                                     Q
                           1
                    bt =
                           R     Q    t+s      s       s
                                        (1 +  ) (1 +  ) trt+s ,    t = 0, . . . , .              (32)
                            t   s =0   t


Lemma 1. Let {ct , k t+1 , trt } be the constrained efficient allocation. Suppose that the government
chooses the default rates and the capital income tax rates  = {t , tk } according to (30) and (31).
Let x = {ct , k t+1 , bt+1 }, where {bt } is given by (32). Let also p be given by (24) and (25). Then
( , x, p) is a self-enforcing equilibrium given { R    t , at }, b0 and k 0 .

Proof. We first verify that the equilibrium allocation is budget feasible. First, note that
the bond sequence defined by (32) is finite because of Assumption 1, and because the




                                                 40
transfer sequence {trt } is a bounded sequence. One can write

                                     Rt bt = trt + (1 +  )(1 +  ) bt+1 ,


and substitute away the transfers from the resource constraint (5) to get

ct + (1 +  )(1 + )k t+1 + (k t , k t+1 ) = f ( at , k t ) + (1 - )k t - trt
                                               = f ( a t , k t ) + (1 -  ) k t - R t bt + (1 +  )(1 +  ) bt+1 .


Hence,

    ct + (1 +  )(1 + ) (k t+1 - bt+1 ) + (k t , k t+1 )
    = f ( a t , k t ) + (1 -  ) k t - R t bt

    = f ( at , k t ) - f k,t k t + f k,t k t + (1 - )k t - Rt (1 - t )bt
    = f ( at , k t ) - f k,t k t + 1 + ( f k,t k t - )(1 - tk ) k t + ( f k,t k t - )tk k t + Rt t bt - Rt bt
    = wt + rt k t + Tt - Rt bt ,

where the second equality adds and subtracts f k,t k t and uses the definition of Rt (25),
the third one adds and subtracts ( f k,t k t - )tk k t , and the fourth one uses the expressions
for wt and rt in (24) and the government budget constraint (22). Thus, the allocation
{ct , k t+1 , bt+1 } is budget feasible given b0 .
     Since Rt+1 is given by (25) and the default rate t+1 is given by (30), (9) implies that
{ct } satisfies the Euler equation (26). Similarly, the definition of the capital income tax
rate (31) and the first-order condition (10) imply that the first-order condition for capital
(27) holds. The transversality condition (28) holds directly because the optimal capital
stock satisfies (11), while the transversality condition (29) holds because the sequence of
bonds {bt } is bounded and by Assumption 1. Thus, condition i. of the definition of the
competitive equilibrium holds.
     By definition of prices (24) and (25) , condition ii. of the definition of the compet-
itive equilibrium holds. The government budget constraint holds by Walras law, and
so condition iii. is satisfied as well. Finally, condition iv. holds directly because the
Pareto-efficient allocation satisfies (7).




                                                       41
A.3     Sustainable Equilibrium
The self-enforcing equilibrium takes the government decisions as given. We will now
make the government's decisions endogenous. We again follow closely Kehoe and Perri
(2004).
     We assume that the government chooses its period-t policy at the beginning of pe-
riod t and cannot commit to a particular policy in advance. After the government
chooses its policies, agents make their decisions and prices are determined. Let ht-1 =
{0 , . . . , t-1 }  Ht-1 be the history of government policies up to period t, where
t = (t , tK ). Government's policy choice, agents' decisions, and the price system are
all defined to be function of past history. Government's policy choice at the begin-
ning of period t after history ht-1 is t (ht-1 ), where t (ht-1 ) = t (ht-1 ), tK (ht-1 ) .
Prices are Pt (ht ), where Pt (ht ) = (wt (ht ), rt (ht ), Rt (ht )). The agents' decisions are Xt (ht ),
where Xt (ht ) = (ct (ht ), k t+1 (ht ), bt+1 (ht )). We denote the whole history-contingent se-
quence of the government's decisions by  = {t (ht-1 ), ht-1  Ht-1 }, of the agents'
decisions by X = { Xt (ht ), ht  Ht }, and of prices by P = { Pt (ht ), ht  Ht }. Occasion-
ally, we will denote the components of X or P similarly. We call the triplet (, X , P)
a plan. Furthermore, we define a continuation of the policy plan t (ht-1 ) to be the
government's plan that follows history ht-1 , t (ht-1 ) = {t+s (ht-1 , hs ), hs  Hs }s0 .
Similarly, we define the continuation of the household plan that follows history ht by
t X ( ht ) = { Xt+s ( ht , hs ), hs  Hs }s0 .



Households. The agents' decisions are required to be optimal after any history, taking
the price plan and the policy plan as given. That is, given government's plan  and the
price plan P, the household plan X must be such that the continuation of the plan t X (ht )
solves, for all t and ht , the agent's problem

                                                                              
                                               max
                                { c t + s , k t + s +1 , bt + s +1 } 
                                                                             s =0 ^ s U (ct+s )             (33)
                                                                     s =0


subject to the budget constraint

 ct+s + (1 +  )(1 + ) (k t+s+1 - bt+s+1 ) = wt+s (ht+s ) + rt+s (ht+s )k t+s - Rt+s (ht+s )bt+s
                                                               + Tt+s (ht+s ) -  (k t+s , k t+1 )   s  0,




                                                                     42
where ht+s is induced by the  according to ht+s+1 = (ht+s , t+s (ht+s )), k t = k t (ht-1 )
and bt = bt (ht-1 ) are given, and the transfers are given as residuals from the government
budget constraint,

                   Tt (ht ) = t (ht ) Rt (ht )bt (ht-1 ) + tK (ht )[ f k,t ( at , k t (ht-1 ) - ].    (34)


Firms. The wage rates and the rental rates are derived in the standard way from the
representative firm's and lender's problem. It must satisfy

                         wt (ht ) = f ( at , k t (ht-1 )) - k t (ht-1 ) f k ( at , k t (ht-1 ))      (35a)
                          rt (ht ) = 1 + [1 - tk (ht-1 )] ( f k ( at , k t (ht-1 ) - )               (35b)


International lender. Taking the prices P as given, the international lender solves, for
all t and ht , the profit maximization problem. The continuation bond plan t b(ht ) must
maximize

          Q
   s =0   Q
           t+s
               (1 + )s (1 +  )s [-(1 +  )(1 + )bt+s+1 + Rt+s (ht+s ) (1 - t+s (ht+s-1 )) bt+s ] ,
            t
                                                                                           (36)

where ht+s is again induced by  according to ht+s+1 = (ht+s , t+s (ht+s )), and bt =
bt (ht-1 ) is given. This leads to a necessary condition for the price of bond,

                                                              R  t
                                            Rt ( ht ) =                 .                             (37)
                                                          1 - t (ht-1 )

Government. Just like the households' decisions, the government's decisions must be
optimal after any history. That is, the government's plan  must be such that the con-
tinuation policy plan t (ht-1 ) must solve, for any t and any history ht-1 ,

                                                     
                                        max
                                     { t+s }
                                                    s =0  s U           ~ t+s ) ,
                                                                 ct+s ( h                             (38)
                                            s =0


where the continuation history is defined by h   ~ t = (ht-1 , t ), and then recursively by
~ t + s +1 = h
h            ~ t+s , t+s+1 . The continuation history is influenced by the government's
decision, and the government takes that into account when maximizing (38). The house-
hold consumption function ct (ht ) is taken as given.


                                                          43
Equilibrium.      A sustainable equilibrium is a plan that satisfies the following conditions:

Definition 3. A sustainable equilibrium is a plan (, X , P), such that, for every history ht ,
and all t,

   i. the household decisions X solve the agent's problem (33) given  and P,

  ii. prices w, r satisfy (35),

  iii. bonds b solve the lender's problem (36),

  iv. the government policy  solves the government problem (38).

    If a plan constitutes a sustainable equilibrium, we will call it a sustainable plan. As
usual, the key aspect of the sustainable equilibrium is that we require both the govern-
ment and consumers to choose optimally after every history, not just the equilibrium
history. Consumers act competitively, but the government does not, in that it knows
that it choice today, t = t (ht ) affects both current prices Pt (ht ), but also future prices.
Note also that the government budget constraint is imposed in the government's prob-
lem only indirectly, in that the transfers in the agent's problem are a residual given by
(34).


From plans to sequences. A deterministic sequence of policies, allocations and prices
that is realized in the sequential equilibrium is called the outcome of the sequential equi-
librium. Formally, take a sustainable equilibrium (, X , P) and let {h             t } be the realized
history, given by h0 =  and then recursively by ht = ht-1 , t (ht-1 ) . Define ( , x, p)
                                                                             

by t = t (h                                        
               t ), xt = Xt ( ht ), and pt = Pt ( ht ). The sequence (  , x, p ) is the outcome of a
sustainable equilibrium (, X , P).


From sequences to plans. To proceed in the opposite direction, we will take an ar-
bitrary sequence ( , x, p), and define a revert-to-autarky plan (, X , P). The revert-to-
autarky plan is equal to ( , x, p) as long as a history given by  is followed; otherwise,
all actors revert to autarky.
    Formally, we set t (ht-1 ) = t , Xt (ht ) = xt , and Pt (ht ) = pt , where the history ht
is generated by  , ht = (0 , 1 , . . . , t-1 ). For any other history ht , we assume that the
country fully defaults (t (ht ) = 1) and imposes zero capital( tK (ht ) = 0). The autarky



                                                 44
allocation Xt (ht ) consists of

                          aut
           c t ( h t ) = gt   (k t (ht-1 )) ,
                           f ( at , k t (ht-1 )) + (1 - )k t (ht-1 ) -  (k t (ht-1 ), k t+1 (ht )) - ct (ht )
        k t +1 ( h t ) =                                                                                      ,
                                                          (1 +  )(1 + )
        bt+1 (ht ) = 0,

where gt   aut is the autarky consumption policy, as defined in the main text. The prices

wt (ht ) and rt (ht ) are given by the standard first-order conditions (35). The bond price
Rt (ht ) is given by (37) which implies that Rt (ht ) = , so as to keep (1 - t (ht-1 )) Rt (ht ) =
Rt.

   We will now show that the self-enforcing equilibrium can be rationalized as an out-
come induced by a particular sustainable equilibrium: an equilibrium that is sustained
by its associated revert-to-autarky plan.

Proposition 2. Given { R     t , at }, b0 and k 0 , (  , x, p ), is a self-enforcing equilibrium if and only
if it is an outcome of a sustainable equilibrium.

Proof. Suppose that ( , x, p) is an outcome of a sustainable equilibrium. Then x must
solve the agent's problem (33) for t = 0 and h0 = . That is, condition i. of (2) holds.
Conditions ii. and iii. of (2) hold by the construction of prices and by the definition of
transfers in (34). Finally, suppose that condition iv. of (2) is violated. Then there is some
period t and some history ht such that

                                      
                                      ^ j U (ct+ j (ht+ j )) < vaut
                                                                t ( k t ( ht-1 )),                                (39)
                                     j =0


where ht+ j = (ht+ j-1 , t+ j ). But since vaut
                                            t ( k t ( ht-1 )) is the value of autarky, it can be
achieved by a plan that reverts to autarky after history ht-1 . This implies that the realized
history after ht-1 differs from ht = (ht-1 , t ), and so ( , x, p) is not the outcome of the
sustainable equilibrium, a contradiction.
    Now suppose that ( , x, p), is a self-enforcing equilibrium. We will show that the
associated revert-to-autarky plan constitutes a sustainable equilibrium. Consider first
histories with no deviations from  before period t. Since ( , x, p) is a competitive
equilibrium, condition i. of (2) holds, and so x solves (33). The government has a choice
of whether to continue with its policy  , or whether to deviate. If it deviates in any

                                                           45
way, the lender will never borrow from the country. Given that the lender is indifferent
among all levels of b, it is optimal for the lender to do so. Given that the consumers
cannot lend and it is not optimal to borrow since Rt (ht ) = , consumers will choose
consumption and capital levels consistent with autarky. Since no lending or borrowing
takes place, it is optimal for the government to set the default rate to one. Given autarky
and zero government consumption, it is optimal for the government to choose a zero
tax on capital. Prices are consistent with those choices. By condition iv. of (2), the
government then prefers to continue with its policy.
     Consider now histories with a deviation from  before t. It is again optimal for the
lender to never borrow any amount from the country. Given that the price of debt is
Rt (ht ) = , it is not optimal for the consumers to borrow. Since there is no borrowing
or lending, consumers will choose consumption and capital consistent with autarky, and
it is optimal for the government to set the default rate equal to one. The capital tax rate
is optimally set to zero since the government has no consumption to finance. Thus, the
autarky plan is sustainable.




                                            46
