                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          MARRIAGE EQUALITY LAWS AND YOUTH SUICIDAL BEHAVIORS

                                       D. Mark Anderson
                                       Kyutaro Matsuzawa
                                         Joseph J. Sabia

                                       Working Paper 26364
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26364


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




Dr. Sabia acknowledges support from the Center for Health Economics & Policy Studies
(CHEPS) at San Diego State University, including grant support received from the Charles Koch
Foundation and Troesh Family Foundation. We thank Kevin Hsu, Samuel Safford, and Colin
Anderson for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26364.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by D. Mark Anderson, Kyutaro Matsuzawa, and Joseph J. Sabia. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Marriage Equality Laws and Youth Suicidal Behaviors
D. Mark Anderson, Kyutaro Matsuzawa, and Joseph J. Sabia
NBER Working Paper No. 26364
October 2019
JEL No. I1,I12,J12

                                         ABSTRACT

Since the landmark ruling in Goodridge v. Department of Public Health in 2004, the legalization
of same-sex marriage (SSM) has proliferated throughout the United States via either legislative
action or court order. Advocates of SSM laws argue that marriage equality will generate
important health benefits not only for adult same-sex couples, but also for LGBQ-identifying
youths. Using data from the State Youth Risk Behavior Surveys, we explore the relationship
between marriage equality and suicidal behaviors among LGBQ-identifying youths. Despite
previous research suggesting otherwise, we find little evidence that SSM laws have reduced
suicide attempts among teen sexual minorities, nor have they decreased the likelihood of suicide
planning, suicide ideation, or depression. Instead, we find some evidence that SSM legalization
via judicial mandate is associated with worse mental health for these individuals, consistent with
a story of social backlash.

D. Mark Anderson                                Joseph J. Sabia
Department of Agricultural Economics            San Diego State University
& Economics                                     Department of Economics
Montana State University                        Center for Health Economics & Policy Studies
P.O. Box 172920                                 5500 Campanile Drive
Bozeman, MT 59717                               San Diego, CA 92182
and IZA                                         and IZA & ESSPRI
and also NBER                                   jsabia@sdsu.edu
dwight.anderson@montana.edu

Kyutaro Matsuzawa
Center for Health Economics and
Policy Studies
San Diego State University
San Diego, CA
qmatsuzawa@gmail.com
                                                 1. Introduction

           Growth in public acceptance of same-sex couples and support for same-sex marriage

(SSM) represents one of the most dramatic social changes in recent American history. In 1999,

just 35 percent of Americans supported SSM (Gallup 1999), there was strong bipartisan support

for the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA), 1 and state bans on equal marriage rights for same-sex

couples were becoming widespread. During his 2004 re-election campaign, President George

W. Bush proposed an amendment to the U.S. Constitution to ban same-sex marriage nationwide.

But in a landmark Massachusetts State Supreme Court ruling handed in Goodridge v.

Department of Public Health (2004), the Commonwealth of Massachusetts became the first U.S.

state to recognize the right of same-sex couples to obtain a marriage license. By May 2015, 35

states and the District of Columbia had legalized SSM, 11 states and D.C. through legislative

action and 24 states through court rulings. On June 26, 2015, in Obergefell v. Hodges, the U.S.

Supreme Court ruled that same-sex couples had a Constitutional right to marry, legalizing SSM

nationwide. In two decades time, public support for same-sex marriage has nearly doubled. 2

           While SSM laws are relatively new in the United States, economists have already begun

studying their labor market and health effects on Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual (LGB) Americans,

as well as their families. 3 Emerging evidence suggests that SSM laws are associated with

increases in same-sex couples' earnings and decreases in occupational segregation (Sansone

2018), results that are consistent with the notion that SSM laws reduce discrimination against


1
  DOMA denied Federal marriage benefits to same-sex couples and allowed states to deny recognition of other
states' same-sex marriage licenses.
2
    Currently, 63 percent of Americans support marriage equality (Gallup 2019).
3
 There is also research on the "first stage" effects of SSM laws. Carpenter et al. (2018) find that access to SSM is
associated with increases in the probability of marriage for individuals residing in households with a same-sex
partner.


                                                          1
and stigma toward same-sex couples. 4 Indeed, Aksoy et al. (2018) find that same-sex

relationship recognition policies in Europe are associated with improvements in attitudes toward

sexual minorities. The legalization of SSM may also generate important benefits for adult same-

sex couples through increases in health insurance coverage and health care service utilization

(Carpenter et al. 2018), lower STI rates (Eppink 2019; Dee 2008), and decreases in mental

healthcare costs (Hatzenbuehler et al. 2012). 5, 6

         While the existing empirical research focuses on adults, advocates of SSM have argued

that the benefits of legalization may extend to adolescent sexual minorities, who are at an

elevated risk of depression and suicide due to social stigma, homophobia, and discrimination

(Meyer 2003). Such spillovers may occur through a number of channels. First, youths' mental

health may improve if SSM legalization changes social attitudes and reduces stigmatization

(Aksoy et al. 2018). 7 Second, legalization expands future choice sets and may change

expectations of future family formation for younger generations of homosexuals, improving

current psychological health. Moreover, forward-looking lesbian, gay, bisexual, or questioning

(LGBQ) teens may be more discerning in their relationship choices, which could also generate




4
  Relatedly, Ciscato (2018) finds evidence that SSM legalization may induce greater household specialization among
lesbian couples.
5
  Langbein and Yost (2009) find no evidence that SSM laws affect marriage, divorce, or abortion rates, nor do they
find evidence for effects on the proportion of children born to single women or the percent of children in female-
headed households. However, both Allen and Price (2015) and Langbein and Yost (2015) agree that the estimates
reported in Langbein and Yost (2009) rely on too little policy variation to reach definitive conclusions.
6
  In related work, Raifman et al. (2018) find that anti-gay rights measures are associated with higher rates of mental
distress among adult sexual minorities. Raifman et al. (2018) focus on three laws: (1) a law in Utah that allows
government officials to refuse to participate in the issuance of marriage licenses to same-sex couples; (2) a Michigan
law that allows adoption and child welfare agencies to deny same-sex couples the opportunity to adopt; and (3)
North Carolina's law that prohibits localities from passing LGBQ anti-discrimination laws.
7
 Upon striking down the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA), Supreme Court Justice Anthony Kennedy claimed that
DOMA "humiliates tens of thousands of children now being raised by same-sex couples" (Jayson 2013).


                                                          2
mental health benefits. Third, the psychological benefits of SSM afforded to adult same-sex

couples may spill over to youths in their family or social network. 8 Finally, legally married

same-sex couples may serve as strong role models for LGBQ youths.

        On the other hand, marriage equality could have unintended consequences that harm

youths' mental wellbeing. SSM may create a backlash whereby heated political, religious, or

social commentary adversely affects the mental health of teens. Such backlash may be more

likely if SSM is legalized in communities where the median voter opposes gay rights.

Legalization is more likely to be unpopularly imposed by judicial order rather than legislative

action taken by elected representatives, and it could create unrealistic expectations about social

acceptance that are at variance with reality. Finally, SSM may induce earlier teen relationship

formation or sexual initiation, which has been shown to adversely affect mental health (Sabia

and Rees 2008).

        A recent article published by Raifman et al. (2017) produces the first empirical evidence

on the relationship between SSM legalization and youth mental health. Using data from the

State Youth Risk Behavior Surveys (YRBS) for the period 1999-2015, Raifman et al. (2017) find

that legalization is associated with a 0.6 percentage-point (7 percent) decline in self-reported

suicide attempts among all high school students, and a 4 percentage-point (14 percent) decline in

suicide attempts among those who identified as LGBQ relative to suicide attempts among

heterosexual-identifying youth. The authors conclude that future policymakers should take into

account the fact that SSM legalization may save LGBQ youths' lives. This widely-cited study

was the highest-impact article published in 2017 in JAMA Pediatrics, the flagship journal in


8
 Children of legally recognized same-sex parents also benefit through expanded access to insurance and various
other government benefits. Recent estimates indicate that as many as 6 million people in the United States have an
LGBT parent (Jayson 2013).


                                                         3
pediatric medicine (Christakis 2018). While there is much to admire about the pioneering efforts

of Raifman et al. (2017), we believe their conclusions deserve closer scrutiny for a number of

reasons, which we outline in detail in Section 2.2.

       Our results provide little evidence to support the notion that marriage equality reduces

suicide attempts among U.S. high school students in general and LGBQ-identifying students in

particular. The estimated relationship between SSM laws and youth suicide attempts becomes

smaller in magnitude and statistically indistinguishable from zero when we properly weight

regressions, cluster the standard errors at the appropriate level, and allow covariate effects to

differ for sexual minorities versus heterosexual students. Furthermore, we find little evidence to

suggest that legalization reduces depression, suicidal ideation, or suicide planning among

LGBQ-identifying youth. Estimated coefficients are also sensitive to the inclusion of an

additional year of data from the newly available 2017 State YRBS. Specifically, the sign on

estimated mental health effects often flips when including the new data, even for the original 9

states examined by Raifman et al. (2017). Lastly, we find evidence that SSM laws via judicial

order are actually associated with increases in the likelihood that LGBQ-identifying youths

planned or seriously considered suicide in the past year.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We begin with an overview of same-

sex marriage in the United States and detail why the study by Raifman et al. (2017) deserves a

reinvestigation; in Section 3, we describe our data and empirical strategy; and in Section 4 we

report our results. Section 5 concludes.




                                                  4
                                         2. Background

2.1 Same-Sex Marriage Legalization in the United States

       Same-sex marriage gained national attention in the United States when the U.S. Supreme

Court declined to hear Baker v. Nelson. In 1972, Jack Baker and Michael McConnell requested

the Supreme Court to find a constitutional right to SSM, while the county in Minnesota that

denied them a license argued in opposition. The Supreme Court rejected their appeal "for want

of a substantial federal question" (Baker v. Nelson: The Legal Briefs 2015). Following this

decision, a number of states passed laws that explicitly banned same-sex marriage, including

Maryland in 1973, Virginia in 1975, and Florida, California, and Wyoming in 1977 (History.com

Editors 2018).

       While activism for marriage equality grew during the 1980s and 1990s, Congress passed,

and President Clinton signed, the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA) in 1996, which effectively

excluded same-sex couples whose marriages were recognized by their home state from receiving

federal marriage benefits (Reilly and Siddiqui 2013). Between 1996 and 2015, 16 states and the

District of Columbia passed civil union or domestic partnership laws that recognized same-sex

relationships, but (initially) stopped short of full marriage recognition (Civil Unions and

Domestic Partnership Statutes 2019). These laws provided same-sex partners many of the same

rights as married couples, such as spousal employment benefits and the ability to file state taxes

jointly, but denied other rights, such as spousal Social Security benefits, estate tax exemptions,

and the ability to file family-based immigration petitions (Civil Marriage v. Civil Unions 2019).

       On May 17, 2004, Massachusetts became the first state to legalize SSM when the

Massachusetts Supreme Court ruled in Goodridge v. Department of Public Health that denying

marriage licenses to same-sex couples violated provisions of the state constitution that



                                                 5
guarantees individual liberty and equality (Iannacci 2016). Between 2004 and 2015, 34

additional states and the District of Columbia legalized SSM; 22 of these laws went into effect

through judicial ruling and 12 went into effect through legislative efforts (Raifman et al. 2017).

On June 26, 2015, in Obergefell v. Hodges, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down DOMA and the

14 state laws banning gay marriage, ruling that SSM bans violated the due process and equal

protection clauses of the 14th Amendment to the Constitution (Obergefell v. Hodges 2019). This

landmark case effectively legalized SSM nationwide.



2.2 A Reinvestigation of Raifman et al. (2017)

         Using data from the State YRBS for the period 1999-2015, Raifman et al. (2017) produce

the first empirical evidence that SSM legalization may improve the mental health of youth,

particularly among those who identify as LGBQ. We believe the results from this study warrant

a reinvestigation for at least 6 reasons.

         First, Raifman et al. (2017) observe limited post-treatment data. For the period 1999-

2015, 9 states contribute observations to the State YRBS before and after SSM legalization. Of

these states, 5 have data for only one post-treatment survey wave (Arizona, Delaware, Hawaii,

Illinois, and New Mexico), 3 have data for two post-treatment survey waves (Maine, Rhode

Island, and Vermont), and one has data for more than two post-treatment survey waves

(Massachusetts). Furthermore, because most states did not collect information on sexual

orientation until more recent waves of the YRBS, only 6 states have more than two waves of pre-

treatment data on suicidality, limiting the ability to conduct even cursory event studies. 9


9
  In 1999, only one state collected information on sexual orientation as part of their State YRBS (Massachusetts).
This number rose to 2 states in 2003, 3 states in 2005, 5 states in 2007, 7 states in 2009, 10 states in 2011, 16 states
in 2013, and 25 states in 2015. By 2017, 30 states asked students questions about their sexual orientation.


                                                            6
         In the analysis below, we include newly available data from the 2017 State YRBS wave,

which offer a number of advantages: (i) a longer post-treatment period for each of the original 9

treated states examined by Raifman et al. (2017), (ii) an additional 6 states contribute identifying

variation, (iii) the ability to meaningfully test lead and lagged effects of legalization on youth

mental health, (iv) a 63 percent increase in the number of respondents who identified as sexual

minorities, and (v) exploitation of a new source of identifying variation generated by the

Obergefell v. Hodges decision. 10

         Second, the authors' central difference-in-difference-in-difference (DDD) specification,

which estimated the effects of SSM laws for self-identified LGBQ youths relative to

heterosexuals, restricted the partial effects of all covariates -- including race/ethnicity, state

LGB employment discrimination laws, and state and year fixed effects -- to be identical for

sexual minorities and heterosexuals. This is a strong assumption given the growing literature on

intersectionality in discrimination (Bostwick et al. 2014), potentially heterogeneous effects of

LGB anti-discrimination employment laws on sexual minorities and heterosexuals (Leppel

2009), and differences in the LGB-heterosexual mental health gradient across states and over

time during a period of massive social change. Allowing the effects of the covariates to differ

across these groups may be important for isolating the effects of SSM legalization on youth

mental health.

         Third, Raifman et al. (2017) adjust standard errors by clustering at the state-by-class

level 11 rather than state-level, where the policy variation occurred. This decision may result in


10
   For the period 1999-2017, a total of 15 states contribute observations before and after SSM legalization. Of these
states, six have a single wave of post-treatment data (Arkansas, Florida, Kentucky, Michigan, North Dakota, and
Wisconsin), five have two waves of post-treatment data (Arizona, Delaware, Hawaii, Illinois, and New Mexico), and
four have more than two waves of post-treatment data (Maine, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Vermont).
11
  In addition, in Table 2 (Raifman et al. 2017; p. 17) the authors state that they "clustered standard errors by school
and by classroom."

                                                           7
estimated standard errors that are downwardly biased, leading to an increased likelihood of

rejecting the null hypothesis when there is insufficient evidence to do so (Bertrand et al. 2004).

       Fourth, the regressions in Raifman et al. (2017) were weighted using a state-specific

YRBS-provided weight. However, the weights provided in each state's survey are not designed

to be comparable across states or even within states over time, and they are certainly not

designed to make a sample of pooled states nationally representative. The provided weights

were designed to make the sample from each state survey wave representative of that state's

population of high school students. Indeed, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

(CDC) cautions users against pooling State YRBS data across states for this very reason (Centers

for Disease Control and Prevention 2014). To make these data nationally representative, the

weights provided by the YRBS must be comparably rescaled within and across state waves (e.g.,

to sum to 1) and any estimated regressions should be weighted by the product of this rescaled

weight and the state-by-year population of U.S. high school students.

       Fifth, SSM legalization may affect whether teens choose to identify as sexual minorities,

either to themselves or on a survey. If the choice to identify is related to mental health, estimated

effects of SSM laws on sexual minorities may reflect, in part or in whole, compositional changes

in the population of sexual minorities. Moreover, a state's inclusion of survey questions on

sexual identity may be related to SSM legalization. For instance, Massachusetts was the first

state to legalize same-sex marriage (in 2004) and was also the first state to include a question

about sexual identity on its state survey (in 1990). At minimum, one should examine whether

SSM legalization is related to self-reports of sexual orientation as well as the inclusion of a

sexual identity question in the YRBS.




                                                  8
           Finally, in addition to self-reports of attempted suicide, the YRBS contains information

on suicidal ideation, suicide planning, and depression. Raifman et al. (2017) were silent on each

of these alternative measures of mental health status. An examination of these outcomes would

(i) allow an exploration of other dimensions of suicidality, as well as (ii) permit the inclusion of

additional sources of identifying variation because data on these outcomes are available for more

state-waves than are data on suicide attempts. 12



                                               3. Data and Methods

3.1 YRBS Data

           We begin by calling upon data from the State YRBS for the period 1999-2015, the same

data used in Raifman et al. (2017). After analyzing data from the 47 states that administered the

YRBS between 1999 and 2015, we append data from the newly available 2017 State YRBS. The

school-based State YRBS is coordinated by the CDC and administered biennially by state

education and health agencies to track trends in teen behaviors including physical activity,

unhealthy eating, substance use, sexual activity, and violence. 13 The surveys also contain

information on self-reported mental health and, in certain state-years, sexual identity. Appendix

Table 1 shows the state-by-year number of observations included in the full State YRBS sample,

as well as the State YRBS sub-sample that has non-missing information on suicide attempts and

sexual orientation.

           To classify respondents as sexual minorities, we use recently collected data on self-

reported sexual identity from the State YRBS. As discussed above, the number of states asking


12
  In analyses on suicidal ideation, suicide planning, and depression, two additional states (Maryland and North
Carolina) contribute to identification.
13
     For further details on the YRBS data-collection protocols, see Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2013).

                                                            9
this question on their survey rose steadily between 2009 and 2017. A total of 7 states included

this question in 2009, 16 by 2013, 25 by 2015, and 30 by 2017. Respondents were asked:



           "Which of the following best describes you? Possible answers: Gay or Lesbian, Bisexual,

           Heterosexual (straight) or Not Sure."



           Following Raifman et al. (2017), we set Sexual Minority equal to 1 if the respondent

answered "Gay or Lesbian," "Bisexual," or "Not Sure", and equal to 0 if the respondent

answered "Heterosexual (straight)." For the sample of all high school students with non-missing

information on this question, 10 percent identified as LGBQ (1.7 percent identified as

gay/lesbian, 5.1 percent as bisexual, and 3.2 percent as not sure). 14

           Our primary analyses focus on the same outcome explored by Raifman et al. (2017),

namely Suicide Attempt. Respondents to the YRBS were asked:



           "During the past 12 months, how many times did you actually attempt suicide?"



Suicide Attempt is set equal to 1 if a student reported having attempted suicide at least once

within the past 12 months, and set equal to 0 otherwise. Eight percent of high school students

reported attempting suicide in the last year (Table 1). Consistent with Raifman et al. (2017), we

find that reports of attempted suicide were four times higher for those who identified as a sexual

minority as compared to heterosexuals (24.8 percent for sexual minorities versus 6.2 percent for

heterosexuals).



14
     We find that 3.3 percent of the sample did not respond to this survey question.

                                                            10
       In addition, we supplement our measure of Suicide Attempt with three other indicators of

mental health. Respondents were asked:



        "During the past 12 months, did you make a plan about how you would attempt
       suicide?"



Suicide Plan is set equal to 1 if the respondent answered in the affirmative, and set equal to 0

otherwise. We find that 33.6 percent of self-reported sexual minorities and 10.9 percent of

heterosexuals reported suicide planning. In addition, respondents were asked:



       "During the past 12 months, did you ever seriously consider attempting suicide?"



Suicide Ideation is set equal to 1 if a student reported seriously considering suicide in the past 12

months, and set equal to 0 otherwise. Suicide ideation for sexual minorities was over three times

larger as compared to heterosexual students (39.1 percent versus 12.8 percent).

       Finally, respondents were asked:



       "During the past 12 months, did you ever feel so sad or hopeless almost every day for

       two weeks or more in a row that you stopped doing some usual activities?"



Depression is set equal to 1 if the student responded in the affirmative, and set equal to 0

otherwise. We find that 53.5 percent of LGBQ-identifying and 24.6 percent of heterosexual-

identifying high school students reported frequent sadness.




                                                 11
       In extensions discussed in Section 4.5 below, we examine a number of other health

behavior outcomes that could be affected by SSM laws, including alcohol use, tobacco use,

marijuana use, and bullying victimization.



3.2 Same-Sex Marriage Laws

       We searched state SSM statutes to generate our policy variable of interest, SSM Law,

which is identical to the indicator used in Raifman et al. (2017). Table 2 shows the effective

dates for SSM laws, including whether SSM was legalized via court order or legislative action.

One might expect heterogeneous effects of SSM laws by the degree of popular support for the

law. Figure 1 shows the rollout of SSM laws over time. Early enacting states include

Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Vermont, while the latest adopting states (prior to the U.S.

Supreme Court decision in June 2015) include Arizona, Colorado, and Utah.



3.3 Methodology

       We begin by using State YRBS data for the period 1999-2015 to replicate Raifman et al.

(2017) and estimate the following equation via ordinary least squares (OLS):



       Suicide Attemptist = 0 + 1SSM Lawst + X'st2 + Z'ist3 + vs + t + ist,                   (1)



where Suicide Attemptist is a binary indicator of whether individual i in state s during year t

reported attempting suicide within the past 12 months. Following Raifman et al. (2017), we

initially estimate equation (1) for the entire sample of respondents, regardless of whether there is

information on sexual identity. The variable of interest, SSM Lawst, is an indicator for whether



                                                 12
state s was enforcing a SSM law during year t. 15 We use the identical control variables

employed by Raifman et al. (2017): Xst contains the state unemployment rate and an indicator for

whether the state has an LGB anti-discrimination employment policy16; Zist contains individual-

level covariates including age, sex, race, and gender; vs is a time-invariant state effect; and t is a

state-invariant year effect.

         In equation (1), 1 is interpreted as the relationship between SSM laws and suicide

attempts among all high school students. Next, Raifman et al. (2017) limit the sample to the

state-year combinations that contain information on self-reported sexual identity and estimate

their primary model of interest, which we also replicate:



         Suicide Attemptist = 0 + 1SSM Lawst + 2Sexual Minorityist                                          (2)
         + 3SSM Lawst*Sexual Minorityist + X'st4 + Z'ist5 + vs + t + ist.



The key parameter of interest in equation (2), 3, is interpreted by Raifman et al. (2017) as the

effect of SSM laws on those students who identify as sexual minorities. However, there are at

least two concerns with this interpretation.

         First, equation (2) does not allow the effects of the covariates, state fixed effects, or year

fixed effects to differ for sexual minorities as compared to heterosexuals. As noted above, there




15
  Because the YRBS is generally distributed to students during the spring of the academic year, we followed
Raifman et al. (2017) and "turned on" SSM Law in the first wave of available data following the year the law went
into effect. Alternative coding strategies produced qualitatively similar results, including assuming the YRBS was
distributed evenly throughout the year and responses to questionnaire items reflected current behavior. With one
exception, the mental health outcomes we observe correspond to behaviors occurring in the past 12 months. The
variable Suicide Attempt is based on a self-report that is retrospective of the past 30 days. The variables Suicide
Planning, Suicide ideation, and Depression are retrospective of the past 12 months.
16
  Data on unemployment rates come from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, while information on state LGB
anti-discrimination laws is available at: https://www.lgbtmap.org/img/maps/citations-nondisc-employment.pdf.


                                                         13
are a number of theoretical reasons why we might expect this to be the case. To allow for a more

flexible specification, we first estimate equation (1) where we limit the sample to self-identified

sexual minorities, and second estimate equation (2) where we fully interact Sexual Minority with

every variable on the right-hand side, thereby estimating a fully-interacted DDD model, rather

than the partially-interacted DDD model estimated by Raifman et al. (2017).

       Second, a youth's willingness to identify as a sexual minority could, itself, be affected by

SSM laws, which creates the potential for sample selection bias. While sexual orientation may

be exogenous to mental health, the decision to identify as a sexual minority -- to oneself, one's

friends and family, or on a survey -- could be influenced by SSM laws. If, for example, the

marginal youth who chooses to identify as a sexual minority as a result of SSM is more

emotionally fragile, then estimates of any beneficial mental health effects of SSM will be biased

toward zero and any adverse effects exacerbated. On the other hand, if the marginal adolescent,

who is likely to self-identify as a sexual minority due to the legalization of SSM, is more

politically aware and forward looking, then the beneficial psychological effects of SSM laws will

be overstated.

       To test for sample selection, we regress Sexual Minority on SSM Law and estimate the

following equation:



       Sexual Minorityist = 0 + 1SSM Lawst + X'st2 + Z'ist3 + vs + t + ist                    (3)



A caveat to this approach is that it cannot determine whether SSM laws affect the distribution of

mental health among those who identify as sexual minorities.




                                                 14
3.4 Identification

       Identification of 1 comes from within-state variation in the legalization of SSM.

Between 1999 and 2015, 35 states and the District of Columbia enacted SSM laws. The

remaining states were required to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples following

Obergefell v. Hodges. For our analyses where we include data from the 2017 State YRBS and

require information on self-reported sexual identity, 15 states contribute to identification (Table

2). Of these 15 states, 9 states (AZ, AR, FL, KY, MA, MI, NM, ND, and WI) legalized SSM

through a court ruling and 6 states (DE, HI, IL, ME, RI, and VT) legalized SSM legislatively.

       The common trends assumption may be violated if (i) there are state-level time-varying

unobservables (e.g., anti-LGB sentiment) that are correlated with both suicide attempts and SSM

laws, (ii) pre-trends in LGB suicide attempts differ in SSM states versus non-SSM states, or (iii)

SSM laws are passed in response to suicide attempts among LGB adolescents.

       We take three approaches to address the possibility that the common trends assumption

does not hold. First, we examine lead, contemporaneous, and lagged effects of SSM laws.

Second, we experiment with augmenting equations (1) and (2) with controls for census division-

by-year effects and state-specific linear time trends. This approach will control for any

unmeasured geographic time shocks that could coincidentally be related to the legalization of

SSM and adolescent suicide attempts. Finally, as discussed above, we estimate a fully-interacted

DDD specification to control for state-specific shocks common to LGBQ and non-LGBQ

identifying youth.




                                                 15
                                                         4. Results

4.1 Suicide Attempts

            In column (1) of Table 3, we attempt to replicate the original findings of Raifman et al.

(2017). Following Raifman et al. (2017), we estimate equation (1), adjusting standard errors for

clustering at the state-by-grade level and weighting regressions using the State YRBS-provided

sampling weights. As discussed above, clustering at the state-by-grade level may lead to

standard errors that are too small and the State YRBS weights are not designed to be comparable

across states or even within states over time. Based on this specification, we find that SSM laws

are associated with a 0.66 percentage point decrease in suicide attempts among U.S. high school

students. This estimate is statistically distinguishable from zero at the 5 percent level and is

nearly identical to the estimate reported in Raifman et al. (2017). 17

            In column (2), we correct the standard errors by adjusting them for clustering them at the

level of policy variation (i.e., the state). This adjustment results in a 56 percent increase in the

estimated standard error, rendering the estimate statistically indistinguishable from zero at

conventional levels.

            In column (3), we correct the weighting variable. Here, we normalize each State YRBS-

provided weight (designed to make the sample of each state representative of that state's

population in a given year) to sum to 1 across students within state-years. We then multiply this

rescaled weight by the state-by-year population of individuals ages 13 to 18 (i.e., roughly the

population of high school students). 18 This "adjusted weight" ensures that our estimate of 1 is




17
     Raifman et al. (2017) report a point estimate of -0.006 that is statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
18
  The population data come from the National Cancer Institute's Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results
Program (http://seer.cancer.gov/popdata/).


                                                               16
representative of the average U.S. high school student. Our estimate of 1, and its standard error,

change little when making this correction. 19

            In panel I of Table 4, we present estimates of 3 from equation (2), and attempt to

replicate Raifman et al.'s (2017) "partially-interacted" DDD model. Again, our estimate is

nearly identical to the one reported in Raifman et al (2017). Specifically, we find that SSM laws

are associated with a statistically significant 4.1 percentage-point reduction in suicide attempts

among LGBQ identifying youths. 20 The estimated effect remains statistically significant at the 5

percent level when we cluster the standard errors appropriately (column (2)) and changes little

when we use corrected weights (column (3)).

            In panel II of Table 4, we restrict the sample to sexual minorities, allowing the effects of

the covariates to differ for this subgroup. In this case, the absolute magnitude of the estimated

policy impact falls by 67 percent; we consistently find that SSM laws are associated with a

statistically insignificant 1.4 to 1.5 percentage-point reduction in suicide attempts. In panel III,

we find no evidence that SSM laws affect suicide attempts among self-identified heterosexuals,

and estimates from fully-interacted DDD models (panel IV) are in line with those shown in panel

II, suggesting that forcing coefficients on covariates to be equal for sexual minorities and

heterosexuals may not be appropriate. 21




19
   We also calculated p-values from the wild cluster bootstrap method suggested by Cameron et al. (2008) and
Cameron and Miller (2015). Wild cluster bootstrap critical values provide an asymptotic refinement and may work
better than other inference methods for OLS when the number of clusters is small. Neither of the estimates reported
in columns (2) or (3) of Table 3 were statistically significant at conventional levels when using the wild cluster
bootstrap procedure (column (2) p-value = 0.126; column (3) p-value = 0.131).
20
     Raifman et al. (2017) report a point estimate of -0.040 that is statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
21
  Coefficient estimates on the variables included in Xst, Zist, and the year fixed effects are shown in Appendix Table
2. They suggest that many of the covariate effects on suicide attempts differ for sexual minorities versus
heterosexuals (columns (1) and (5)).


                                                               17
         When we further probe which covariate interactions affect the marginal impact of Sexual

Minority*SSM Law, we find that failing to account for differential year effects vastly overstates

the effect of SSM laws on suicide attempts among sexual minorities (Appendix Table 3). 22 This

is consistent with a period of massive national social change that improved social conditions for

sexual minorities.



4.2 Sample Selection Bias

          In Table 5, we explore the possibility of sample selection bias by estimating the impact

of SSM laws on self-identification as a sexual minority. Our results provide evidence that SSM

legalization leads to a reduction in the likelihood that a respondent reports being "not sure" of his

or her sexual orientation. This effect appears to be driven by an increase in the share of youths

who report to be gay, lesbian, or bisexual, although these estimated effects are not statistically

distinguishable from zero. One interpretation is that SSM laws push those on the margin of

identifying as a sexual minority (or in transition to that identification) over that threshold. 23 This

possibility raises concerns about sample selection bias. If SSM laws increase the probability that

youth identify as sexual minorities and these individuals have systematically better (worse)

mental health, then the estimated mental health benefits of SSM would be biased upward

(downward). However, given that the effects mostly occur within LGBQ-identifying




22
  Joint significance tests on the interactions between Sexual Minority and year fixed effects yielded an F-statistic of
113 and a p-value < 0.0001.
23
  If we restrict the samples in columns (2), (3), and (4) to exclude those identifying as bisexual and "not sure",
gay/lesbian and "not sure", and gay/lesbian and bisexual, respectively, the estimates are very similar to those
currently reported in Table 5. Likewise, the results are similar if we do not require non-missing information on
suicide attempts.


                                                          18
respondents, rather than across LGBQ and heterosexual-identifying respondents, these effects

should be relatively small.

            Finally, we explore the possibility that SSM laws influence a state's choice to include a

sexual identity question in their YRBS, another form of potential sample selection bias. These

results, which are shown in Appendix Table 4, provide no evidence that SSM laws affected the

likelihood that a state's YRBS included information on the sexual identity of its respondents.



4.3 Other Mental Health Outcomes

            As noted above, a number of other mental health outcomes are available in the YRBS,

but were unexplored by Raifman et al. (2017). In Table 6, we explore the relationship between

SSM laws and Suicide Planning (column (1)), Suicide Ideation (column (2)), and Depression

(column (3)). 24 From this point forward, we present estimates that are weighted by the preferred

adjusted YRBS weights and correct standard errors for clustering at the state level. Across the

sample of sexual minorities (panel I), DD estimates show no evidence that SSM laws affected

the probability of planning suicide, seriously contemplating suicide, or frequent sadness or

depression. The estimates are uniformly small in magnitude and are statistically

indistinguishable from zero at conventional levels. Fully-interacted DDD estimates (panel II)

also show no evidence that SSM laws improved youth mental health. 25




24
     See Table 1 for variable definitions and descriptive statistics.
25
  Appendix Table 2 shows coefficient estimates on all the covariates and year effects for DD models estimated
separately by sexual minority status. They suggest that many of the covariate effects on these other mental health
outcomes differ for sexual minorities versus heterosexuals (columns (2)-(4) and (6)-(8)).


                                                              19
4.4 Expanding the Sample and Examining Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

           Next, we append data from the 2017 State YRBS to our analysis sample. 26 This allows

us to increase the post-treatment period for many states that legalized SSM, allows the

Obergefell decision to contribute identifying variation, and expands our sample of LGBQ-

identifying youths. The results in Table 7 suggest that the inclusion of the 2017 YRBS data

renders the estimated effects of SSM laws on LGBQ-identifying youths' suicidal behaviors and

depression to be uniformly positive. Fully-interacted DDD estimates now show that SSM laws

are associated with a statistically significant 4.8 percentage-point increase in the probability of

suicide planning among sexual minorities and a 2.9 percentage-point increase in suicide ideation.

Furthermore, when we restrict the set of treatment states to only the original 9 states included in

Raifman et al.'s analysis (Appendix Table 6), we see a similar pattern of results. Thus, we are

not capturing heterogeneous treatment effects relative to prior findings. In sharp contrast with

Raifman et al. (2017), our results suggest no evidence of a reduction in suicide behaviors among

LGBQ youths and are consistent with possible backlash from SSM legalization or, perhaps,

expectations of acceptance that are at variance with social reality.

           Conducting a long event study is not feasible given that data on mental health for LGBQ-

identifying youth has only been consistently provided in more recent waves of the State YRBS,

with the number of states asking about sexual identity increasing over time. 27 In light of this, we

simply replace SSM Law with a lead that indicates two or more waves prior to legalization, an

indicator for the year of the law change, and a lag that indicates one or more years after




26
     Appendix Table 5 presents descriptive statistics for the period 1999-2017.
27
  Eight states have one wave of data on self-reported sexual identity, nine states have two waves, five states have
three waves, two states have four waves, and seven states have five or more waves of data (Appendix Table 1).


                                                           20
legalization (Table 8). 28 The results from this exercise show little evidence of systematic pre-

trends for three of the four mental health outcomes of interest. For suicide planning, in both the

DD (panel I) and fully-interacted DDD (panel II) models, the coefficient estimate on Two or

More Waves Prior to SSM Law is negative and statistically significant. In the post-treatment

period, we find no evidence of mental health benefits of SSM laws. Instead, we find that SSM

legalization is associated with increases in the probability of suicide planning and suicide

ideation for LGBQ-identifying youths, a pattern not seen in the pre-treatment period. 29

           In Table 9, we control for spatial heterogeneity. This approach is designed to disentangle

the effects of SSM laws from unobserved geographic-specific time shocks, including sentiment

toward LGBQ-identifying youths. We find that estimates are similar to those reported above

when including census division-by-year effects (panels I and II) and state-specific linear time

trends (panel III and IV) on the right-hand side of our estimating equations. 30, 31

           In Table 10, we replace SSM Law with two mutually exclusive indicators, SSM Law by

Legislative Action and SSM Law by Court Order. Here, we explore whether the effects of SSM

laws on youth mental health differ by the political process through which legalization occurred,




28
     The omitted category is the wave prior to legalization.
29
  Fifteen states identify the coefficient on Two or More Waves Prior to SSM Law, 15 states identify the coefficient
on Wave Prior to SSM Law, 14 states identify the coefficient on Year of Law Change, and 10 states identify the
coefficient on One or More Waves After SSM Law.
30
  There are nine census divisions, Pacific (AL, CA, HI, OR, WA), Mountain (AZ, CO, ID, MT, NM, NV, UT,
WY), West North Central (IA, KS, MN, MO, NE, ND, SD), West South Central (AR, LA, OK, TX), East North
Central (IN, IL, MI, OH, WI), East South Central (AL, KY, MS, TN), South Atlantic (DE, DC, FL, GA, MD, NC,
SC, VA, WV), Middle Atlantic (NJ, NY, PA), and New England (CT, ME, MA, NH, RI, VT).
31
   In Appendix Table 7, we present unweighted State YRBS estimates and the results are qualitatively similar. In
Appendix Table 8, we pool the State and National YRBS (which includes identifying variation from 3 additional
states) and again confirm our general pattern of results. See Anderson and Sabia (2018) for a description of the
differences between the State and National YRBS. In Appendix Table 9, we estimate effects separately for
gay/lesbian, bisexual, and questioning youths. We find little evidence of heterogeneous effects by type of sexual
minority.

                                                               21
namely whether it was through judicial ruling or a legislatively-initiated law change. Our results

indicate some heterogeneity in effects by path to adoption. In particular, we find that court-

ordered SSM legalization has worse mental health effects on LGBQ-identifying youths than

legislatively enacted SSM legalization. This result is consistent with the hypothesis that LGBQ-

identifying youths may face harsher social backlash in places where SSM is less popular and

hence not enacted by the state's popularly elected representatives. Interestingly, when we

disaggregate court-ordered legalization by whether it occurred at the state versus federal level,

we find that Obergefell v. Hodges is associated with the largest adverse mental health effect

(Appendix Table 10). However, this latter effect is identified off of only four states in our

sample, suggesting caution in interpretation.

           In Table 11, we examine whether there are heterogeneous effects of SSM legalization by

gender (panels I and II), race (panels III and IV), and age (panels V and VI) among sexual

minorities. Across all demographic groups, we find little evidence to suggest that SSM laws are

associated with improvements in mental health.



4.5 Other Health and Risky Behaviors

           Finally, in Table 12, we explore whether SSM laws are associated with changes in any

other risky behaviors to which marginalized LGBQ youths may turn when coping with stigma:

alcohol consumption, tobacco use, and marijuana use. 32 If SSM laws were effective at creating


32
     Respondents were asked:

        "During the past 30 days, on how many days did you have at least one drink of alcohol?"

        "During the past 30 days, on how many days did you have 5 or more drinks of alcohol in a row, that is, within
        a couple of hours?"

        "During the past 30 days, on how many days did you smoke cigarettes?"


                                                          22
"safer spaces" for sexual minorities and improved their mental health, one might expect a

reduction in risky health behaviors. In addition, SSM law-induced reductions in substance abuse

could be a pathway through which SSM legalization improved youth mental health. Our

findings, however, lend little support to either hypothesis. In fact, DDD estimates show that

SSM legalization was associated with a 3.4 percentage-point increase in binge drinking among

self-identifying LGBQ youths. Moreover, we also find little evidence that SSM legalization

reduced bullying victimization among LGBQ-identifying youths. 33 In summary, there is little

support for the hypothesis that SSM legalization reduced adolescent risky health behaviors or

bullying victimization at school, outcomes strongly related to youth mental health.



                                                  5. Conclusion

           The growth in public support for same-sex couples and the legalization of SSM

represents one of most dramatic and rapid social changes in American history. While there is

emerging evidence that SSM legalization has generated important financial and health-related

benefits for adult same-sex couples, advocates of SSM argue that the benefits may extend to the

psychological health of LGBQ-identifying youth. Using data from the State Youth Risk




        "During the past 30 days, how many times did you use marijuana?"

Alcohol Use, Binge Drinking, Cigarette Use, and Marijuana Use, are coded as equal to 1 if respondents answered
the above items by reporting a positive number of occasions of use, respectively, and set equal to 0 otherwise.
33
     During the 2009-2017 waves of the YRBS, respondents were asked:

       "During the past 12 months, have you ever been bullied on school property?"

Bullied is set equal to 1 if respondents answered the above item in the affirmative, and set equal to 0 otherwise.
Means for the outcomes considered in Table 12 are reported in Appendix Table 11.


                                                          23
Behavior Surveys for the period 1999-2017, we examine the relationship between marriage

equality and suicidal behaviors of LGBQ-identifying youths.

       Our results suggest that prior evidence showing that SSM laws reduce youth suicide

attempts can be explained by (i) underestimated standard errors, (ii) a failure to account for

differential trends in suicidal behaviors between LGBQ-identifying and heterosexual-identifying

youth, (iii) a focus on one measure of suicidal behavior, and (iv) insufficient post-treatment data

for youths exposed to SSM legalization. After accounting for each of these concerns, we find

little evidence that SSM laws have reduced suicide behaviors of self-identifying sexual

minorities. When we include additional years of post-treatment data and new sources of

identifying variation, we actually find some evidence that SSM legalization is associated with

worse mental health outcomes for LGBQ youth, particularly when legalization occurs through

judicial ruling rather than legislative action by popularly elected representatives. This finding is

consistent with a story of social backlash against LGBQ youths in jurisdictions where support for

SSM is weak.

       While the debate over SSM has been a controversial and contentious one, there is now

reasonably strong support for SSM among the current median American voter. In the hurry to

embrace social change, it is incumbent upon scientists to be cautious in the interpretation of early

evidence. To echo Allen and Price (2015, pg. 154), "[r]ushing into empirical work before the

data are ready or before an appropriate empirical strategy can be identified, is likely to cause

more harm than good." We close that, while there appears to be important benefits of SSM for

adult same-sex couples, it is too soon to conclude that the legalization of SSM reduces suicide

attempts among LGBQ-identifying youths.




                                                 24
                                         References

Aksoy, Cevat Giray, Christopher S. Carpenter, Ralph De Haas, and Kevin Tran. 2018. "Do Laws
Shape Attitudes? Evidence From Same-Sex Relationship Recognition Policies in Europe." IZA
Discussion Paper No. 11743, Institute of Labor Economics.

Allen, Douglas W. and Joseph Price. 2015. "Same-Sex Marriage and Negative Externalities: A
Critique, Replication, and Correction of Langbein and Yost." Econ Journal Watch 12(2): 142-
160.

Anderson, D. Mark and Joseph J. Sabia. 2018. "Child Access Prevention Laws, Youth Gun
Carrying, and School Shootings." Journal of Law and Economics 61(3): 489-524.

Baker v. Nelson: The Legal Briefs. 2015. New York Times. Available at:
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/05/13/us/document-baker-vs-nelson-case.html.
Accessed on [9/9/2019].

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. "How Much Should We
Trust Differences-In-Differences Estimates?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1): 249-275.

Bostwick, Wendy B., Ilan Meyer, Frances Aranda, Stephen Russell, Tonda Hughes, Michelle
Birkett, and Brian Mustanski. 2014. "Mental Health and Suicidality Among Racially/Ethnically
Diverse Sexual Minority Youths." American Journal of Public Health 104(6): 1129-1136.

Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah Gelbach, and Douglas Miller. 2008. "Bootstrap-Based Improvements
for Inference with Clustered Errors." Review of Economics and Statistics 90(3): 414-427.

Cameron, A. Colin and Douglas Miller. 2015. "A Practitioner's Guide to Cluster-Robust
Inference." Journal of Human Resources, 50(2): 317-372.

Carpenter, Christopher, Samuel T. Eppink, Gilbert Gonzales Jr, and Tara McKay. 2018. "Effects
of Access to Legal Same-Sex Marriage on Marriage and Health: Evidence from BRFSS." NBER
Working Paper No. w24651, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2013. "Methodology of the Youth Risk Behavior
Surveillance System ­ 2013." MMWR 62(1): 1-20.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2014. "Combining YRBS Data Across Years and
Sites." Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/data/yrbs/pdf/yrbs_combining_data.pdf.
Accessed on [5/1/2019].

Christakis, Dimitri. 2018. "JAMA Pediatrics ­ The Year in Review, 2017." JAMA Pediatrics
172(5): 412-413.

Ciscato, Edoardo, Alfred Galichon, and Marion Goussé. 2018. "Like Attract Like? A Structural
Comparison of Homogamy Across Same-Sex and Different-Sex Households." Forthcoming.

                                             25
Civil Marriage v. Civil Unions. 2019. National Organization for Women. Available at:
https://now.org/resource/civil-marriage-v-civil-unions/. Accessed on [9/9/2019].

Civil Unions and Domestic Partnership Statutes. 2019. National Conference of State
Legislatures. Available at: http://www.ncsl.org/research/human-services/civil-unions-and-
domestic-partnership-statutes.aspx. Accessed on [9/9/2019].

Dee, Thomas. 2008. "Forsaking All Others? The Effects of Same-Sex Partnership Laws on Risky
Sex." Economic Journal 118(July): 1055-1078.

Eppink, Samuel T. 2019. "Legal Access to Same-Sex Marriage and Sexually Transmitted
Infections," in Three Essays on LGBT Economics and Policy. Doctoral Dissertation, Vanderbilt
University.

Gallup. "Marriage." Available at: https://news.gallup.com/poll/117328/marriage.aspx. Accessed
on [8/1/2019]

Hatzenbuehler, Mark L., Conall O'Cleirigh, Chris Grasso, Kenneth Mayer, Steven Safren, and
Judith Bradford. 2012. "Effect of Same-Sex Marriage Laws on Health Care Use and
Expenditures in Sexual Minority Men: A Quasi-Natural Experiment." American Journal of
Public Health 102(2): 285-291.

History.com Editors. 2018. "Gay Marriage." History.com. Available at:
https://www.history.com/topics/gay-rights/gay-marriage. Accessed on [9/9/2019].

Iannacci, Nicandro. 2016. "Before Obergefell, There was Goodridge: The Birth of Same-Sex
Marriage in America." Constitution Daily. Available at:
https://constitutioncenter.org/blog/before-obergefell-there-was-goodridge-the-birth-of-same-sex-
marriage-in-ame. Accessed on [9/9/2019].

Jayson, Sharon. 2013. "How Will Same-Sex Marriage Rulings Affect Children?" USA Today.
Available at: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2013/06/26/same-sex-marriage-
families/2461375/. Accessed on [9/5/2019].

Langbein, Laura and Mark A. Yost Jr. 2009. "SameSex Marriage and Negative Externalities."
Social Science Quarterly 90(2): 292-308.

Langbein, Laura and Mark A. Yost, Jr. 2015. "Still No Evidence of Negative Outcomes from
Same-Sex Marriage." Econ Journal Watch 12(2): 161-163.

Leppel, Karen. 2009. "Labour Force Status and Sexual Orientation." Economica 76(301): 197-
207.

Movement Advancement Project. "Employment Non-Discrimination." Available at:
https://www.lgbtmap.org/img/maps/citations-nondisc-employment.pdf. Accessed on [8/1/2019].

                                               26
Meyer, Ilhan H. 2003. "Prejudice, Social Stress, and Mental Health in Lesbian, Gay, and
Bisexual Populations: Conceptual Issues and Research Evidence." Psychological Bulletin
129(5): 674.

Obergefell v. Hodges. 2019. Constitutional Accountability Center. Available at:
https://www.theusconstitution.org/litigation/obergefell-v-hodges-et-al-u-s-sup-ct/. Accessed on
[9/9/2019].

Raifman, Julia, Ellen Moscoe, S. Bryn Austin, and Margaret McConnell. 2017. "Difference-in-
Differences Analysis of the Association Between State Same-Sex Marriage Policies and
Adolescent Suicide Attempts." JAMA Pediatrics 171(4): 350-356.

Raifman, Julia, Ellen Moscoe, S. Bryn Austin, Mark L. Hatzenbuehler, and Sandro Galea. 2018.
"Association of State Laws Permitting Denial of Services to Same-Sex Couples With Mental
Distress in Sexual Minority Adults: A Difference-in-Difference-in-Differences Analysis." JAMA
Psychiatry 75(7): 671-677.

Reilly, Ryan J. and Sabrina Siddiqui. 2013. "Supreme Court DOMA Decision Rules Federal
Same-Sex Marriage Ban Unconstitutional." Huffington Post. Available at:
https://www.huffpost.com/entry/supreme-court-doma-decision_n_3454811. Accessed on
[9/9/2019].

Sansone, Dario. 2018. "Pink Work: Same-Sex Marriage, Employment and Discrimination"
Available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3164515. Accessed on [10/1/2019].




                                               27
Figure 1. Same Sex Marriage Legalization Over Time
                      2004




                      2008




                      2012




                       28
                                                       2013




                                                       2014




                                                       2015




Notes: States are shaded if SSM was legalized at any point during the indicated calendar year.

                                                        29
                    Table 1. Means by Self-Reported Sexual Identity, State YRBS (1999-2015)
                          Pooled       Heterosexual      LGBQ                          Description
Dependent Variables
Suicide Attempt            0.080           0.062          0.248       = 1 if respondent attempted suicide at least
                       (N = 232,019)   (N = 209,024)   (N = 22,995)   once in past 30 days, = 0 otherwise

Suicide Planning           0.132           0.109          0.336       = 1 if respondent made a plan about how to
                       (N = 341,289)   (N = 304,585)   (N = 36,704)   attempt suicide in past 12 months, = 0
                                                                      otherwise

Suicide Ideation           0.155           0.128          0.391       = 1 if respondent seriously considered
                       (N = 309,921)   (N = 275,449)   (N = 34,472)   attempting suicide in past 12 months, = 0
                                                                      otherwise

Depression                 0.275           0.246          0.535       =1 if respondent felt sad or hopeless almost
                       (N = 357,887)   (N = 318,983)   (N = 38,904)   every day for two weeks or more in a row in
                                                                      past 12 months, = 0 otherwise
Independent Variables
SSM Law                    0.513          0.507             0.561     =1 if state enacted same-sex marriage law

Male                       0.495          0.512             0.340     = 1 if respondent is male, = 0 if respondent is
                                                                      female
Age 14 or Younger          0.114          0.112             0.125     = 1 if respondent is 14 years old or younger,
                                                                      = 0 otherwise
Age 15                     0.256          0.255             0.264     = 1 if respondent is 15 years old, = 0
                                                                      otherwise
Age 16                     0.256          0.257             0.251     = 1 if respondent is 16 years old, = 0
                                                                      otherwise
Age 17                     0.236          0.238             0.222     = 1 if respondent is 17 years old, = 0
                                                                      otherwise
Age 18                     0.138          0.138             0.138     = 1 if respondent is 18 years or older, = 0
                                                                      otherwise
Black                      0.108          0.105             0.127     = 1 if respondent is black, = 0 otherwise

Non-Hispanic White         0.584          0.592             0.507     = 1 if respondent is non-Hispanic white, = 0
                                                                      otherwise
Hispanic                   0.216          0.212             0.254     = 1 if respondent is Hispanic, = 0 otherwise

Other Race                 0.093          0.091             0.112     = 1 if respondent is an "other" race, = 0
                                                                      otherwise
Sexual Minority            0.100            0                1        = 1 if respondent reported as LGB or "not
                                                                      sure", = 0 otherwise
Gay or Lesbian             0.017            0               0.173     = 1 if respondent reported as gay or lesbian,
                                                                      = 0 otherwise


                                                       30
Bisexual                         0.051                 0                 0.511        = 1 if respondent reported as bisexual, = 0
                                                                                      otherwise
Not sure                         0.032                 0                 0.316        = 1 if respondent reported as "not sure", = 0
                                                                                      otherwise
LGB Employment                   0.678               0.681               0.651        = 1 if state has an LGB anti-discrimination
Policy                                                                                employment law, =0 otherwise
Unemployment                     6.465               6.470               6.414        State unemployment rate

Notes: Means for the mental health outcomes are based on the state-year combinations where information on sexual identity is available.
Means for the independent variables are based on the state-year combinations where information on sexual identity and suicide attempts is
available. All means are weighted to be nationally representative.




                                                                    31
                                           Table 2. State Same-Sex Marriage Laws

                        Date of          Court Ordered vs.                                         Date of          Court Ordered vs.
State                 Legalization       Legislative Action               State                  Legalization       Legislative Action
Alabama                06/26/15           Court Ordered                   Montana                 11/09/14           Court Ordered
Alaska                 10/12/14           Court Ordered                   Nebraska                06/26/15           Court Ordered
Arizonaab              10/17/14           Court Ordered                   Nevada                  10/09/14           Court Ordered
Arkansasb              06/26/15           Court Ordered                   New Hampshire           01/01/10          Legislative Action
California             06/26/13           Court Ordered                   New Jersey              10/22/13           Court Ordered
Colorado               10/17/14           Court Ordered                   New Mexicoab            12/19/13           Court Ordered
Connecticut            11/12/08           Court Ordered                   New York                07/24/11          Legislative Action
Delawareab             07/01/13          Legislative Action               North Carolina          10/10/14           Court Ordered
D.C.                   03/03/10          Legislative Action               North Dakotab           06/26/15           Court Ordered
Floridab               01/06/15           Court Ordered                   Ohio                    06/26/15           Court Ordered
Georgia                06/26/15           Court Ordered                   Oklahoma                10/06/14           Court Ordered
Hawaiiab               12/02/13          Legislative Action               Oregon                  05/19/14           Court Ordered
Idaho                  10/15/14           Court Ordered                   Pennsylvania            05/20/14           Court Ordered
Illinoisab             11/20/13          Legislative Action               Rhode Islandab          07/01/11          Legislative Action
Indiana                10/06/14           Court Ordered                   South Carolina          11/12/14           Court Ordered
Iowa                   04/03/09           Court Ordered                   South Dakota            06/26/15           Court Ordered
Kansas                 06/26/15           Court Ordered                   Tennessee               06/26/15           Court Ordered
Kentuckyb              06/26/15           Court Ordered                   Texas                   06/26/15           Court Ordered
Louisiana              06/26/15           Court Ordered                   Utah                    10/06/14           Court Ordered
Maineab                12/29/12          Legislative Action               Vermontab               09/01/09          Legislative Action
Maryland               01/01/13          Legislative Action               Virginia                10/06/14           Court Ordered
Massachusettsab        05/07/04           Court Ordered                   Washington              12/06/12          Legislative Action
Michiganb              06/26/15           Court Ordered                   West Virginia           10/09/14           Court Ordered
Minnesota              07/01/13          Legislative Action               Wisconsinb              10/06/14           Court Ordered
Mississippi            06/26/15           Court Ordered                   Wyoming                 10/07/14           Court Ordered
Missouri               06/26/15           Court Ordered
a
  These states contribute observations before and after SSM legalization in the State YRBS sample that contains information on suicide
attempts and self-reports of sexual identity for the period 1999-2015.
b
  These states contribute observations before and after SSM legalization in the State YRBS sample that contains information on suicide
attempts and self-reports of sexual identity for the period 1999-2017.




                                                                   32
       Table 3. SSM Laws and Suicide Attempts for Full Sample, State YRBS (1999-2015)
                                    (1)                   (2)                  (3)

                                          Suicide Attempt                Suicide Attempt          Suicide Attempt
SSM Law                                      -0.0066*                        -0.0066                  -0.0064
                                             (0.0027)                       (0.0042)                 (0.0041)

N                                              757,977                        757,977                 757,977
Mean of dependent variable                      0.080                          0.080                   0.083

Level of SE clustering                     State-by-grade                     State                    State
Sample weights                                 YRBS                           YRBS                Adjusted YRBS
* Significant at the 5 percent level; ** Significant at the 1 percent level

Notes: Each column represents results from a separate OLS regression based on data from the State YRBS for the
period 1999-2015. All models control for the covariates listed in Table 1, state fixed effects, and year fixed effects.
Regressions are weighted by the type of weights indicated above. Standard errors, clustered at the level indicated above,
are in parentheses.




                                                              33
  Table 4. SSM Laws and Suicide Attempts for Sample with Information on Self-
               Reported Sexual Identity, State YRBS (1999-2015)
                                 (1)               (2)               (3)

                                        Suicide Attempt          Suicide Attempt       Suicide Attempt

                                        Panel I: Replication of Raifman et al.'s (2017) partially-
                                                        interacted DDD estimate
SSM Law*Sexual Minority                   -0.0418**             -0.0418*            -0.0425*
                                           (0.0130)              (0.0170)            (0.0174)
N                                            232,019                  232,019              232,019
Mean of dependent variable                    0.248                    0.248                0.248

                                                Panel II: DD estimates for sexual minorities
SSM Law                                       -0.0138             -0.0138             -0.0145
                                             (0.0173)            (0.0119)            (0.0121)
N                                             22,995                   22,995               22,995
Mean of dependent variable                     0.248                    0.248                0.248

                                                 Panel III: DD estimates for heterosexuals
SSM Law                                       0.0022              0.0022              0.0022
                                             (0.0056)            (0.0067)            (0.0067)
N                                            209,024                  209,024              209,024
Mean of dependent variable                    0.061                    0.061                0.062

                                                 Panel IV: Fully-interacted DDD estimates
SSM Law*Sexual Minority                       -0.0160              -0.0160           -0.0167
                                             (0.0167)             (0.0119)          (0.0121)
N                                            232,019                  232,019              232,019
Mean of dependent variable                    0.248                    0.248                0.248

Level of SE clustering                   State-by-grade                State               State
Sample weights                               YRBS                      YRBS           Adjusted YRBS
* Significant at the 5 percent level; ** Significant at the 1 percent level

Notes: Each column within each panel represents results from a separate OLS regression based on data
from the State YRBS for the period 1999-2015. All models control for the covariates listed in Table 1,
state fixed effects, and year fixed effects. The models in panel IV also control for interactions between
Sexual Minority and all right-hand-side variables. Regressions are weighted by the type of weights
indicated above. Standard errors, clustered at the level indicated above, are in parentheses.




                                                      34
          Table 5. SSM Laws and Youth LGBQ Identification, State YRBS (1999-2015)
                                 (1)            (2)               (3)           (4)

                                      Sexual Minority Gay or Lesbian                  Bisexual             Not Sure
SSM Law                                   -0.0070        0.0005                        0.0003             -0.0078**
                                         (0.0052)       (0.0022)                      (0.0031)             (0.0016)

N                                          232,019                 232,019            232,019               232,019
Mean of dependent variable                  0.100                   0.017              0.051                 0.032
* Significant at the 5 percent level; ** Significant at the 1 percent level

Notes: Each column represents results from a separate OLS regression based on data from the State YRBS for the
period 1999-2015. All models control for the covariates listed in Table 1, state fixed effects, and year fixed effects.
Regressions are weighted by the adjusted YRBS weights. Standard errors, corrected for clustering at the state level,
are in parentheses.




                                                              35
Table 6. SSM Laws and Other Mental Health Outcomes, State YRBS (1999-2015)
                                (1)              (2)              (3)

                                        Suicide Planning          Suicide Ideation       Depression
                                                 Panel I: DD estimates for sexual minorities
SSM Law                                        -0.0035             0.0139             -0.0200
                                              (0.0146)            (0.0141)           (0.0207)
N                                              36,704                   34,472              38,904
Mean of dependent variable                      0.336                    0.391               0.535

                                                  Panel II: Fully-interacted DDD estimates
SSM Law*Sexual Minority                        -0.0016               0.0244           0.0024
                                              (0.0123)              (0.0152)         (0.0171)
N                                             341,289                  309,921             357,887
Mean of dependent variable                     0.336                    0.391               0.535
* Significant at the 5 percent level; ** Significant at the 1 percent level

Notes: Each column within each panel represents results from a separate OLS regression based on data
from the State YRBS for the period 1999-2015. All models control for the covariates listed in Table 1,
state fixed effects, and year fixed effects. The models in panel II also control for interactions between
Sexual Minority and all right-hand-side variables. Regressions are weighted by the adjusted YRBS
weights. Standard errors, corrected for clustering at the state level, are in parentheses.




                                                      36
                       Table 7. SSM Laws and Mental Health, State YRBS (1999-2017)
                                       (1)              (2)              (3)                                        (4)

                                        Suicide Attempt         Suicide Planning Suicide Ideation              Depression
                                                           Panel I: DD estimates for sexual minorities
SSM Law                                       0.0017                0.0517**          0.0323**                   0.0069
                                             (0.0132)               (0.0160)           (0.0103)                 (0.0132)
N                                             38,600                   56,679              56,068                63,145
Mean of dependent variable                     0.234                    0.325               0.392                 0.547

                                                            Panel II: Fully-interacted DDD estimates
SSM Law*Sexual Minority                       0.0005               0.0477**             0.0294*                  0.0160
                                             (0.0120)              (0.0142)            (0.0109)                 (0.0150)
N                                            333,880                  473,857             446,666               513,803
Mean of dependent variable                    0.234                    0.325               0.392                 0.547
* Significant at the 5 percent level; ** Significant at the 1 percent level

Notes: Each column within each panel represents results from a separate OLS regression based on data from the State YRBS
for the period 1999-2017. All models control for the covariates listed in Table 1, state fixed effects, and year fixed effects.
Regressions are weighted by the adjusted YRBS weights. The models in panel II also control for interactions between Sexual
Minority and all right-hand-side variables. Standard errors, corrected for clustering at the state level, are in parentheses.




                                                                 37
                        Table 8. Leads and Lags of SSM Law, State YRBS (1999-2017)
                                                    (1)          (2)          (3)                                   (4)

                                                            Suicide            Suicide         Suicide
                                                            Attempt           Planning        Ideation         Depression

                                                                   Panel I: DD estimates for sexual minorities
Two or More Waves Prior to SSM Law                           -0.0435         -0.0398*        -0.0256        -0.0186
                                                            (0.0218)         (0.0150)       (0.0154)       (0.0225)
Wave Prior to SSM Law                                            -               -               -

Year of Law Change                                           0.0056           0.0450**       0.0353**            0.0071
                                                            (0.0137)          (0.0128)       (0.0090)           (0.0161)
One or More Waves After SSM Law                              0.0473            0.0302        0.0563**            0.0138
                                                            (0.0261)          (0.0180)       (0.0114)           (0.0265)
N                                                            38,600            56,679          56,068            63,145
Mean of dependent variable                                    0.234             0.325           0.392             0.547

                                                                   Panel II: Fully-interacted DDD estimates
Two or More Waves Prior to SSM Law                           -0.0343       -0.0360**         -0.0136       -0.0069
 *Sexual Minority                                           (0.0192)        (0.0108)        (0.0145)      (0.0183)
Wave Prior to SSM Law*Sexual Minority                            -              -                -

Year of Law Change*Sexual Minority                           0.0051           0.0414**       0.0340**            0.0176
                                                             (0.014)          (0.0110)       (0.0100)           (0.0166)
One or More Waves After SSM Law                              0.0433            0.0276        0.0597**            0.0279
 *Sexual Minority                                           (0.0298)          (0.0153)       (0.0156)           (0.0221)
N                                                           333,880           473,857          446,66            513,803
Mean of dependent variable                                   0.234             0.325            0.392             0.547
* Significant at the 5 percent level; ** Significant at the 1 percent level

Notes: Each column within each panel represents results from a separate OLS regression based on data from the State YRBS
for the period 1999-2017. The omitted category is the wave prior to legalization. All models control for the covariates listed
in Table 1, state fixed effects, and year fixed effects. The models in panel II also control for interactions between Sexual
Minority and all right-hand-side variables. Regressions are weighted by the adjusted YRBS weights. Standard errors,
corrected for clustering at the state level, are in parentheses.




                                                                 38
               Table 9. Controlling for Spatial Heterogeneity, State YRBS (1999-2017)
                                       (1)             (2)              (3)                                 (4)

                                            Suicide                 Suicide          Suicide
                                            Attempt                Planning         Ideation           Depression

                                                Panel I: Controlling for census division-by-year effects
                                                          (DD estimates for sexual minorities)
SSM Law                                      0.0070           0.0298*           0.0353**            0.0080
                                            (0.0144)          (0.0116)           (0.0100)          (0.0135)
N                                            38,600                 56,679           56,068               63,145
Mean of dependent variable                    0.234                  0.325            0.392                0.547

                                               Panel II: Controlling for census division-by-year effects
                                                          (Fully-interacted DDD estimates)
SSM Law*Sexual Minority                      0.0017          0.0268**           0.0376**           0.0102
                                            (0.0090)          (0.0088)          (0.0105)          (0.0131)
N                                           333,880                473,857          446,666              513,803
Mean of dependent variable                   0.234                  0.325            0.392                0.547

                                        Panel III: Controlling for census division-by-year effects and state-
                                                              specific linear time trends
                                                        (DD estimates for sexual minorities)
SSM Law                                    -0.0093           0.0115**             0.0255          -0.0171
                                          (0.0126)           (0.0041)            (0.0133)        (0.0130)
N                                            38,600                 56,679           56,068               63,145
Mean of dependent variable                    0.234                  0.325            0.392                0.547

                                        Panel IV: Controlling for census division-by-year effects and state-
                                                             specific linear time trends
                                                        (Fully-interacted DDD estimates)
SSM Law*Sexual Minority                    -0.0077          0.0121**            0.0327*          -0.0064
                                          (0.0093)          (0.0033)            (0.0151)        (0.0180)
N                                           333,880                473,857          446,666              513,803
Mean of dependent variable                   0.234                  0.325            0.392                0.547
* Significant at the 5 percent level; ** Significant at the 1 percent level

Notes: Each column within each panel represents results from a separate OLS regression based on data from the State
YRBS for the period 1999-2017. All models control for the covariates listed in Table 1, state fixed effects, and year
fixed effects. The models in panels II and IV also control for interactions between Sexual Minority and all right-hand-
side variables. Regressions are weighted by the adjusted YRBS weights. Standard errors, corrected for clustering at
the state level, are in parentheses.




                                                              39
   Table 10. SSM Laws by Court Order versus Legislative Action, State YRBS (1999-2017)
                                  (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)

                                                Suicide               Suicide        Suicide
                                                Attempt              Planning       Ideation           Depression

                                                        Panel I: DD estimates for sexual minorities
SSM Law by Legislative Action                    0.0021           0.0280           0.0132           0.0042
                                                (0.0193)         (0.0195)         (0.0142)        (0.0209)
SSM Law by Court Order                           0.0032          0.0633**        0.0403**           0.0087
                                                (0.0148)         (0.0173)         (0.0129)        (0.0129)
N                                                38,600               56,679         56,068              63,145
Mean of dependent variable                        0.234                0.325          0.392               0.547

                                                         Panel II: Fully-interacted DDD estimates
SSM Law by Legislative Action                    0.0030           0.0334*           0.0144         0.0142
 *Sexual Minority                               (0.0156)         (0.0156)          (0.0125)       (0.0182)
SSM Law by Court Order                           0.0011          0.0544**          0.0353*         0.0184
 *Sexual Minority                               (0.0151)         (0.0156)          (0.0148)       (0.0157)
N                                               333,880               473,857        446,666             513,803
Mean of dependent variable                       0.234                 0.325          0.392               0.547
* Significant at the 5 percent level; ** Significant at the 1 percent level

Notes: Each column within each panel represents results from a separate OLS regression based on data from the State
YRBS for the period 1999-2017. All models control for the covariates listed in Table 1, state fixed effects, and year
fixed effects. The models in panel II also control for interactions between Sexual Minority and all right-hand-side
variables. Regressions are weighted by the adjusted YRBS weights. Standard errors, corrected for clustering at the
state level, are in parentheses.




                                                              40
               Table 11. Heterogeneous Effects and SSM Laws, State YRBS (1999-2017)
                                                (1)                     (2)                (3)                   (4)

                                        Suicide Attempt        Suicide Planning    Suicide Ideation         Depression

                                                         Panel I: DD estimates for male sexual minorities
SSM Law                                       0.0005                0.0387             0.0479*             0.0121
                                             (0.0188)              (0.0191)            (0.0231)           (0.0227)
N                                             12,546                 18,916             18,555                 20,897
Mean of dependent variable                     0.216                  0.260              0.312                  0.402

                                                        Panel II: DD estimates for female sexual minorities
SSM Law                                       0.0019               0.0571*              0.0237               0.0055
                                             (0.0144)              (0.0278)            (0.0159)             (0.0132)
N                                             26,054                 37,763             37,513                 42,248
Mean of dependent variable                     0.242                  0.357              0.432                  0.619

                                               Panel III: DD estimates for non-Hispanic white sexual minorities
SSM Law                                       0.0174             0.0522*             0.0377*            -0.0065
                                             (0.0209)            (0.0202)            (0.0164)           (0.0185)
N                                             20,148                 27,878             24,864                 30,470
Mean of dependent variable                     0.222                  0.341              0.426                  0.572

                                                   Panel IV: DD estimates for non-white sexual minorities
SSM Law                                      -0.0224            0.0315              0.0213               0.0167
                                             (0.0253)          (0.0278)            (0.0146)             (0.0174)
N                                             18,452                 28,801             31,204                 32,675
Mean of dependent variable                     0.244                  0.311              0.363                  0.525

                                               Panel V: DD estimates for sexual minorities 12 to 15 years of age
SSM Law                                       0.0073             0.0391              0.0078               -0.0177
                                             (0.0185)           (0.0296)            (0.0216)              (0.0224)
N                                             15,270                 23,396             23,498                 26,196
Mean of dependent variable                     0.250                  0.360              0.423                  0.553

                                            Panel VI: DD estimates for sexual minorities 16 years of age and older
SSM Law                                      -0.0048            0.0543*              0.0430               0.0203
                                             (0.0198)           (0.0233)            (0.0255)             (0.0154)
N                                             23,330                 33,283             32,570                 36,949
Mean of dependent variable                     0.224                  0.304              0.374                  0.543
* Significant at the 5 percent level; ** Significant at the 1 percent level

Notes: Each column within each panel represents results from a separate OLS regression based on data from the State
YRBS for the period 1999-2017. All models control for the covariates listed in Table 1, state fixed effects, and year fixed
effects. Regressions are weighted by the adjusted YRBS weights. Standard errors, corrected for clustering at the state
level, are in parentheses.

                                                                41
                    Table 12. SSM Laws and Youth Risky Behavior, State YRBS (1999-2017)
                                    (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)                                      (5)

                                                               Binge                            Marijuana
                                       Alcohol Use            Drinking        Cigarette Use       Use                Bullied

                                                             Panel I: DD estimates for sexual minorities
SSM Law                                   0.0060             0.0320**          0.0087          0.0195                -0.0193
                                         (0.0174)            (0.0110)         (0.0168)        (0.0185)              (0.0315)
N                                         57,152               55,032            60,821           61,518             54,377
Mean of dependent variable                 0.373                0.185             0.180            0.295              0.322
                                                               Panel II: Fully-interacted DDD estimates
SSM Law*Sexual Minority                   0.0121              0.0341*            0.0165         0.0191               0.0255
                                         (0.0127)             (0.0145)          (0.0163)       (0.0171)             (0.0192)
N                                         484,270             458,882           503,240          508,395             421,066
Mean of dependent variable                 0.373               0.185             0.180            0.295               0.322
* Significant at the 5 percent level; ** Significant at the 1 percent level

Notes: Each column within each panel represents results from a separate OLS regression based on data from the State YRBS for
the period 1999-2017. All models control for the covariates listed in Table 1, state fixed effects, and year fixed effects. The
models in panel II also control for interactions between Sexual Minority and all right-hand-side variables. Regressions are
weighted by the adjusted YRBS weights. Standard errors, corrected for clustering at the state level, are in parentheses.




                                                                    42
                   Appendix Table 1. Number of Observations by State-Year, State YRBS (1999-2017)
                       1999    2001     2003     2005      2007     2009      2011      2013        2015    2017
Alabama                1,827   1,351     916      858        -      1,214     1,148     1,279       1,291     -
Alaska                   -       -      1,283      -       1,105    1,047     1,096     1,034       1,165   1,102
Arizona                  -       -      2,895    2,649     2,447    2,207     2,436     1,388       2,094   1,720
Arkansas               1,302   1,531      -      1,290     1,336    1,344     1,091     1,296       2,321   1,353
California               -       -        -        -         -        -         -         -         1,675   1,470
Colorado                 -       -        -      1,320       -      1,348     1,153       -           -     1,417
Connecticut              -       -        -      2,183     1,984    1,906     1,996     2,282       2,269   2,289
Delaware               1,950   2,594    2,536    2,324     2,088    1,888     1,850     2,272       2,260   2,428
District of Columbia     -       -        -        -         -        -         -         -           -       -
Florida                  -     3,583    3,507    3,749     3,777    4,791     5,198     5,117       5,308   5,128
Georgia                  -       -      1,739    1,460     2,041    1,582     1,582     1,637         -       -
Hawaii                 1,115     -        -      1,376      989     1,252     3,462     3,819       4,969   4,852
Idaho                    -     1,512    1,507    1,279     1,227    1,913     1,541     1,697       1,546   1,545
Illinois                 -       -        -        -       1,970    2,475     2,868     2,648       2,630   4,040
Indiana                  -       -      1,468    1,342     2,000    1,290     2,351       -         1,702     -
Iowa                     -       -        -      1,267     1,288      -       1,374       -           -     1,436
Kansas                   -       -        -      1,462     1,484    1,785     1,658     1,666         -     2,004
Kentucky                 -       -      1,364    2,770     3,176    1,474     1,451     1,387       2,119   1,722
Louisiana                -       -        -        -       1,089     842       945       886          -      933
Maine                    -     1,111    1,462    1,193     1,188    8,276     8,764     8,203       9,027   8,921
Maryland                 -       -        -      1,229     1,237    1,314     2,075       -           -       -
Massachusetts          3,741   3,623    3,093    2,911     2,620    2,277     2,263     2,331       2,577   2,775
Michigan               2,281   3,047    2,924    2,784     2,908    2,872     3,523     3,641       3,991   1,435
Minnesota                -       -        -        -         -        -         -         -           -       -
Mississippi            1,292   1,529    1,257      -       1,220    1,438     1,418     1,240       1,616     -
Missouri               1,472   1,518    1,412    1,669     1,344    1,390       -       1,408       1,286   1,553

                                                         43
Montana                    2,549       2,254        2,344       2,617        3,411        1,591        3,617        4,259      3,912    4,116
Nebraska                     -           -          2,514       3,276          -            -          2,397        1,517      1,286    1,250
Nevada                     1,540       1,317        1,773       1,350        1,485        1,755          -          1,845      1,238    1,375
New Hampshire                -           -          1,185       1,154        1,467        1,376        1,286        1,518     13,505   10,448
New Jersey                   -         1,817          -           -            -            -          1,443        1,660        -        -
New Mexico                   -           -            -         4,484        2,103        4,214        4,941        4,653      7,106    4,902
New York                   3,066         -          7,614       7,997       10,530       11,557       10,352        8,437      8,493    8,761
North Carolina               -           -            -         3,800       3,371        5,533           -            -          -      2,564
North Dakota               1,552       1,448        1,481       1,523        1,718        1,607        1,859        1,915      2,062    2,056
Ohio                       1,810         -          1,017         -            -            -            -          1,263        -        -
Oklahoma                     -           -          1,257       1,476       2,279        1,208        1,019         1,331      1,430    1,355
Oregon                       -           -            -           -            -            -            -            -          -        -
Pennsylvania                 -           -            -           -            -          1,836          -            -        2,396    3,036
Rhode Island                 -         1,249        1,567       1,951        1,838        2,693        3,364        2,350      2,961    1,854
South Carolina             3,573         -            -         1,094        1,036         870         1,216        1,310      1,053    1,044
South Dakota               1,465       1,564        1,569       1,421        1,403        1,916        1,312        1,265      1,127      -
Tennessee                    -           -          1,731       1,329       1,689        1,857        2,228         1,584      3,487    1,753
Texas                        -         6,105          -         3,539        2,707        3,026        3,263        2,679        -      1,747
Utah                       1,320        933         1,206       1,286        1,678        1,359        1,452        1,898        -      1,541
Vermont                    6,484       6,630        5,690       6,700       5,466        7,736        8,239           -       18,991   19,544
Virginia                     -           -            -           -            -            -          1,208        5,738      3,731    3,264
Washington                   -           -            -           -            -            -            -            -          -        -
West Virginia              1,193         -          1,523       1,169        1,211        1,383        1,846        1,560      1,382    1,278
Wisconsin                  1,255       1,873        1,961       2,191        1,827        2,125        2,610        2,483        -      1,820
Wyoming                    1,484       2,524        1,385       2,209        1,902        2,447        2,047        2,590      2,045      -

Notes: Boldface font denotes state-year combinations that include information on both sexual identity and suicide attempts.




                                                                          44
                Appendix Table 2. Estimated Coefficients on Covariates and Year Effects for DD Models by
                                 Self-Reported Sexual Identity, State YRBS (1999-2015)
                                        Sexual minorities                                   Heterosexuals
                            (1)         (2)            (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)             (7)        (8)

                          Suicide      Suicide       Suicide                  Suicide    Suicide        Suicide
                          Attempt     Planning      Ideation   Depression     Attempt   Planning       Ideation   Depression
SSM Law                   -0.0145      -0.0035        0.0139     -0.0200       0.0022    -0.0019        -0.0105   -0.0224**
                         (0.0121)     (0.0146)      (0.0141)    (0.0207)     (0.0067)   (0.0044)       (0.0053)    (0.0076)
Age 15                     0.0007      -0.0243       -0.0212      0.0103       0.0079     0.0089         0.0083    0.0269**
                         (0.0198)     (0.0188)      (0.0258)    (0.0210)     (0.0045)   (0.0050)       (0.0051)    (0.0038)
Age 16                    -0.0273    -0.0869**       -0.0757      0.0117       0.0032     0.0067        0.0084*    0.0411**
                         (0.0191)     (0.0260)      (0.0294)    (0.0129)     (0.0028)   (0.0033)       (0.0031)    (0.0060)
Age 17                    -0.0445    -0.0918**     -0.0582**      0.0087    -0.0067**    -0.0094        -0.0034    0.0388**
                         (0.0260)     (0.0159)      (0.0185)    (0.0144)     (0.0019)   (0.0058)       (0.0022)    (0.0064)
Age 18                   -0.0763*     -0.1019*     -0.1324**     -0.0298      -0.0056    -0.0101       -0.0103*    0.0360**
                         (0.0298)     (0.0381)      (0.0429)    (0.0198)     (0.0034)   (0.0057)       (0.0050)    (0.0046)
Black                      0.0215    -0.0724**     -0.1213**   -0.0915**     0.0224**    -0.0003      -0.0101**      0.0070
                         (0.0269)     (0.0215)      (0.0212)    (0.0184)     (0.0049)   (0.0051)       (0.0031)    (0.0056)
Hispanic                 0.0635**      -0.0071     -0.0332**      0.0125     0.0241**    0.0114*         0.0007    0.0431**
                         (0.0132)     (0.0147)      (0.0106)    (0.0080)     (0.0059)   (0.0047)       (0.0065)    (0.0100)
Other Race                 0.0257       0.0268       -0.0338    -0.0358*     0.0157**   0.0164**         0.0057     0.0192*
                         (0.0208)     (0.0233)      (0.0231)    (0.0153)     (0.0056)   (0.0031)       (0.0048)    (0.0086)
Female                     0.0361     0.1110**      0.1290**    0.2141**     0.0221**   0.0450**       0.0627**    0.1341**
                         (0.0193)     (0.0223)      (0.0100)    (0.0136)     (0.0040)   (0.0056)       (0.0040)    (0.0041)
Unemployment               0.0100       0.0135       0.0204*    -0.0305*       0.0052     0.0036         0.0036     -0.0049
                         (0.0110)     (0.0085)      (0.0088)    (0.0144)     (0.0035)   (0.0030)       (0.0040)    (0.0042)
LGB Employment Policy     -0.0043    -0.0657**     -0.0976**    -0.0351*      -0.0032    -0.0078         0.0021    -0.0126*
                         (0.0148)     (0.0097)      (0.0153)    (0.0170)     (0.0055)   (0.0041)       (0.0042)    (0.0055)
Year 1999                0.1120**     0.1139**      0.1334**     -0.0521      0.0304*   0.0530**       0.0794**     0.0325*
                         (0.0227)     (0.0217)      (0.0203)    (0.0436)     (0.0110)   (0.0061)       (0.0104)    (0.0137)
Year 2001                 0.0446*     0.0742**      0.1161**     -0.0527      0.0255*   0.0326**       0.0700**     -0.0132
                         (0.0183)     (0.0224)      (0.0206)    (0.0387)     (0.0108)   (0.0066)       (0.0103)    (0.0135)
Year 2003                 0.0866*       0.0272        0.0376      0.0348       0.0158     0.0011        0.0197*      0.0114
                         (0.0325)     (0.0327)      (0.0243)    (0.0317)     (0.0101)   (0.0090)       (0.0089)    (0.0078)
Year 2005                  0.0144       0.0037     -0.0695**     -0.0130       0.0074     0.0027         0.0030    0.0251**
                         (0.0147)     (0.0130)      (0.0123)    (0.0156)     (0.0043)   (0.0039)       (0.0038)    (0.0059)


                                                               45
Year 2007                           0.0290        -0.0499**        -0.0335      0.0001           0.0039        -0.0050         -0.0065      -0.0181**
                                  (0.0163)         (0.0152)       (0.0177)     (0.0281)        (0.0102)       (0.0040)        (0.0051)       (0.0052)
Year 2009                          -0.0139          -0.0636        -0.0463      0.0974          -0.0208        -0.0304         -0.0198        0.0042
                                  (0.0475)         (0.0516)       (0.0250)     (0.0498)        (0.0141)       (0.0192)        (0.0163)       (0.0139)
Year 2011                          -0.0183          -0.0858       -0.1027*      0.0175          -0.0205        -0.0147         -0.0146        0.0044
                                  (0.0696)         (0.0592)       (0.0478)     (0.0476)        (0.0122)       (0.0121)        (0.0148)       (0.0122)
Year 2013                           0.0256          -0.0083        -0.0233      0.0167          -0.0055        -0.0059         -0.0030        0.0052
                                  (0.0247)         (0.0214)       (0.0179)     (0.0324)        (0.0055)       (0.0057)        (0.0068)       (0.0097)

N                                   22,995           36,704          34,472        38,904      209,024         304,585        275,449        318,983
Mean of dependent variable           0.248           0.336            0.391        0.535        0.062           0.109          0.128          0.246
* Significant at the 5 percent level; ** Significant at the 1 percent level

Notes: Each column represents results from a separate OLS regression based on data from the State YRBS for the period 1999-2015. All models control
for state fixed effects. Regressions are weighted by the adjusted YRBS weights. Standard errors, corrected for clustering at the state level, are in
parentheses.




                                                                              46
   Appendix Table 3. Sensitivity of Estimated Relationship Between SSM Law*Sexual Minority and Suicide Attempt to
                        Interacting Covariates with Sexual Minority, State YRBS (1999-2015)
                                             (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)

                                                          Suicide        Suicide          Suicide    Suicide      Suicide       Suicide        Suicide
                                                          Attempt        Attempt          Attempt    Attempt     Attempt       Attempt        Attempt
SSM Law*Sexual Minority                                  -0.0425*       -0.0466*         -0.0420*   -0.0414*    -0.0482**       -0.0221        -0.0167
                                                         (0.0174)       (0.0186)         (0.0174)   (0.0154)     (0.0080)      (0.0135)       (0.0121)

N                                                        232,019         232,019         232,019    232,019      232,019        232,019       232,019
Mean of dependent variable                                0.248           0.248           0.248      0.248        0.248          0.248         0.248

Zist*Sexual Minority                                         No               Yes          No         No           No             No             Yes
Unemployment*Sexual Minority                                 No               No           Yes        No           No             No             Yes
LGB Employment Policy*Sexual Minority                        No               No           No         Yes          No             No             Yes
vs*Sexual Minority                                           No               No           No         No           Yes            No             Yes
t*Sexual Minority                                            No               No           No         No           No             Yes            Yes
* Significant at the 5 percent level; ** Significant at the 1 percent level

Notes: Each column represents results from a separate OLS regression based on data from the State YRBS for the period 1999-2015. All models
control for the covariates listed in Table 1, state fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Regressions are weighted by the adjusted YRBS weights. Standard
errors, corrected for clustering at the state level, are in parentheses.




                                                                                    47
       Appendix Table 4. SSM Laws and Inclusion of Sexual Minority
                  Question on State YRBS (1999-2015)
                                     (1)                   (2)

                                           Sexual Minority                 Sexual Minority
                                          Question Included               Question Included
SSM Law                                         0.155                           0.149
                                               (0.099)                         (0.102)

N                                                  313                           304
Mean of dependent variable                        0.224                         0.217

Sample of states                                All states              State-years with non-
                                                                        missing information
                                                                         on suicide attempts
* Significant at the 5 percent level; ** Significant at the 1 percent level

Notes: Each column represents results from a separate OLS regression based on data from the
State YRBS for the period 1999-2015. The dependent variable is equal to 1 if state s included
a question on sexual minority status in their YRBS during wave t, and equal to 0 otherwise.
All models control for state fixed effects and year fixed effects. Standard errors, corrected for
clustering at the state level, are in parentheses.




                                                48
            Appendix Table 5. Means by Self-Reported Sexual Identity,
                            State YRBS (1999-2017)
                                           Pooled              Heterosexual              LGBQ
Dependent Variables
Suicide Attempt                           0.084                   0.064                  0.234
                                      (N = 333,800)           (N = 295,280)           (N = 38,600)
Suicide Planning                          0.134                   0.110                  0.325
                                      (N = 473,857)           (N = 417,178)           (N = 56,679)
Suicide Ideation                          0.159                   0.128                  0.392
                                      (N = 446,666)           (N = 390,598)           (N = 56,068)
Depression                                0.290                   0.256                  0.547
                                      (N = 513,803)           (N = 450,658)           (N = 63,145)
Independent Variables
SSM Law                                     0.703                  0.693                  0.771
SSM: Court Mandate                          0.551                  0.545                  0.600
SSM: Legislative                            0.139                  0.135                  0.165
Male                                        0.495                  0.518                  0.326
Age 14                                      0.117                  0.116                  0.123
Age 15                                      0.255                  0.255                  0.254
Age 16                                      0.256                  0.255                  0.264
Age 17                                      0.237                  0.238                  0.228
Age 18                                      0.135                  0.136                  0.132
Black                                       0.113                  0.110                  0.135
White                                       0.552                  0.560                  0.487
Hispanic                                    0.240                  0.237                  0.269
Other Race                                  0.096                  0.094                  0.109
Sexual Minority                             0.117                    0                      1
Gay or Lesbian                             0.0206                    0                    0.177
Bisexual                                   0.0613                    0                    0.525
Not sure                                   0.0348                    0                    0.298
LGB Employment Policy                       0.606                  0.611                  0.574
Unemployment                                5.673                  5.700                  5.467

Notes: Means for the mental health outcomes are based on the state-year combinations where
information on sexual identity is available. Means for the independent variables are based on the state-
year combinations where information on sexual identity and suicide attempts is available. All means
are weighted to be nationally representative.




                                                  49
 Appendix Table 6. Restricting Sample to Non-SSM Adopting States and Raifman
   et al.'s (2017) Original Nine SSM Adopting States, State YRBS (1999-2017)
                                   (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)

                                           Suicide             Suicide         Suicide
                                           Attempt            Planning        Ideation       Depression
                                                Panel I: DD estimates for sexual minorities
SSM Law                                     0.0045         0.0317       0.0398**        0.0100
                                           (0.0183)       (0.0209)       (0.0091)      (0.0203)
N                                           33,301             50,793         50,173            57,240
Mean of dependent variable                   0.231              0.324          0.394             0.545

                                                 Panel II: Fully-interacted DDD estimates
SSM Law*Sexual Minority                     -0.0052         0.0297        0.0366**      0.0232
                                           (0.0182)        (0.0174)       (0.0112)     (0.0145)
N                                          287,141            422,225         394,931          462,053
Mean of dependent variable                  0.231              0.324           0.394            0.545
* Significant at the 5 percent level; ** Significant at the 1 percent level

Notes: Each column within each panel represents results from a separate OLS regression based on data
from the State YRBS for the period 1999-2017. All models control for the covariates listed in Table 1,
state fixed effects, and year fixed effects. The models in panel II also control for interactions between
Sexual Minority and all right-hand-side variables. Regressions are weighted by the adjusted YRBS
weights. Standard errors, corrected for clustering at the state level, are in parentheses.




                                                       50
              Appendix Table 7. Unweighted Estimates, State YRBS (1999-2017)
                                     (1)           (2)           (3)                                   (4)

                                              Suicide             Suicide         Suicide
                                              Attempt            Planning        Ideation         Depression
                                                   Panel I: DD estimates for sexual minorities
SSM Law                                       0.0002          0.0097         0.0157         -0.0035
                                             (0.0077)        (0.0114)       (0.0101)       (0.0089)
N                                             38,600              56,679          56,068             63,145
Mean of dependent variable                     0.227               0.321           0.381              0.526

                                                    Panel II: Fully-interacted DDD estimates
SSM Law*Sexual Minority                       -0.0037         0.0087          0.0106        -0.0041
                                             (0.0073)        (0.0087)        (0.0091)      (0.0070)
N                                             333,880            473,857         446,666            513,803
Mean of dependent variable                     0.227              0.321           0.381              0.526
* Significant at the 5 percent level; ** Significant at the 1 percent level

Notes: Each column within each panel represents results from a separate OLS regression based on data from
the State YRBS for the period 1999-2017. All models control for the covariates listed in Table 1, state fixed
effects, and year fixed effects. The models in panel II also control for interactions between Sexual Minority and
all right-hand-side variables. Standard errors, corrected for clustering at the state level, are in parentheses.




                                                          51
               Appendix Table 8. Unweighted Estimates, State and National
                             YRBS Combined (1999-2017)
                                   (1)           (2)           (3)                                  (4)

                                          Suicide            Suicide           Suicide
                                          Attempt           Planning          Ideation        Depression
                                                Panel I: DD estimates for sexual minorities
SSM Law                                    -0.0011         0.0085        0.0149         -0.0034
                                          (0.0075)        (0.0112)      (0.0098)       (0.0089)
N                                          41,366             60,206           59,634            66,716
Mean of dependent variable                 0.227               0.323            0.383             0.528

                                                 Panel II: Fully-interacted DDD estimates
SSM Law*Sexual Minority                    -0.0056         0.0072          0.0089       -0.0045
                                          (0.0069)        (0.0087)        (0.0092)     (0.0073)
N                                         355,253            501,109          474,259           541,310
Mean of dependent variable                 0.227              0.323            0.383             0.528
* Significant at the 5 percent level; ** Significant at the 1 percent level

Notes: Each column within each panel represents results from a separate OLS regression based on data
from the State and National YRBS for the period 1999-2017. All models control for the covariates listed
in Table 1, state fixed effects, and year fixed effects. The models in panel II also control for interactions
between Sexual Minority and all right-hand-side variables. Standard errors, corrected for clustering at the
state level, are in parentheses.




                                                       52
  Appendix Table 9. Heterogeneous Effects by Sexual Minority Type, State YRBS (1999-2017)
                                             (1)                    (2)                (3)                    (4)

                                     Suicide Attempt        Suicide Planning    Suicide Ideation          Depression

                                                          Panel I: DD estimates for gay/lesbian teens
SSM Law                                   0.0050                 0.0266             0.0865**                0.0374
                                         (0.0452)               (0.0444)            (0.0291)               (0.0345)
N                                          6,663                  10,684             10,605                 11,580
Mean of dependent variable                 0.268                   0.313              0.370                  0.493

                                                           Panel II: DD estimates for bisexual teens
SSM Law                                  -0.0061               0.0669*               0.0185                 0.0315
                                         (0.0174)              (0.0326)             (0.0198)               (0.0221)
N                                         20,239                  29,385             28,617                 32,452
Mean of dependent variable                 0.231                   0.368              0.451                  0.624

                                                         Panel III: DD estimates for questioning teens
SSM Law                                   0.0195                0.0592**             0.0408*               -0.0414
                                         (0.0177)               (0.0200)             (0.0167)              (0.0243)
N                                         11,698                  16,610             16,846                 19,113
Mean of dependent variable                 0.183                   0.256              0.305                  0.448

                                             Panel IV: Fully-interacted DDD estimates for gay/lesbian teens
SSM Law*Sexual Minority                   0.0039              0.0226            0.0837**              0.0464
                                         (0.0432)            (0.0453)           (0.0279)             (0.0373)
N                                         301,943                427,862            401,203                462,238
Mean of dependent variable                 0.268                  0.313              0.370                  0.493

                                              Panel V: Fully-interacted DDD estimates for bisexual teens
SSM Law*Sexual Minority                  -0.0072            0.0630*             0.0156                0.0405
                                         (0.0166)           (0.0304)           (0.0180)              (0.0233)
N                                         315,519                446,563            419,215                483,110
Mean of dependent variable                 0.231                  0.368              0.451                  0.624

                                             Panel VI: Fully-interacted DDD estimates for questioning teens
SSM Law*Sexual Minority                   0.0184             0.0552**           0.0380*              -0.0325
                                         (0.0204)            (0.0205)           (0.0195)             (0.0216)
N                                         306,978                433,788            407,444                469,771
Mean of dependent variable                 0.183                  0.256              0.305                  0.448
* Significant at the 5 percent level; ** Significant at the 1 percent level

Notes: Each column within each panel represents results from a separate OLS regression based on data from the State
YRBS for the period 1999-2017. All models control for the covariates listed in Table 1, state fixed effects, and year fixed
effects. The models in panels IV, V, and VI also control for interactions between Sexual Minority and all right-hand-side
variables. Regressions are weighted by the adjusted YRBS weights. Standard errors, corrected for clustering at the state
level, are in parentheses.


                                                               53
         Appendix Table 10. SSM Laws by State versus U.S. Supreme Court Mandate,
                                 State YRBS (1999-2017)
                                       (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)

                                                   Suicide             Suicide         Suicide
                                                   Attempt            Planning        Ideation         Depression

                                                         Panel I:     DD estimates for sexual minorities
SSM by Legislative Action                           0.0020             0.0232          0.0119         -0.0003
                                                   (0.0195)           (0.0189)       (0.0139)        (0.0209)
SSM by State Court Order                            0.0027            0.0483**        0.0356*         -0.0073
                                                   (0.0151)           (0.0144)       (0.0140)        (0.0185)
SSM by U.S. Supreme Court Order                     0.0040            0.0899**       0.0490**        0.0385*
                                                   (0.0164)           (0.0185)       (0.0122)        (0.0184)

N                                                   38,600              56,679         56,068             63,145
Mean of dependent variable                           0.234               0.325          0.392              0.547

                                                          Panel II: Fully-interacted DDD estimates
SSM Law by Legislative Action                       0.0029          0.0301          0.0152        0.0129
 *Sexual Minority                                  (0.0158)        (0.0147)        (0.0120)      (0.0176)
SSM by State Court Order                            0.0011        0.0455**         0.0404*        0.0172
 *Sexual Minority                                  (0.0154)        (0.0154)        (0.0179)      (0.0149)
SSM by U.S. Supreme Court Order                     0.0009        0.0684**          0.0232        0.0160
 *Sexual Minority                                  (0.0188)        (0.0173)        (0.0163)      (0.0261)

N                                                  333,880             473,857        446,666            513,803
Mean of dependent variable                          0.234               0.325          0.392              0.547
* Significant at the 5 percent level; ** Significant at the 1 percent level

Notes: Each column within each panel represents results from a separate OLS regression based on data from the
State YRBS for the period 1999-2017. All models control for the covariates listed in Table 1, state fixed effects, and
year fixed effects. The models in panel II also control for interactions between Sexual Minority and all right-hand-
side variables. Regressions are weighted by the adjusted YRBS weights. Standard errors, corrected for clustering at
the state level, are in parentheses.




                                                             54
    Appendix Table 11. Means for Risky Behaviors by Self-Reported Sexual Identity, State YRBS (1999-2017)
                         Pooled            Heterosexual          LGBQ                                 Description
Alcohol Use               0.321               0.314               0.373            = 1 if respondent drank alcohol in past 30 days, =
                      (N = 484,270)       (N = 427,118)        (N = 57,152)        0 otherwise

Binge Drinking            0.166               0.163               0.185            = 1 if respondent had five or more drinks in a row
                      (N = 458,882)       (N = 403,850)        (N = 55,032)        on the same day in past 30 days, = 0 otherwise

Cigarette Use             0.108              0.0991               0.180            = 1 if respondent smoked a cigarette in past 30
                      (N = 503,240)       (N = 442,419)        (N = 60,821)        days, = 0 otherwise

Marijuana Use             0.210               0.199               0.295            = 1 if respondent used marijuana in past 30 days,
                      (N = 508,495)       (N = 446,877)        (N = 61,518)        = 0 otherwise

Bullied                   0.196               0.179               0.322            = 1 if respondent has been bullied on school
                      (N = 421,066)       (N = 366,689)        (N = 54,377)        property in past 12 months, = 0 otherwise

Notes: Means are weighted to be nationally representative and are based on the state-year combinations where information on sexual identity is
available.




                                                                     55
