                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




EDUCATIONAL, LABOR-MARKET AND INTERGENERATIONAL CONSEQUENCES OF
                     POOR CHILDHOOD HEALTH

                                      Krzysztof Karbownik
                                         Anthony Wray

                                      Working Paper 26368
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26368


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019


We are grateful to Dr. Sue Hawkins for providing access to data from the Historical Hospital
Admission Records Project (HHARP), and to Hardish Bindra at Paradigm Data Services for
coordinating the transcription of the admission records from St. Bartholomew's and Guy's
Hospitals. Wray is indebted to his dissertation committee members Joel Mokyr (chair), Joseph
Ferrie, and David Dranove for encouragement and guidance. We also thank David N. Figlio,
Guillermo Marshall, Werner Troesken, seminar participants at Emory University, the Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago, Hitotsubashi University, the Max Planck Institute for Demographic
Research, the National Graduate Institute for Policy Studies (GRIPS), Northwestern University,
and the University of Southern Denmark, conference participants at the World Congress of
Cliometrics, the European Historical Economics Society, the Economic History Association, the
Social Science History Association, the H2D2 Research Day at the University of Michigan, the
NBER Children's Meeting, and the Public Health and Development Workshop at the University
of Gothenburg for helpful comments and suggestions. Wray appreciates financial support from
the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science KAKENHI Young Scientists B Grant Number
J160100115 (PI: Wray), the Hitotsubashi Institute for Advanced Study (HIAS), Hitotsubashi
University, the Northwestern University Economics Department's Eisner Fund and Center for
Economic History, and the Economic History Association's Sokoloff Fellowship. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Krzysztof Karbownik and Anthony Wray. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Educational, Labor-market and Intergenerational Consequences of Poor Childhood Health
Krzysztof Karbownik and Anthony Wray
NBER Working Paper No. 26368
October 2019
JEL No. I14,J62,N33

                                         ABSTRACT

We study whether childhood health capital affects school attendance, long-run occupational
outcomes, and intergenerational mobility. We address this question in the context of London,
England during the late-nineteenth century using the inpatient admission records of three large
hospitals linked to population census records, from which we identify household characteristics
and the patients' siblings. Sibling fixed effects estimates indicate that boys with health
deficiencies were 14.9 percent less likely to work in white collar occupations as adults and 13.9
percent more likely to experience downward occupational mobility relative to their fathers, in
comparison to their brothers. This negative effect offsets 16.2 percent of the benefit of having a
father in a high status occupation. We also explore medium-run mechanisms for both boys and
girls, and find that poor childhood health reduced the likelihood of attending school by 2.5 and
4.1 percent, respectively.


Krzysztof Karbownik
Department of Economics
Emory University
Rich Memorial Building
1602 Fishburne Drive
Atlanta, GA 30322
and NBER
krzysztof.karbownik@emory.edu

Anthony Wray
Department of Business and Economics
University of Southern Denmark
Campusvej 55
Odense M - DK-5230
Denmark
wray@sam.sdu.dk
1 Introduction

Childhood health is an important determinant of future economic success (Currie 2009) while
parental socioeconomic status in turn a ects children's health (Case et al. 2002), potentially cre-
ating a cycle linking health and inequality across generations. An extensive body of research has
shown that in utero conditions have persistent e ects on human capital accumulation and labor
market outcomes (Almond and Currie 2011b).          e extant literature has also been largely suc-
cessful at estimating the socioeconomic consequences of health during the rst few years a er
birth (Almond and Currie 2011a). However, less is known about the long-run e ects of health
throughout childhood (Almond et al. 2018). A related literature has sought to explain the mor-
tality decline and the demographic transition at the end of the nineteenth century (Cutler et al.
2006), but we know relatively li le about health during life, di erences in health between so-
cioeconomic groups, and how health a ected social well-being during this period (Costa 2015).
Notably, health de ciencies in childhood could potentially have impacted the ability to a end
school or enter into an apprenticeship (Horrell et al. 2001).
    We make some progress in addressing these gaps in the literature by documenting that in-
dividual health capital between ages 0 and 11 a ects school enrollment, occupational success,
and intergenerational mobility in the context of London, England during the late-nineteenth and
early-twentieth centuries. Our empirical approach combines three key elements. First, we obtain
an individual-level measure of health that captures in uences throughout childhood rather than
during infancy alone. Second, we link individual childhood health status not only to medium-
run schooling outcomes, but also to long-run occupational and intergenerational outcomes. And
third, we combine these two inputs with a sibling xed e ects identi cation strategy.
    We construct a measure of childhood health de ciencies by collecting historical inpatient
records for the universe of children aged 0 to 11 admi ed to three large London-area hospitals
between 1870 and 1902.1 Our hospitalization-based indicator of childhood health has several
advantages. First and foremost, it yields estimates that are confounded by the positive e ects
of inpatient care to a lesser degree than studies using modern data, given that medical treat-
ments and mitigation strategies were less e ective historically. Moreover, in the context of our
study, hospital admissions occur independently of any disease-speci c policy intervention or
population-wide mortality shock, which represent the typical sources of identifying variation in
the literature.   is distinction is important to the extent that the variation in health status in
our study abstracts from any potential partial or general equilibrium e ects that can arise when
studying speci c policies or shocks. Additionally, our measure of hospitalization captures health
   1 Other papers using hospital inpatient data to study the consequences of poor health include Arthi and Schneider

(2017) and Doyle et al. (2019) in historical se ings, and Currie et al. (2010) and Schwandt (2018) in modern contexts.


                                                          1
during childhood alone, in contrast to adult height, another common proxy for childhood health,
which re ects the net in uence of health throughout childhood and adolescence.2 Lastly, it avoids
the issue of recall bias in studies that use self-reported measures of health (Smith 2009).
    In documenting long-run e ects, we combine the individual-level hospital records with lon-
gitudinal census samples that contain demographic characteristics from childhood and socioeco-
nomic outcomes during adulthood. We construct these samples from newly available complete-
count records for the censuses of England between 1881 and 1911 which are provided by the Inte-
grated Census Microdata (I-CeM) project. In doing so, we apply the methods for linking historical
U.S. census data developed by Ferrie (1996) and re ned by Abramitzky et al. (2012), Feigenbaum
(2016), Mill and Stein (2016), and Bailey et al. (2017). We modify these methods to suit the U.K.
context in which birthplace is non-standardized and reported at multiple levels of time-varying
geographic boundaries (Sch¨  urer and Day 2019). Finally, in the empirical analysis, we create a
sample of hospital patients and their siblings that pools together multiple hospital-to-census and
census-to-census linkages.

    We implement a sibling xed e ects identi cation strategy that compares hospital patients
to their siblings who lived in the same household during childhood but were not hospitalized, as
far as we can observe in the surviving records. Our estimates control for environmental factors
common to the childhood household, as well as any time-invariant unobservables that may be
correlated with both health status and economic outcomes. A limitation of the sibling xed ef-
fects approach is that it cannot separately account for any time-varying parental responses such
as compensatory or reinforcing behaviors that are related to the treatment. To the extent that
these resource reallocation mechanisms are triggered by the initial health shock that led to the
hospitalization, they would be captured by our long-run reduced-form estimates. Additionally,
if the siblings were admi ed to hospitals with no surviving records or if they were otherwise
unhealthy, then our estimates should be interpreted as lower-bound e ects.
    We nd that compared to their brothers, hospitalized males were 4.1 percentage points less
likely to work in white collar occupations as adults, which o sets 16.2 percent of the advantage
of having a father in a white collar occupation. Male patients were also 3.9 percentage points
more likely than their brothers to experience downward occupational mobility, which accounts
for 14.6 percent of overall downward mobility in England at the end of the nineteenth century.
   ese results are robust to a variety of speci cation checks including issues related to selective
   2 Case and Paxson (2008, 2010) and Parman (2015a) use height as a proxy for childhood health and nd that it is
positively associated with cognitive test scores and levels of educational a ainment, respectively. On the other hand,
Case et al. (2005) document that conditional on height, the number of chronic conditions su ered at ages 7 and 11
have signi cant associations with education, which suggests that height does not capture all aspects of childhood
health.



                                                          2
mortality, sample selection choices, and changes in the matching algorithm.
    We then consider potential mechanisms for the long-run e ects and show that hospitalized
boys were 2.5 percent less likely to a end school compared to their non-hospitalized brothers
in the 5-year period a er the hospital admission. As is typically the case with historical data,
we are unable to link hospital records for girls to long-run occupational outcomes due to name
changes by women at the time of marriage. As such, it is rare to nd evidence on the impact
of childhood health for girls in a historical context.3 However, we can ask how poor childhood
health a ects school enrollment for hospitalized girls compared to their sisters, and nd that the
e ect on schooling is modestly larger than for boys at 4.1 percent.
       is paper is among the few studies to use sibling xed e ects to identify the consequences
of poor childhood health (Smith 2009; Currie et al. 2010; Beach et al. 2018; Hoehn-Velasco 2019).4
Our study is the rst to show that de cient childhood health as indicated by hospitalization has
consequences that extend to older ages beyond the increased welfare participation in young adult-
hood found by Currie et al. (2010). Our results suggest that the consequences of poor childhood
health also include lower occupational status as adults and a decline in relative status between
generations. Similar to our ndings, Hoehn-Velasco (2019) estimates that exposure to a pre-
ventative health program has a positive impact on adult earnings. Our study is also one of the
relatively few papers on the long-run e ects of childhood health measured by the disease envi-
ronment beyond the early-life period. In particular, B¨   utikofer and Salvanes (2019) explore the
impact of a tuberculosis testing and vaccination campaign, and Gensowski et al. (2018) use data
on childhood hospitalizations for polio to study the e ects of physical disability from the quasi-
random incidence of paralytic polio.5 In contrast, our historical urban se ing and the causes of
admission reported in the hospital registers are characterized by variation in health status that
stems from a broad range of conditions, which arguably increases the external validity of our
estimates. Moreover, the consequences of the historical health environment remain relevant in
modern times given that similar conditions are still prevalent in the developing world, especially
in rapidly urbanizing cities (Fogel 2004; Floud et al. 2011; Currie and Vogl 2013).

    Our paper also connects to a literature that uses the disease environment around the time of
birth as a proxy for early-life health to evaluate its long-run consequences. Previous studies typ-
   3    is signi cant omission from our knowledge base is now being remedied by the ongoing Longitudinal, Inter-
generational Family Electronic Micro-Database (LIFE-M) Project and other related projects making use of birth and
marriage registers (Bailey et al. 2017).
    4 e use of sibling xed e ects among studies based on historical census data is also limited, but growing with

the recent availability of complete count data (Abramitzky et al. 2012; Parman 2015a; Mill and Stein 2016).
    5 Other studies have evaluated the impact of policy changes during childhood such as expansions in childhood

health insurance coverage (Goodman-Bacon 2017; Brown et al. 2019) and improvements in living conditions (Gould
et al. 2011).



                                                       3
ically exploit cross-sectional variation in mortality from infectious diseases such as hookworm
(Bleakley 2007), malaria (Barreca 2010; Venkataramani 2012; Hong 2013), pneumonia (Bhalotra
and Venkataramani 2012), typhoid fever (Beach et al. 2016), or yellow fever (Saavedra 2017). Many
studies obtain causal estimates by interacting this cross-sectional variation with quasi-random
temporal changes in mortality due to the discovery of antibiotics (Bhalotra and Venkataramani
2012; Zhang 2014; Lazuka 2019) or public health campaigns that sought to eradicate tropical dis-
eases (Bleakley 2007, 2010; Venkataramani 2012; Baird et al. 2016).6 Our results on intergen-
erational mobility also provide context to prior literature that has estimated intergenerational
elasticities and rates of occupational mobility for the historical period that we study (Long and
Ferrie 2013; Long 2013; Clark 2014; Olive i and Paserman 2015; P´     erez 2019). In particular, our
results indicate that poor childhood health can account for a non-trivial share of overall mobility
by reducing upward mobility and increasing downward mobility.



2 Historical Background

Mid-nineteenth century England was characterized by a minimal degree of e ective medical
treatment (Lomax 1996) and limited knowledge of preventative health behaviors (Mokyr 2000;
Worboys 2000). Child mortality due to infectious diseases such as scarlet fever, typhoid fever,
cholera, tuberculosis, whopping cough, and smallpox declined from the 1860s onward (Mercer
2014), but the perception of sickness was de ned by the daily discomforts of colds, headaches,
and diarrhea (Hardy 2001). Factors such as overcrowded housing, inadequate sanitary conditions,
resource constraints, and a lack of proper nutrition or medication arguably contributed to poor
childhood health (McKeown 1976; Wohl 1983; Szreter 2005).
    During the second half of the nineteenth century, medical care for children transitioned from
informal home care to formal institutional se ings. is shi was precipitated by changing at-
titudes towards the care of children, the growing professionalization of medical care, and the
increasing availability of medical technology. Until then, the health of children was not viewed
as a state responsibility in England. Even at general hospitals that received no state funding and
  nanced their operating costs out of private endowments, the admission of infants was discour-
aged on the basis of the beliefs that the baby would su er ill-e ects from the separation from
   6 Other  papers that evaluate long-run outcomes obtain exogenous variation in early-life health conditions from
the roll-out of policy interventions. Many studies focus on interventions during infancy or very early in life such
as access to infant health care centers and their impact on socioeconomic outcomes (B¨    utikofer et al. 2019) or the
introduction of a home visiting program and its impact on health outcomes (Hjort et al. 2017). Other childhood health
interventions shown to have a ected socioeconomic outcomes include improvements in nutrition (Adhvaryu et al.
2019). Studies that examine health outcomes exploit variation in early-life health that stems from the introduction
of sulfa drugs (Jayachandran et al. 2010) or the eradication of malaria (Hong 2007).


                                                          4
their mother and that hospitalization challenged parental authority. Furthermore, until the late-
nineteenth century, few general hospitals had specialized wards or sta to admit child patients
(Lomax 1996).
    Children's hospitals were established to provide specialized medical care and surgical treat-
ments for sick children. Doctors at the hospitals could develop knowledge of rare childhood
diseases and train specialized nurses and medical students. e hospitals were founded with the
aim of spreading middle-class values and providing education about preventative health behav-
iors to the "deserving" or "independent" poor (Hawkins and Tanner 2013). On the other hand,
destitute paupers were denied admission to hospitals and sent to poor law in rmaries where they
could not be refused (Brunton 2004). By the end of the nineteenth century, children's hospitals
no longer faced the "stigma of charity," nor were they feared as places where patients would die
of hospital-acquired infections. Hospitals came to be viewed as the most suitable venue for treat-
ing acutely and chronically ill children and those requiring surgery. Moreover, the willingness
to seek admission to the hospital extended beyond the working poor to include the middle and
even the privileged upper classes (Lomax 1996).
       e rst children's hospital in Britain, the Hospital for Sick Children at Great Ormond Street
(GOSH), opened in 1852 in London and by 1870, London had seven children's hospitals. GOSH
opened with a capacity of 10 beds and would grow to 62 beds by 1864, before expanding to 120
beds in 1877 and 240 beds in 1914 (Franklin 1964; Hawkins and Tanner 2013). Among children
age 0 to 11, the number of inpatients at GOSH per 1,000 in the London population increased from
0.98 in 1881 to 1.90 in 1901, while inpatients per 1,000 at St. Bartholomew's Hospital (Barts), one
of the largest general hospitals in London, declined from 1.05 to 0.67 during the same time period,
as children's hospitals became the preferred location for treating children.
    Admission to the hospital inpatient department was selective as medical a endants had con-
siderable authority over the types of cases admi ed and could prioritize the admission of outpa-
tients with acute illness or rare childhood diseases. In the case of children, the parent accompa-
nying a child to the hospital was rst screened by a clerk to determine the family's ability to pay
for the hospital stay, while the child was examined by the house surgeon or physician on duty to
determine suitability for admission as an inpatient.7 Parents of children who were not admi ed
received some medical advice (Hawkins and Tanner 2013). By regulation, hospitals were typi-
cally expected to exclude chronic or incurable cases, to avoid having a bed occupied for a lengthy
period of time, and infectious diseases to limit the number of deaths at the hospital. However, as
we observe in our data, many such cases were admi ed in practice.
   7 Duringthe 1880s, early in our study period, the large general hospitals began collecting admission fees from
patients who could a ord the payment, but still admi ed those who could not (Higgs 2009).



                                                       5
    Despite improved diagnostics following gains in knowledge about bacteriology and the in-
creased prevalence of autopsies, pediatrics was largely limited to convalescent care. Medical
patients bene ted from bed rest, nursing care, and an adequate diet while admi ed to the hos-
pital. Especially among impoverished patients, children were exposed to a much more sanitary
environment than the overcrowded conditions at home (Higgs 2009). From the 1880s onward,
hospital practices advanced in the area of surgical procedures with improved knowledge of the
bacteria that caused surgical infections and be er training of nurses, which enabled the control
of post-operative sepsis. Hospitals also limited the spread of infection by establishing isolation
wards. As the mortality risk declined, hospital began performing a wider range of surgeries that
could improve the quality of life for patients, including the removal of tubercular glands or the
appendix, and the repair of congenital malformations such as cle palate or club foot (Lomax
1996).



3 Data and Descriptive Statistics

Our paper draws on a new data set of individual-level hospitalization records that we compile
from the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth century inpatient admission registers of three large
hospitals in London, England. We link the hospital admission records to the complete-count Pop-
ulation Censuses of England to bring together the data on childhood health with information on
family structure, socioeconomic status, demographics, and school a endance during childhood,
as well as occupational and intergenerational outcomes during adulthood.


3.1    Inpatient hospital records

   e rst branch of our data set consists of inpatient hospital admission records, which provide a
measure of health during childhood. We digitized and transcribed the inpatient admission regis-
ters from two of the four large general hospitals in London: St. Bartholomew's Hospital (Barts)
and Guy's Hospital (Guy's). We supplement these data with the admission records from the Hos-
pital for Sick Children at Great Ormond Street (GOSH), the largest and oldest children's hospital
in London.8 A map of central London in Figure A1 shows the locations of the hospitals in the data
as well as other nearby general and children's hospitals, and highlights that admission records
have survived for only four out of the ten largest general hospitals and two of the ve largest
   8  e records from the Hospital for Sick Children at Great Ormond Street were transcribed by volunteers in
London from inpatient admission registers as part of the Historical Hospital Admissions Research Project (HHARP;
Kingston University 2010). We thank Dr. Sue Hawkins for sharing these data.



                                                       6
children's hospitals in London. We discuss how selection into hospital admission and selective
survival of records may impact our results in Section 3.5.
       e hospital records contain detailed information about the patient and the characteristics of
the admission. Figure A2 presents a sample page of an individual admission register from Barts
Hospital, which is similar to the records for the other hospitals in our sample. An individual entry
includes the patient's full name, age in years, and residential address, in addition to a description
of the patient's cause of admission, the dates of admission and discharge, the name of the a end-
ing physician or surgeon, and an indication of whether the patient died in the hospital. For all
hospitals, we observe both male and female patients. We use the information contained in the
hospital records to link individuals to the census and to construct a health de ciency index that
measures the severity of the cause of admission.
    Children were admi ed to the hospital as inpatients for a wide-ranging set of conditions. Ta-
ble A1 lists the most common causes of admissions to the hospitals among all hospital patients,
all male patients, and those in the sample of male patients used in the main analysis.9 Overall, the
death of an inpatient while admi ed to the hospital was not an uncommon occurrence among
the cohorts in our study, with an average mortality rate of 11 percent, and a mortality rate as
high as 26 percent for individuals admi ed before the age of two (Figure A3).10 Additionally, the
average mortality rate was relatively constant over the sample period (Figure A4). As an alterna-
tive treatment variable to the hospitalization indicator, we construct a gender-speci c childhood
health de ciency index that is based on the unexplained portion of the inpatient mortality a er
removing the in uence of the hospital, age at admission, and year of admission using a procedure
described in appendix B. is variable is standardized on a 0 to 1 scale and has a mean value of
0.28 and standard deviation of 0.10 among the hospital patients in the estimation sample. We in-
terpret causes of admission with higher residual mortality as having greater severity and thus the
health de ciency index represents a proxy for childhood health capital that varies across causes
of admission with higher values indicating more severe diagnoses.
       e analysis restricts a ention to the admission records of male and female patients from the
1870 to 1890 birth cohorts who were admi ed between 1870 and 1902, and hospitalized between
the ages of 0 and 11 years.11 Although older children were also hospitalized at the general hos-
pitals, we choose age 11 as the cuto for inclusion in the sample since, as a rule, the children's
   9   roughout the paper we present results separately by gender unless otherwise noted.
  10 While comparable estimates of inpatient mortality rates from the nineteenth century are limited, hospital records

from the Royal Hospital for Sick Children in Glasgow, Scotland indicate that the inpatient mortality rate between
1890 and 1899 was lower at that hospital at 5.9 percent (Cullis and Young 2013).
   11 e number of observations is balanced across age groups and admission periods with the exception of admis-

sions between 1870 and 1875 given that we only include individuals born from 1870 onward (Figure A5).



                                                         7
hospitals did not admit patients at older ages.12 Furthermore, children age 12 and older were
much less likely than younger individuals to be living with their parents (Figure A6), which is
a crucial requirement for the sibling- xed e ects estimation strategy that will be described in
Section 4.


3.2     Linked Census of England complete counts, 1881 to 1911

We estimate the e ects of childhood health capital on school a endance, long-run labor market
outcomes, and intergenerational mobility by linking the inpatient admission records to childhood
household characteristics and socioeconomic outcome variables from the complete-count les
of the Population Censuses of England provided by the Integrated Census Microdata (I-CeM)
project.13 First, we locate the hospital patients in their childhood households in the 1881 through
1901 censuses, and collect information on their father's occupational title, the identity of their
siblings, the educational status of patients and siblings, and the places of birth (parish and county,
or country for foreign births) of all family members. en, we link individuals across censuses to
observe patients and their siblings as adults in the 1901 and 1911 censuses, and use occupational
titles to evaluate their long-run labor market outcomes. Since women changed their surnames
at marriage, the analysis of long-run outcomes is restricted to men.14 We also create a separate
hospital-to-census linked sample of both males and females to explore the role of schooling as a
mechanism, which we discuss in Section 3.4.
    More speci cally, for the long-run analysis, we match admission records to individuals enu-
merated in each of the 1881, 1891 and 1901 censuses, which potentially generates multiple link-
ages for each admission record. We use rst and last name and the approximate birth year implied
by the age at admission or age at enumeration as matching variables. In the absence of a unique
patient identi er in the admission registers, we identify unique individuals based on shared char-
  12     e founders of the children's hospitals initially intended for the hospitals to treat patients aged 2 to 12, leaving
mothers to care for sick infants and general hospitals to admit older children (Lomax 1996). In practice, an upper
age limit of 10 to 12 years was enforced with some exceptions, but medical sta typically disregarded the ban on
under-two admissions (Hawkins and Tanner 2013), which would account for over 30.1 percent of GOSH patients by
1900. In Section 6 we show that our main results are robust to excluding age 0 to 1 admissions from the sample. At
GOSH, a few 12 to 16 year olds were admi ed, but as they only accounted for 0.7 percent of admissions during the
sample period (1870 to 1902), we exclude these individuals from the sample with no bearing on the main results.
   13 e digitized complete-count census records of Great Britain for 1851 to 1911 are available to download from the

I-CeM project, but do not include individual names or street addresses. We are among the rst researchers to obtain
access to these restricted-use variables through a Special License from the UK Data Archive.             e complete-count
censuses from Britain represent the second largest historical census microdata collection a er the U.S. (Ruggles 2014).
   14 In an earlier version (Karbownik and Wray 2015), we explored the possibility of conducting an additional link-

age to marriage certi cates to incorporate women in the long-run analysis. However, we found that the digitized
collections of marriage certi cates for London are incomplete and that adding a fourth linkage would have reduced
our sample size drastically.


                                                             8
acteristics across admissions using a procedure described in appendix A.3. Separately, we link the
universe of males from the cohorts of interest in each of the 1881 and 1891 censuses to both the
1901 and 1911 censuses, in addition to linking the 1901 to the 1911 census. In the census-to-census
matching applications, we use place of birth as a linking variable, which allows us to match in-
dividuals who migrate within England between childhood and adulthood. In both cases, we use
an iterative matching algorithm that draws on elements of Ferrie (1996), Abramitzky et al. (2012),
Mill and Stein (2016), and Feigenbaum (2016).15 Appendix A provides a detailed description of the
hospital admission-to-census and census-to-census linkages, including how we consolidate mul-
tiple hospital-to-census matches and arrive at a nal set of unique patient identi ers and sample
individuals.
     Table 1 presents baseline sample sizes and linkage rates for the three hospital admission-to-
census linkages (to the 1881, 1891, and 1901 censuses) in columns 1 to 3. In each case we consider
hospital admissions by male patients that occurred within ten years of census enumeration. Col-
umn 4 shows overall linkage rates for hospital admissions from pooling together the separate
admission-to-census links, on which our analysis is based. In panel A we nd a unique match to
a census record for 34.3 percent of hospital admissions, fail to nd any match for 3.5 percent of
admissions, and exclude the remaining 62.2 percent of cases for which there are multiple poten-
tial matches.     e unique match rate is similar to the match rates in other studies (Abramitzky
et al. 2012; Long and Ferrie 2013). Further restricting the unique matches to households in which
a male sibling is present only eliminates an additional 2.1 percent of all admissions, leaving us
with 32.2 percent of the baseline sample. Panel B presents consolidated linkage rates for each
childhood census year from combining matches to either the 1901 or 1911 censuses during adult-
hood. We match 21.9 percent of the baseline sample to census records in both childhood and
adulthood, while in 10.9 percent of cases, we are also able to link a male sibling between cen-
suses. A er eliminating observations with missing cause of admission or occupational outcome,
our nal sample includes 2,320 hospital admissions or 8.2 percent of the baseline sample.
   15 While previous applications of the historical census linkage methods have o en involved U.S. data, U.K. censuses

are characterized by important di erences in comparison to the U.S., which necessitate di erent approaches to data
linkage. U.K. censuses report both county and parish of birth, whereas the U.S. only reports state of birth, which
are larger geographic units by population than either parish or county. While state and county are comparable in
terms of data quality and number of unique entries, birth parishes have boundaries that change over time and are not
consistently reported across censuses. us, in the main analysis, we match on birth county when linking records
across censuses. Countries other than the U.S. that have been studied using linked historical census data include the
U.K. (Long 2013; Long and Ferrie 2013), Norway (Abramitzky et al. 2012), and Argentina (P´  erez 2019).




                                                          9
3.3    Occupational outcomes

   e occupational titles reported in the 1901 and 1911 censuses contain information on an individ-
ual's social class and provide the basis for a measure that compares the occupational a ainment
of hospital patients and their siblings as working adults. We also construct measures of inter-
generational mobility that compare the occupational success of patients and siblings conditional
on their father's occupational status when they were children, which we obtain from the census
during childhood. e la er measure indicates the extent to which poor childhood health hinders
the intergenerational transmission of status.
       e I-CeM project has assigned a Historical International Standard Classi cation of Occupa-
tions (HISCO) code to each of the unique occupation strings in the complete-count census les
(van Leeuwen et al. 2002; UK Data Archive 2014). We rank the socioeconomic status of the occu-
pational titles according to the Historical International Social Class Scheme (HISCLASS), which
maps each of the 16,000 HISCO occupation codes to one of twelve social classes (van Leeuwen
and Maas 2011).      e assignment of the HISCLASS category is based on the extent of supervi-
sion and skill level required by the occupation, whether the occupation is manual, and by the
economic sector of the occupation.
    In the main empirical analysis of individual occupational success, we consolidate the HIS-
CLASS ranking into four classes, which we refer to as white collar (e.g. clerk; HISCLASS 1-5),
skilled (e.g. cabinet maker; HISCLASS 6-8), semi-skilled (e.g. house painter; HISCLASS 9), and
unskilled (e.g. general laborer; HISCLASS 10-12). Table A2 lists the most common occupations
in each of the four groups that we use to construct binary dependent variables in the analysis
of unconditional occupational a ainment. When we turn to the intergenerational outcomes that
compare the occupational status of patients and siblings to their fathers, we follow Abramitzky
et al. (2011) and base the comparison on a consolidated HISCLASS ranking with seven social
classes. In comparison to the ranking with four classes, the seven-class measure has three di er-
ences. First, among white collar workers, managers and professionals are separated from cler-
ical and sales personnel. Second, farmers and shermen are placed in a separate group ranked
between skilled and semi-skilled workers.16     ird, low-skilled and unskilled farm workers are
ranked below other unskilled workers.
  16 Given  that our sample is predominantly urban, we have very few farmers and unskilled farm workers from
classes four and seven, respectively.




                                                    10
3.4     School attendance

We consider the role of human capital accumulation as a potential mechanism that accounts for
the long-run e ects on occupational status by constructing a measure of school a endance for
children age 5 to 10. ese individuals were subject to compulsory schooling under the Elemen-
tary Education Act of 1880.17 In the absence of speci c questions on education in the historical
censuses of England, we use information contained in the occupational eld in the 1881 and 1891
censuses. In these census years, enumerators were instructed to record "scholar" in the occupa-
tional eld for children and young persons above the age of ve who a ended school on a daily
basis. Furthermore, enumerators typically did not record an occupation for children younger
than 12 years old, and thus, being regarded as a"scholar" arguably provides a reliable indicator
of school a endance.

       e di erence in how enumerators recorded information in the occupational eld for individ-
uals age 12 and below is born out in the census data. Figure A7 plots the school enrollment rates
and the labor force participation rates for children aged 5 to 18 in the 1881 census. e census-
based measure suggests that compliance with compulsory schooling was relatively high as 64 to
82 percent of children aged 5 to 10 were recorded as a "scholar," while fewer than 1 percent of
children age 10 and below reported a gainful occupation. e la er helps to rule out occupational
health hazards as a potential mechanism for our ndings. When constructing the linked sample,
we match patients to either the 1881 or the 1891 censuses if they were admi ed to the hospital
prior to enumeration and they were ages 5 to 10 years old at the time of the census.18 is implies
that the estimation sample includes individuals from the 1871 to 1876 birth cohorts linked to the
1881 census and individuals from the 1881 to 1886 birth cohorts linked to the 1891 census.


3.5     Sample selection

In this section we characterize the sample selection into hospital admissions as well as in rela-
tion to data availability and methodological choices at di erent stages of the analysis. Although
admission registers from the nineteenth century have survived to the present for only a handful
of hospitals in London, those that do remain are among the largest hospitals in their respective
categories and accounted for a sizable fraction of the market for hospital care at the time (Cha o
and Windus 1897). Table A3 shows that Barts and Guy's Hospitals accounted for 25 percent of
  17   e Elementary Education (School A endance) Act of 1893 raised the minimum school leaving age to 11, while
an amendment to the Act in 1899 further raised the compulsory age to 12, but these changes occurred a er the latest
census year in which we observe school a endance, 1891, and thus we exclude 11 and 12 year olds from this analysis.
  18 e 1901 census did not report whether a child was a "scholar" and did not report years of education.    us, we
do not link hospital patients to the 1901 for this exercise.


                                                        11
inpatient admissions among the twelve largest general hospitals in London, while GOSH covered
a large share of the children's hospital market with 29 percent of inpatients. e hospitals in our
sample had similar market shares in terms of outpatients and hospital beds.
    As we cannot speak to hospitals without surviving records, we rst consider how registration
districts in which the sample hospitals were located and neighboring districts di ered from the
rest of London. We de ne a hospital's catchment area as the set of registration districts in which
the largest share of inpatients resided and which together accounted for at least 50 percent of
admi ed patients.       e majority of patients admi ed to the general hospitals, Barts and Guy's,
resided in districts immediately surrounding the hospital, whereas a specialty children's hospital
such as GOSH had a much larger catchment area and typically admi ed patients from a wider
part of London. Table A4 presents descriptive statistics from the 1891 Census of England for
the catchment areas of each of the three hospitals in the sample, in comparison to the rest of
London.19 Since Guy's Hospital was located in the poorer borough of Southwark to the south of
the ames River, it is not surprising that the share of unskilled fathers in its catchment area (20
percent) was much larger that the shares for Barts and GOSH (11 and 12 percent, respectively),
and the share for the rest of London (16 percent). Aside from the di erences in average occupation
status, the hospital catchment areas were similar to one another in terms of observable measures
from the census, such as the share of children aged 0 to 4 or 5 to 11 in the population, sibship
size, the share of children (age 0 to 11) living with their parents, the share of married households,
or the share of immigrants.
     Next, Table A5 examines how household socioeconomic status determined selection into hos-
pital admission among children age 0 to 5 and residing in London at the time of census enumer-
ation. We consider inpatient hospital admissions that occurred up to 10 years a er census enu-
meration. We nd evidence of an SES gradient as children with semi-skilled or unskilled fathers
were more likely to be admi ed to the hospital than children with white collar fathers, regardless
of whether we look across London, within registration districts or within parishes.20 e nding
that children from white collar backgrounds were less likely to be admi ed is consistent with the
fact that upper classes could a ord medical treatment and relied on general practitioners who
operated private clinics and treated patients in the privacy of their homes (Carpenter 2010). Sam-
ple selection arising from di erences in hospital catchment area characteristics or household SES
relative to the population will not a ect the internal validity of our estimates to the extent that
it is absorbed by the sibling xed e ects.
  19 We  use the 1891 census since it is closest to the midpoint of admission years in our sample. e comparisons of
hospital catchment areas are similar when based on the 1881 or 1901 censuses.
   20 We nd a similar SES gradient when the outcome variable is hospital admissions that occurred in the 10 years

prior to census enumeration, but choose not to include these speci cations since the father's occupational status will
be endogenous to the child's health de ciency.


                                                         12
     However, within-household selection due to parents' di erential sending of their children to
the hospital based on health status could a ect internal validity. Columns 1 to 4 of Table A6
explore how sibling-speci c factors a ect the likelihood of hospitalization. We consider samples
of census records linked forward to hospital admissions within 10 years of enumeration and
assume that unlinked individuals were not hospitalized. Using a sibling xed e ects speci cation,
we nd that rst-born males and females regardless of parity were less likely to be hospitalized.
To the extent that parents valued rst-born males greater than other children, our sample of
hospitalized children will be negatively selected due to the rst-born advantage present even in
our historical data, and thus we include birth order xed e ects in our empirical speci cation to
control for this potential bias. We abstract from gender-speci c selection by restricting to a male-
only sample in the main analysis. Despite evidence of parity-based selection into hospitalization
it is reassuring that the selection appears to be unrelated to health, as columns 5 to 8 show that
among hospital patients, rst-born status and gender are unrelated to the health de ciency index
at admission which is our proxy for severity.
     Another potential source of sample selection bias is di erential rates of linkage from the
hospital records to the childhood censuses by health status. Table A7 examines how the health
de ciency index of a patient admi ed to the hospital a ects the likelihood of nding a unique
match in the census immediately following the admission. Columns 1 to 3 present results for
linkages to each of the 1881, 1891, and 1901 censuses separately, while column 4 pools the samples
and considers the impact on linkage to any census. We nd evidence of positive selection into the
sample as patients with a worse health de ciency index at admission are less likely to be linked
to a census. e magnitude of these estimates is quite small with a 1 s.d. (0.10) increase in the
health de ciency index reducing the likelihood of a match by about 0.6 percentage points or 2.2
percent. Furthermore, Figure A8 shows that the distribution of the health de ciency index in the
universe of hospital admissions is similar to the distribution in the sample used in the analysis.
It is primarily patients admi ed for conditions with a very high health de ciency index (i.e. high
in-hospital mortality) who are naturally less likely to be matched. is positive selection would
downward bias our estimates, leading to a lower-bound interpretation, but as noted above the
magnitude of the selection appears small.
    Lastly, we consider sample selection due to di erential linkage rates between patients and
siblings. In panel B of Table A8 we compare match rates from censuses during childhood to
censuses during adulthood for patients compared to their siblings. In general patients are more
likely to be linked, though the results are only signi cant for matches from the 1891 census and
the magnitudes are small at 2.4 pp (4.1 to 4.3 percent relative to the mean). Since patients in this
analysis have already been matched from hospital records to a census during childhood, this is a
plausible factor making patients more likely to be matched.

                                                13
    Collectively, the evidence on sample selection suggests that the patients in our linked em-
pirical sample are positively selected relative to their brothers. us, our point estimates should
provide a lower bound for the role of childhood health in long-run occupational and intergen-
erational success. Additionally, as noted above, many of the selection coe cients are small in
magnitude even if statistically signi cant.



4 Empirical Speci cation
We use a sibling xed e ects model to estimate the e ects of childhood health de ciencies on
school a endance, occupational class, and intergenerational occupational mobility for male pa-
tients and their brothers. We estimate the following regression for child i from household j:


                                   Yij = HealthCapital ij + Xi + j + ij                                             (1)

where Yij is a schooling, occupational, or intergenerational outcome for individual i from child-
hood household j, HealthCapital ij is a measure of de ciency in health capital, Xi is a vector of indi-
vidual characteristics, j denotes a sibling xed e ect that captures unobservable time-invariant
determinants of the outcomes speci c to a childhood household, and ij is a heteroskedasticity-
robust error term clustered at the childhood household level that represents sibling-speci c un-
observed characteristics.
       e variable HealthCapital ij is proxied by an indicator for hospitalization during childhood
or the health de ciency index described in appendix B. e coe cient of interest is , which can
be interpreted as the di erential e ect of lower childhood health capital for a hospitalized child
compared to his brother. e vector of individual characteristics Xi includes age-by-census year
and birth-order xed e ects, an indicator for the older sibling in each pair of observations from
a household, standardized measures of rst name frequency and an interaction of rst name and
surname frequency, and indicators for match quality (exact matches on rst name, surname, and
birth parish between censuses, or cleaned birth places).21
       e analysis of individual occupational success uses measures based on collapsing the HIS-
CLASS ranking into four classes as described in Section 3.3. e outcome variables Yij represent
one of three indicators: the probability of working in a white collar occupation, the probability
of working in a white collar or skilled occupation, and the probability of working in a white col-
lar, skilled, or semi-skilled occupation. In the last case, the lowest status category of unskilled
  21 We include age-by-census year     xed e ects to account for the fact that a 25 year old observed in the 1901 census
comes from a di erent birth cohort than a 25 year old observed in the 1911 census. We do not include surname
frequency in levels since it is absorbed by the household xed e ects.


                                                          14
occupations constitutes the comparison group. ese outcome variables can be thought of as a
cumulative distribution function for occupational class.
    When the focus turns to intergenerational mobility in occupational a ainment, we study the
e ects on two additional indicator variables.     e rst measure indicates the probability of at-
taining a lower occupational class than one's father and the second variable identi es individuals
who a ain the same occupational class or higher than their fathers. Among patients in the main
analysis sample 36 percent have the same status as their father, while for siblings this share is 37
percent. ese intergenerational outcomes represent measures of occupational success relative
to family endowments and we consider the stability of status across generations as a positive
outcome.
    Given that upward mobility is not possible if a father has the highest occupational status,
and downward mobility is not feasible when a father is in the lowest class, we exclude these
cases from the sample. Furthermore, the e ects on a downgrade in occupational class are only
identi ed from cases in which the patient a ains a lower occupational class than his father, but
the non-hospitalized sibling does not, and similarly for an upgrade in status. In our main sample,
74 percent of patient-sibling pairs have the same outcomes relative to their fathers and thus do
not contribute to the identi cation. Reassuringly, an indicator for households with patient-sibling
variation in outcomes is uncorrelated with potentially confounding explanatory variables (Miller
et al. 2019).22



5 Main Results

We begin by analyzing the e ects of childhood health de ciencies on long-run occupational sta-
tus and intergenerational mobility using the main estimation sample of male patients and their
brothers linked to census records during adulthood. We put the magnitudes of the estimates into
context by estimating the intergenerational transmission of occupational status and computing
overall rates of occupational mobility in the population as benchmarks.      en, we turn to an
examination of potential mechanisms and highlight the role of human capital accumulation by
considering school a endance as an intermediary outcome. We also conduct heterogeneity anal-
  22 An  indicator for patient-sibling pairs with variation in outcomes relative to their fathers is uncorrelated with
father's age categories, sibship size, characteristics of the patient's linkage to the census, and whether the household
is located in the hospital's catchment area. Households with fathers in skilled or semi-skilled occupations are more
likely to have variation in outcomes than those with fathers in unskilled occupations, which re ects the greater
mobility in and out of the middle of the occupational distribution. Given our results reported in section 5, we
naturally nd that households with patients who had a worse health de ciency index are more likely to have variation
in outcomes relative to the father. ese pa erns are similar for the individual occupational outcomes.



                                                          15
ysis to provide further insight into the channels linking poor childhood health to labor market
outcomes in adulthood.
      e main regression results for the long-run occupational and intergenerational outcomes,
based on sibling xed e ects, are presented in Table 2. Panel A presents estimates in which the
treatment of interest is an indicator variable for hospitalization, while panel B contains estimates
in which the treatment is the health de ciency index that exploits variation in severity across
causes of admission. Columns 1 to 3 display the results for the occupational outcomes, while
columns 4 and 5 present the intergenerational ndings.
    We nd that poor childhood health as proxied by hospitalization reduces the probability of
achieving white-collar occupational status as an adult by 4.1 percentage points (pp), which cor-
responds to a 14.9 percent e ect relative to the mean. e estimates for the likelihood of entering
skilled or white-collar occupations, or the likelihood of a aining semi-skilled status and above
are similar in magnitude although the e ect sizes are smaller at 7.3 and 4.0 percent, respectively.
Together, these ndings indicate that the hospital patients were more likely than their siblings
to end up in unskilled occupations in adulthood as a consequence of their poor health during
childhood.

    Given that the binary measure of hospitalization treats all causes of admission equally, we also
consider a treatment variable that exploits the variation in severity across causes of admission
(see Section 3.1 and appendix B) and is standardized on a 0 to 1 scale with higher values indicating
more severe diagnoses. Among the hospital patients in the estimation sample, the mean value of
the health de ciency index is 0.28 (s.d. 0.10), and representative causes of admission around this
value include diseases of the hip or knee as well as rheumatism. A one-standard deviation increase
in the health de ciency index decreases the likelihood of a aining higher occupational status as
an adult by 1.6 to 5.8 percent. To x ideas, a change in severity of this magnitude relative to
the mean of the health de ciency index corresponds to being admi ed for heart disease (morbus
cordis) or sequela of diphtheria (diphtheric paralysis) as opposed to the conditions at the mean.
    In addition to the e ects on individuals' occupational status, we also nd an impact of poor
childhood health on intergenerational mobility. In comparison to their brothers, hospitalization
increases the likelihood that a patient experienced downward occupational mobility relative to
their father by 3.9 pp (13.9 percent). Likewise, a 1 s.d. (0.10) increase in the health de ciency
index corresponds to a 1.1 pp (5.0 percent) increase in downward mobility.            e e ects on the
probability of maintaining or rising in status relative to one's father are similar in magnitude, but
the e ect sizes are smaller relative to the mean, which is consistent with the high rates of upward
mobility from unskilled jobs into skilled occupations during this time period (Long 2013).



                                                 16
5.1   Interpreting the magnitudes

To put the magnitude of our estimates for the e ects of poor childhood health on long-run oc-
cupational outcomes into context we compare them to the association between father and son's
status. We conduct this analysis on a sample of 2 million children age 0 to 11 in London linked
from the 1881 to the 1911 census complete-count le. In Table A9, panel A scales the estimates
from columns 1 to 3 of panel B in Table 2 to represent the impact of a 1 s.d. (0.10) change in the
health de ciency index, while panel B presents results from estimating the following regressions:


                         Son's statusi =  +  · Father's statusi + Xi + i                         (2)

where i indexes individual, and Son's status and Father's status are one of three identical measures
of status as adults: indicators for white collar occupations, skilled occupations and above, as well
as semi-skilled occupations and above. Xi is a vector of individual characteristics that includes
son's age and father's age xed e ects, standardized measures of rst name frequency and an
interaction of rst name and surname frequency, indicators for a rst born child, above median
sibship size, and match quality (exact matches on rst name, surname, and birth parish between
censuses, or cleaned birth places). ese regressions represent the closest approximation to an
intergenerational wage elasticity that we can estimate given the variables in the census data.
Having a high status father increases the likelihood of a aining high status as an adult by 18 to
25 percentage points.
    To benchmark the magnitudes of our occupational status results, we rst consider the e ects
of a 1 s.d. (0.10) change in the health de ciency index scaled by the estimates for the intergener-
ational transmission of occupational status. Recall that a change in the health de ciency index of
this magnitude relative to the mean corresponds to su ering from diphtheric paralysis compared
to a diseased knee or hip. Such a change o sets about 6.3 to 7.3 percent of the advantage of having
a higher status father. Alternatively, if we scale the estimated coe cients on the hospitalization
indicator from panel A of Table 2, we nd that on average, health de ciencies in childhood o -
set 16.2 to 18.6 percent of the intergenerational status premium. Either way, the consequences
of poor childhood health appear socially and economically relevant in London during the early-
twentieth century.
    We also consider benchmarks for the intergenerational mobility results based on the estimated
degree of upward and downward occupational mobility in our sample and in the population. To
do so, we construct occupational transition matrices for fathers and sons in our main estima-
tion sample, and for the population of sons age 18 to 41 in 1911 linked to their fathers in 1881
(Table A10). en, in Table A11 we sum the elements below the diagonal to obtain the share of

                                                17
downward mobility in the population. e rate of downward mobility in our estimation sample
is slightly higher than estimates for the population of England from 1881 to 1911 at 27.9 percent
compared to 26.7 percent. When we scale our estimates for the e ect of a 1 s.d. (0.10) increase
in the health de ciency index on the chances of downward mobility, we nd that it accounts
for 5.0 to 5.2 percent of the overall degree of downward mobility in the sample and population,
respectively. Similarly, the scaled e ect for patients relative to their siblings accounts for 13.9
to 14.6 percent of overall downward mobility. e scaled e ects of the patient indicator and the
HDI on upward mobility are smaller at 5.4 to 5.5 percent, and 1.9 percent, respectively. Taken to-
gether, poor childhood health accounts for a meaningful but reasonable share of overall mobility
in London, speci cally, and England more generally at the turn of the twentieth century.


5.2     Mechanisms

Next, we consider potential mechanisms and mediators linking poor childhood health to long-
run occupational outcomes and intergenerational mobility. We inquire whether poor childhood
health limited opportunities for human capital accumulation, which in turn could have impeded
success in the labor market. While we lack the data to conclude if the speci c pathway is an
adverse e ect on cognitive ability, chronic health conditions that prevented regular school a en-
dance, parental reinforcement of the health shock that reduced human capital investments, or a
combination of these factors, we examine this mechanism using school a endance as an inter-
mediate outcome. We interpret school a endance as broadly capturing the role of human capital
accumulation. ese results are presented in Table 3.
    As the analysis of school a endance only requires a linkage from the hospital records to
censuses during childhood, we can study the e ects of poor childhood health on girls in addition
to boys. Columns 1 and 2 display results from single sex samples where we compare male patients
to their brothers and female patients to their sisters. Columns 3 to 5 then display results from
larger samples that include both boys and girls and control for gender. First we pool together the
single sex samples, then we restrict the sample to opposite sex comparisons within households,
and nally we allow for either same sex and opposite sex comparisons.23 As before, we present
the results for the e ect of hospitalization in panel A and the e ect of the health de ciency index
in panel B. Across the various speci cations, the results are very similar, and hospitalization is
associated with a 1.9 to 3.0 percentage point (2.5 to 4.1 percent) decrease in the probability of
a ending school 0 to 5 years a er hospitalization. Similarly, a 1 s.d. (0.10) increase in the health
  23 A patient in the column 5 sample is compared to his or her sibling closest in age who is matched to the outcome-

year census, regardless of gender. Since patients may only be matched to the closest sibling of one gender, the sample
size in column 5 is smaller than the combined sample sizes of columns 3 and 4.


                                                         18
de ciency index leads to a 1.0 to 1.3 percent decrease in school a endance. Furthermore, it is
notable that the e ects of poor childhood health on schooling are modestly larger for girls than
for boys. us, we conclude that the reduction in school a endance likely impeded human capital
accumulation which is a plausible explanation for part of the decline in occupational status as
adults for boys and potentially for girls.
     In addition to the human capital channel documented in Table 3, we explore other mechanisms
through heterogeneity analysis. Studies that utilize historical census data are typically unable to
study heterogeneity to the same extent as those that use modern data, and our investigation is no
exception. Nonetheless, we present sample splits that provide some suggestive evidence on how
our results vary across relevant sub-populations. We examine three potential mediating channels:
the severity of the health insult, the age at admission, and household socioeconomic status during
childhood. Table A12 presents these results for the educational outcome (column 1), the three
occupational outcomes (columns 2 to 4), and the two intergenerational outcomes (columns 5 and
6). It is important to note, however, that this evidence should be treated as suggestive only since
due to relatively small sample sizes we cannot reject the null of equal coe cients at conventional
levels of statistical signi cance in virtually all speci cation.
    An advantage of using hospital records rather than intervention-speci c health shocks to
study childhood health is that the causes of admission to a hospital are wide-ranging, from con-
ditions such as eczema that are not expected to yield detrimental e ects, to those such as diph-
theria that may cause severe consequences in the long-run.       e health de ciency index intro-
duced in Section 3.1 summarizes this variability, and thus in panel A of Table A12 we estimate
separate e ects for patients admi ed for conditions with a health de ciency index above and
below the median.     e results for school a endance, white collar occupational status, and the
two intergenerational mobility measures indicate that e ects of poor health were more adverse
among lower mortality admissions. ese ndings are consistent with positive selection among
surviving patients admi ed for high-mortality conditions relative to those with low-mortality
conditions. Conversely, the magnitude of the estimates is larger for higher-mortality admissions
when we consider e ects on lower levels of occupational a ainment (columns 3 and 4).
    If earlier childhood experiences ma er more than later ones then health shocks earlier in
childhood could be more consequential than those experienced later. us, in panel B, we present
results in which we estimate separate e ects for children who were admi ed to the hospital before
age 5 and those that were admi ed at ages 5 to 11.24 Our point estimates are between 1.1 and
2 times larger for children admi ed early rather than late in childhood, with the exception of
  24 34.2
        percent of patients in our main sample were admi ed only at ages 0 to 4, 63.2 percent of patients were
admi ed only at ages 5 to 11, and 2.6 percent were admi ed during both age ranges.



                                                     19
downward mobility for which the estimates are very similar. For the most part, however, the
estimates are negative and statistically signi cant for both age groups.       us, our ndings not
only provide qualitative support to literature on the importance of early childhood health, but also
suggest that poor health later in childhood can likewise have detrimental e ects on occupational
status in the long run.
       e nal heterogeneity analysis, in panel C, explores the notion that a family's socioeconomic
status may mediate the consequences of lower health capital during childhood (Currie and Hyson
1999). Wealthier parents who compensate for a child's poor health could provide additional re-
sources to the child and minimize the potential negative consequences. On the other hand, if
parents reinforce the initial health insult they will divert resources away from the a ected child
which magni es the di erence between a child observed in hospital records and their brothers.
As patients from both high and low SES backgrounds have worse occupational outcomes in the
long-run, we interpret our results as the direct negative e ects of childhood health de ciencies
bundled with any compensating or reinforcing behavior by parents.



6 Robustness

In Section 5 we documented the causal e ects of poor childhood health on long-run occupational
success and intergenerational mobility, and highlighted school a endance as an intermediate
outcome and potential mechanism. Next, we conduct an extensive series of robustness checks to
ensure that our results are stable and invariant to plausible alternative speci cations and sample
modi cations. We address concerns that our results are biased downward by selective mortality
or driven by outliers and examine the sensitivity of the results to changes in the criteria for in-
clusion in the sample and changes in the linking algorithm. e results are presented in Tables 4
and 5 for long-run outcomes with the occupational outcomes in panels A to C and the intergen-
erational outcomes in panels D and E. In each table we present our baseline estimates in the rst
column and show results using the hospitalized patient treatment indicator. In the appendix, we
reproduce the same speci cations using the health de ciency index (Tables A13 and A14) and
present similar robustness analysis for school a endance (Table A15).
    While we think of our estimates as capturing the e ects of health de ciencies during child-
hood, they could also encompass poor health that persists into adulthood and impedes employ-
ment opportunities or productivity. Our main results may not be generalizable if they are driven
by particular sub-groups of patients who su ered from severe or chronic health insults that re-
sulted in a persistent scarring e ect. Alternatively, sub-groups characterized by high mortality
may be positively selected in the linked, longitudinal samples, resulting in downward bias to

                                                20
our estimates. Either of these concerns apply to patients admi ed to the hospital with severe
conditions, as re ected by a high value of the health de ciency index (HDI), patients admi ed
as infants, and patients with recurring admissions. In separate estimation samples in columns
2, 4, and 5 of Table 4, we drop individuals admi ed with health conditions in the top 10 per-
cent of the HDI distribution (e.g. diphtheria or bronchopneumonia), individuals admi ed at ages
0 or 1, and individuals admi ed more than once. In column 3, we drop patients in the bo om
10 percent of the HDI distribution because mild health de ciencies are less likely to have long-
run consequences and treating these individuals as having poor health would bias our estimates
downward.25 Another potential source of downward bias is within-household contagion and thus
in column 6 we drop individuals admi ed with contagious diseases. In each case, we also drop
the siblings of the excluded hospitalized patients from the robustness exercises since they would
not contribute to identi cation in the speci cations with sibling xed e ects. Across these speci-
  cations with varying sample restrictions, our coe cients remain very similar and if anything, in
many instances the negative e ects are slightly larger in magnitude, which suggests that our main
estimates are biased downward due to positive selection of surviving patients, the inclusion of
mild health de ciencies with no long-term consequences in the treatment, and within-household
contagion. Ruling out that our results are driven by poor health during infancy, when mortality
was very high, also supports our interpretation that poor health during childhood has negative
long-run consequences.
       e next set of robustness checks addresses di erent sources of sample selection bias and
concerns about external validity. In our main speci cation, we compare a male hospital patient
to the brother closest in age among those linked between censuses. Our sibling xed e ects
estimates could be biased by the comparison to a speci c non-hospitalized sibling to the extent
that there are negative spillovers from the patient's hospitalization to siblings close in age. us,
in column 2 of Table 5 we add to the comparison group all linked brothers within 8 years of
the patient's age. Sample selection bias could also arise from the set of households included in
the analysis, given that in our main speci cation we restrict a ention to households with only
one male patient linked from the hospital records to censuses during childhood and adulthood.
In column 3 we add families with multiple hospital patients to demonstrate that our results are
una ected by this sample restriction.
   Another potential concern with our estimates is bias due to di erential selection of patients
by distance traveled to the hospital. e general hospitals (Barts and Guy's) and the children's
  25 Moreover,  the most common causes of admission in the bo om 10 percent of the HDI distribution were club
foot (talipes) and hare lip, conditions for which surgical treatment was available. In order to treat club foot and
other developmental deformities that involved the shortening of tendons, surgeons performed a tenotomy, which
was a routine procedure by the end of the nineteenth century. Similarly, operations to repair hare lip was considered
relatively simple and safe by 1860 (Lomax 1996).


                                                         21
hospital (GOSH) in our sample admi ed 15, 12, and 31 percent of their patients from outside the
County of London, respectively. Providing care to children from outside of London was especially
common at GOSH, which specialized in the treatment of rare childhood medical conditions. As
parents faced a higher cost of bringing the child to the hospital the further they traveled, patients
residing outside of London could have had greater health de ciencies or conversely, particularly
good unobservable characteristics that made it worthwhile to invest in hospital care. Further-
more, individuals residing outside the County of London when admi ed to the hospital are 4.2
percentage points less likely to be matched to any census record, which indicates that linked in-
dividuals may be selective. However, column 4 shows that our results are robust to restricting the
sample to patients residing in the County of London at the time of hospitalization, easing con-
cerns about selection by distance travelled. Finally, for Barts Hospital and GOSH we observe the
universe of admissions seen by physicians and surgeons, while for Guy's we only obtained the
records of patients seen by physicians, and thus the la er may be unrepresentative of hospital
admissions.26     us, in column 5 we show that the main results are robust to dropping house-
holds with patients admi ed to Guy's Hospital. Taken together, these robustness exercises ad-
dress external validity concerns and selection bias due the set of siblings, households, residential
locations, or hospitals included in the main analysis sample.
     An issue that arises with the use of automated linking methods and imperfect historical data
is that linked samples are likely to contain false positive matches (Bailey et al. 2017). When deter-
mining the strictness of the linking criteria, the researcher faces a trade-o between the number
of false positives and the sample size, and decreasing the la er reduces precision and external
validity as linked observations become highly selective. Our application imposes signi cant de-
mands on the automated linking methods as we require three separate linkages: patients from
hospital records to childhood census as well as patients and siblings between censuses in child-
hood and adulthood. For our preferred estimates, we allow matched records to have names with
Jaro-Winkler distances up to 0.2, other records with similar names in neighboring birth cohorts,
and ages that di er by up to 3 years. Our approach is supported by Abramitzky et al. (2019) who
have shown in other contexts that coe cients of interest are typically stable across speci cations
with stricter versus lenient match criteria. While we lack "ground truth" data to assess the extent
of false positive, we can illustrate the consistency of our results when we impose stricter criteria
that reduce the likelihood of false matches. We also demonstrate the stability of our results when
we relax the thresholds for linked records.
   We begin the linkage diagnostics by probing for bias from false positive matches due to rst
names or surnames that di er in their Jaro-Winkler distance scores. In Figure A9 we plot the co-
  26 Inpatient
           hospital admissions in nineteenth-century London were categorized as physician or surgeon patients.
Among cohorts in our samples, physician patients accounted for 35 percent of inpatients at Barts Hospital.


                                                     22
e cient on the patient indicator across the six dependent variables as we vary the Jaro-Winkler
distance threshold by increments of 0.025 from 0 to 0.2 in the main speci cation. Our results are
qualitatively similar when we impose the more restrictive speci cations, though we lose preci-
sion and our estimates shrink somewhat for the white collar and skilled-plus outcomes when we
restrict to exactly matched names. In addition, they are very stable for the intergenerational and
school a endance outcomes. In the presence of misreported ages in the census, the probability
of a false match is also increasing in the number of records with similar names in neighboring
birth cohorts. False matches would introduce measurement error in the dependent variable and
reduce the precision of our estimates. In the main speci cation the maximum number of records
with similar names in the outcome-year census is 20 and a similar name is de ned as di ering
in the Jaro-Winkler distance score by less than 0.10. In Figure A10 we allow the number of sim-
ilar names to vary between 4 and 1000, and restrict the de nition of similar names to include
records with a di erence in the Jaro-Winkler distance of less than 0.05 or 0.10.27 Our estimates
are comparable across the various permutations though sometimes, as expected, we lose some
precision in speci cations with few similar names due to much reduced sample sizes and with
many similar names due to a much higher likelihood of false matches.
    Returning to Table 5, we present two additional robustness checks in columns 6 and 7 that
tweak the linking procedure to address concerns about false positives and sample selection bias.
In our main speci cation, we follow the standard approach of automated linking methods by not
using place of residence as a linking variable due to concerns about endogenous residential choice.
However, in the absence of birth place information in the hospital records, we can only link
individuals to the census using name and age, and thus to break ties we rst prioritize records with
the same county of residence, followed by records with the same district or parish of residence.
As it was common in this time period for households to move frequently between registration
districts or parishes, the la er step may introduce false positive matches and could bias our sample
towards stayers. Cross-county moves were less common and so prioritizing records that match
on county of residence may not bias our results, but the possibility of false positives remains.
   us, we impose an additional restriction that individuals linked between the hospital and census
records are uniquely identi ed within the county of residence at enumeration to avoid biasing the
sample towards non-movers (column 6). en, we further restrict the sample to records with the
same county of residence in the hospital records and the census to balance the trade-o between
restricting to non-movers and the potential for false matches across counties (column 7). In both
cases the results are consistent with the main estimates, indicating that the way we incorporate
place of residence in the matching procedure should not introduce bias.
  27 When we restrict the sample to records with fewer than 4 similar names in neighboring birth cohorts, the sample

size decreases signi cantly and becomes characterized by rare names.


                                                        23
       e robustness exercises demonstrate that our main estimates for the e ect of poor child-
hood health on school a endance, occupational success, and intergenerational mobility are stable
across a variety of speci cation choices and remain statistically signi cant in the vast majority
of permutations. In particular, we show that the results are robust to changes in the de nition of
the treatment, the use of alternative sample selection criteria, and variation in the strictness of
the matching criteria. We thus conclude that the results are unlikely to be driven by our preferred
choice of speci cation in the main analysis, or by false positive matches.



7 Conclusion

An extensive body of research has documented long-run and intergenerational consequences of
prenatal health shocks, but much less is known about the role of health capital during childhood.
To the extent that health ma ers post-infancy, it may be an important piece of the puzzle missing
from explanations for socioeconomic inequality within and across generations. In this paper,
we show that health de ciencies proxied by hospital admissions at ages 0 to 11 a ect school
enrollment and long-run occupational success, and contribute to explaining the intergenerational
elasticity between fathers and sons.
    To estimate the impact of health de ciencies during childhood, we link records of individual
hospital admissions that occurred between 1870 and 1902 to longitudinal samples of the Census of
England from 1881 to 1911. en, we implement a sibling xed e ects identi cation strategy that
contrasts patients with their siblings who lived in the same household during childhood but were
not hospitalized as far as we can observe in the surviving records. We nd that compared to their
brothers, hospitalized males were 14.9 percent less likely to work in white collar occupations
and 22.7 percent more likely to work in unskilled occupations as adults. In the rst case, the
e ect size o sets 16.2 percent of the advantage of having a father in while collar occupation.
Consistent with these results, we also nd that these patients were 13.9 percent more likely than
their brothers to experience downward occupational mobility.
    Our results are robust to a variety of speci cation checks including issues related to selective
mortality, sample selection choices, or changes to the matching algorithms. In considering expla-
nations for the estimated e ects, we show that hospitalized boys were 2.5 percent less likely to
a end school compared to their non-hospitalized brothers in the 5-year period a er the hospital
admission. Although we cannot observe long-run outcomes for girls due to name changes at
marriage, we nd that the e ects of health capital on school a endance are modestly larger for
girls than for boys at 4.1 percent. is implies that as adults these females potentially experienced
even more detrimental socioeconomic outcomes.

                                                24
    Today, the rapid urbanization as well changes in the disease environment and mortality trends
taking place in developing countries are arguably similar to the historical experience of late-
nineteenth century England (Mercer 2014), notwithstanding di erences in public health infras-
tructure and the availability of antibiotics. As was the case historically, serious and unexpected
illnesses remain a signi cant threat to the economic opportunities of households in these coun-
ties, especially in the absence of formal health and disability insurance schemes (Gertler and
Gruber 2002). Although quantifying the exact mitigating role of a social safety net is beyond the
scope of this paper, a safety net can smooth health shocks and thus contribute to productivity
and welfare gains for children upon reaching adulthood, and potentially for the next generation
as well. We view understanding the exact role that various channels play in driving the estimated
e ects in both historical and modern contexts as a fruitful avenue of future research.




                                               25
References
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Pla Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. 2012. Europe's Tired, Poor, Hud-
  dled Masses: Self-Selection and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration. American
  Economic Review 102, no. 5:1832­1856.
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Pla Boustan, Katherine Eriksson, James J. Feigenbaum, and Santiago
  P´
   erez. 2019. Automated Linking of Historical Data. National Bureau of Economic Research
  Working Paper Series No. 25825.
Abramitzky, Ran, Adeline Delavande, and Luis Vasconcelos. 2011. Marrying Up: e Role of Sex
  Ratio in Assortative Matching. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3, no. 3:124­157.
Adhvaryu, Achyuta, Steven Bednar, Teresa Molina, ynh Nguyen, and Anant Nyshadham. 2019.
  When It Rains It Pours: e Long-run Economic Impacts of Salt Iodization in the United States.
   e Review of Economics and Statistics :1­45.
Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie. 2011a. Human Capital Development Before Age Five. In
  Handbook of labor economics, vol. 4B, eds. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam: El-
  sevier, 1315­1486.
------. 2011b. Killing Me So ly:   e Fetal Origins Hypothesis. Journal of Economic Perspectives
  25, no. 3:153­172.
Almond, Douglas, Janet Currie, and Valentina Duque. 2018. Childhood Circumstances and Adult
  Outcomes: Act II. Journal of Economic Literature 56, no. 4:1360­1446.
Arthi, Vellore and Eric B. Schneider. 2017. Infant Feeding and Cohort Health: Evidence from the
  London Foundling Hospital. Working Paper.
Bailey, Martha, Connor Cole, Morgan Henderson, and Catherine Massey. 2017. How Well Do Au-
  tomated Methods Perform in Historical Samples? Evidence from New Ground Truth. National
  Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series No. w24019.
Baird, Sarah, Joan Hamory Hicks, Michael Kremer, and Edward Miguel. 2016. Worms at Work:
  Long-run Impacts of Child Health Gains.   arterly Journal of Economics 131, no. 4:1637­1680.
Barreca, Alan I. 2010.  e Long-Term Economic Impact of in Utero and Postnatal Exposure to
  Malaria. Journal of Human Resources 45, no. 4:865­892.
Beach, Brian, Joseph Ferrie, Martin Saavedra, and Werner Troesken. 2016. Typhoid Fever, Water
     ality, and Human Capital Formation. e Journal of Economic History 76, no. 1:41­75.
Beach, Brian, Joseph P Ferrie, and Martin H Saavedra. 2018. Fetal Shock or Selection? e 1918
  In uenza Pandemic and Human Capital Development. National Bureau of Economic Research
  Working Paper Series No. 24725.
Bhalotra, Sonia and Atheendar S. Venkataramani. 2012. Shadows of the Captain of the Men of
  Death: Early Life Health Interventions, Human Capital Investments, and Institutions. Working
  Paper .

                                              26
Bleakley, Hoyt. 2007. Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in the
  American South. e arterly Journal of Economics 122, no. 1:73­117.
------. 2010. Malaria Eradication in the Americas: A Retrospective Analysis of Childhood Expo-
  sure. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2, no. 2:1­45.
Brown, David W, Amanda E Kowalski, and Ithai Z Lurie. 2019. Long-Term Impacts of Childhood
  Medicaid Expansions on Outcomes in Adulthood. e Review of Economic Studies forthcoming.
Brunton, Deborah. 2004. Medicine transformed: Health, disease and society in Europe, 1800-1930.
  Manchester: Manchester University Press.
B¨
 utikofer, Aline, Katrine V Løken, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2019. Infant Health Care and Long-Term
  Outcomes. e Review of Economics and Statistics :1­14.
B¨
 utikofer, Aline and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2019. Disease Control and Inequality Reduction: Evidence
  from a Tuberculosis Testing and Vaccination Campaign. Review of Economic Studies .
Carpenter, Mary Wilson. 2010. Health, medicine, and society in Victorian England. Santa Barbara,
  Calif.: Praeger.
Case, Anne, Angela Fertig, and Christina Paxson. 2005.     e lasting impact of childhood health
  and circumstance. Journal of Health Economics 24, no. 2:365 ­ 389.
Case, Anne, Darren Lubotsky, and Christina Paxson. 2002. Economic Status and Health in Child-
  hood: e Origins of the Gradient. American Economic Review 92, no. 5:1308­1334.
Case, Anne and Christina Paxson. 2008. Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and Labor Market
  Outcomes. Journal of Political Economy 116, no. 3:499­532.
------. 2010. Causes and Consequences of Early-Life Health. Demography 47, no. 1:S65­S85.
Cha o and Windus. 1897. Sixty years of healing. Belgravia: A London magazine 93:203­233.
Christen, Peter. 2012. Data Matching: Concepts and Techniques for Record Linkage, Entity Resolu-
  tion, and Duplicate Detection. Heidelberg: Springer.
Clark, Gregory. 2014. e Son Also Rises: Surnames and the History of Social Mobility. Princeton,
  NJ: Princeton University Press.
Costa, Dora L. 2015. Health and the Economy in the United States from 1750 to the Present.
  Journal of Economic Literature 53, no. 3:503­570.
Cullis, P. S. and D. G. Young. 2013. Nineteenth century mortality at the Royal Hospital for Sick
  Children, Glasgow. Sco ish Medical Journal 58, no. 3:182­187.
Currie, Janet. 2009. Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in Childhood,
  and Human Capital Development. Journal of Economic Literature 47, no. 1:87­122.
Currie, Janet and Rosemary Hyson. 1999. Is the Impact of Health Shocks Cushioned by Socioe-
  conomic Status? e Case of Low Birthweight. American Economic Review 89, no. 2:245­250.

                                              27
Currie, Janet, Mark Stabile, Phongsack Manivong, and Leslie L. Roos. 2010. Child Health and
  Young Adult Outcomes. Journal of Human Resources 45, no. 3:517­548.
Currie, Janet and Tom Vogl. 2013. Early-Life Health and Adult Circumstance in Developing Coun-
  tries. Annual Review of Economics 5, no. 1:1­36.
Cutler, David, Angus Deaton, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2006.        e Determinants of Mortality.
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 20, no. 3:97­120.
Doyle, Shane, Felix Meier zu Selhausen, and Jacob Weisdorf. 2019. e Blessings of Medicine? Pa-
  tient Characteristics and Health Outcomes in a Ugandan Mission Hospital, 1908-1970. Working
  Paper.
Feigenbaum, James J. 2016. A Machine Learning Approach to Census Record Linking. Working
  Paper.
Ferrie, Joseph P. 1996. A New Sample of Males Linked from the Public Use Micro Sample of the
  1850 U.S. Federal Census of Population to the 1860 U.S. Federal Census Manuscript Schedules.
  Historical Methods 29:141­156.
Floud, Roderick, Robert W. Fogel, Bernard Harris, and Sok Chul Hong. 2011. e Changing Body :
  Health, Nutrition, and Human Development in the Western World since 1700. Cambridge: Cam-
  bridge University Press.
Fogel, Robert William. 2004. e Escape from Hunger and Premature Death, 1700-2100. Cambridge:
  Cambridge University Press.
Franklin, Alfred White. 1964. Children's Hospitals. In     e evolution of hospitals in Britain, ed.
  F. N. L. Poynter. London: Pitman, 103­121.
Gensowski, Miriam, Torben Heien Nielsen, Nete Munk Nielsen, Maya Rossin-Slater, and Miriam
  W¨ust. 2018. Childhood Health Shocks, Comparative Advantage, and Long-Term Outcomes:
  Evidence from the Last Danish Polio Epidemic. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
  Paper Series No. 24753.
Gertler, Paul and Jonathan Gruber. 2002. Insuring Consumption against Illness. American Eco-
  nomic Review 92, no. 1:51­70.
Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2017. e Long-Run E ects of Childhood Insurance Coverage: Medi-
  caid Implementation, Adult Health and Labor Market Outcomes. Working Paper.
Gould, Eric D., Victor Lavy, and M. Daniele Paserman. 2011. Sixty Years a er the Magic Car-
  pet Ride: e Long-Run E ect of the Early Childhood Environment on Social and Economic
  Outcomes. e Review of Economic Studies 78, no. 3:938­973.
Hardy, Anne. 2001. Health and Medicine in Britain since 1860. New York: Palgrave.
Hawkins, Sue and Andrea Tanner. 2013. Myth, Marketing, and Medicine: Life in British Children's
  Hospitals, 1850-1914. In Hospital life: eory and practice from the medieval to the modern, eds.
  Laurinda Abreu and Sally Sheard. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang, 209­236.

                                               28
Higgs, Michelle. 2009. Life in the Victorian hospital. Stroud, Gloucestershire: History Press.

Hjort, Jonas, Mikkel Sølvsten, and Miriam W¨
                                           ust. 2017. Universal Investment in Infants and Long-
  Run Health: Evidence from Denmark's 1937 Home Visiting Program. American Economic Jour-
  nal: Applied Economics 9, no. 4:78­104.

Hoehn-Velasco, Lauren. 2019.       e Long-term Impact of Preventative Public Health Programs.
 Working Paper.

Hong, Sok Chul. 2007. e Burden of Early Exposure to Malaria in the United States, 1850-1860:
 Malnutrition and Immune Disorders. e Journal of Economic History 67, no. 04:1001­1035.

------. 2013. Malaria: An Early Indicator of Later Disease and Work Level. Journal of Health
  Economics 32, no. 3:612­632.

Horrell, Sara, Jane Humphries, and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2001. Destined for Deprivation: Human
 Capital Formation and Intergenerational Poverty in Nineteenth-Century England. Explorations
 in Economic History 38, no. 3:339­365.

Jayachandran, Seema, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Kimberly V. Smith. 2010. Modern Medicine and
  the Twentieth Century Decline in Mortality: Evidence on the Impact of Sulfa Drugs. American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2, no. 2:118­146.

Karbownik, Krzysztof and Anthony Wray. 2015. Childhood health and long-run economic op-
  portunity in Victorian England. Working Paper.

Kingston University. 2010. HHARP: e Historic Hospital Admission Records Project. Kingston
  upon ames, Surrey: Kingston University.

Lazuka, Volha. 2019. Infant Health and Later-Life Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from the
  Introduction of Sulpha Antibiotics in Sweden. Journal of Human Resources Forthcomin.

Lomax, Elizabeth M. R. 1996. Small and Special: e Development of Hospitals for Children in
  Victorian Britain. London: Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine.

Long, Jason. 2013.   e Surprising Social Mobility of Victorian Britain. European Review of Eco-
  nomic History 17, no. 1:1­23.

Long, Jason and Joseph Ferrie. 2013. Intergenerational Occupational Mobility in Great Britain
  and the United States since 1850. American Economic Review 103, no. 4:1109­1137.

McKeown,      omas. 1976.    e Modern Rise of Population. London: Edward Arnold.

Mercer, Alexander. 2014. Infections, chronic disease, and the epidemiological transition : a new
 perspective. Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press.

Mill, Roy and Luke C. D. Stein. 2016. Race, Skin Color, and Economic Outcomes in Early
  Twentieth-Century America. Working Paper.



                                                29
Miller, Douglas L, Na'ama Shenhav, and Michel Z Grosz. 2019. Selection into Identi cation in
  Fixed E ects Models, with Application to Head Start. National Bureau of Economic Research
  Working Paper Series No. 26174.

Mokyr, Joel. 2000. Why "More Work for Mother?" Knowledge and Household Behavior, 1870-
 1945. e Journal of Economic History 60, no. 1:1­41.

Nix, Emily and Nancy Qian. 2015.    e Fluidity of Race: "Passing" in the United States, 1880-1940.
  Working Paper.

Olive i, Claudia and Daniele Paserman. 2015. In the Name of the Son (and the Daughter): Inter-
  generational Mobility in the United States, 1850-1940. American Economic Review 105, no. 8:1­
  31.

Parman, John. 2015a. Childhood health and human capital: New evidence from genetic brothers
  in arms. Journal of Economic History 75, no. 1:30­64.

------. 2015b. Childhood Health and Sibling Outcomes: Nurture Reinforcing Nature During the
  1918 In uenza Pandemic. Explorations in Economic History 58:22­43.

P´
 erez, Santiago. 2019. Intergenerational Occupational Mobility across       ree Continents.     e
   Journal of Economic History 79, no. 2:383­416.

Ruggles, Steven. 2014. Big microdata for population research. Demography 51, no. 1:287­297.

Saavedra, Martin. 2017. Early-life disease exposure and occupational status: e impact of yellow
  fever during the 19th century. Explorations in Economic History 64:62­81.

Sch¨
   urer, K and Joe Day. 2019. Migration to London and the development of the north­south
  divide, 1851­1911. Social History 44, no. 1:26­56.

Schwandt, Hannes. 2018. e Lasting Legacy of Seasonal In uenza: In-Utero Exposure and Labor
  Market Outcomes. Working Paper.

Smith, James P. 2009. e Impact of Childhood Health on Adult Labor Market Outcomes. Review
  of Economics and Statistics 91, no. 3:478­489.

Szreter, Simon. 2005. Health and Wealth. Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press.

UK Data Archive. 2014. International Census Microdata Project [Electronic Dataset]. Colchester,
 UK: University of Essex.

van Leeuwen, Marco H. D. and Ineke Maas. 2011. Hisclass: A Historical International Social Class
  Scheme. Leuven, Belgium: Leuven University Press.

van Leeuwen, Marco H. D., Ineke Maas, and Andrew Miles. 2002. Hisco: Historical International
  Standard Classi cation of Occupations. Leuven, Belgium: Leuven University Press.

Venkataramani, Atheendar S. 2012. Early Life Exposure to Malaria and Cognition in Adulthood:
  Evidence from Mexico. Journal of Health Economics 31, no. 5:767­780.

                                              30
Wohl, Anthony S. 1983. Endangered Lives: Public Health in Victorian Britain. Cambridge, MA:
 Harvard University Press.

Worboys, Michael. 2000. Spreading Germs: Diseases,    eories, and Medical Practice in Britain,
 1865-1900. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Zhang, Xiaohan. 2014. Disease and Development of the Next Generation. Working Paper.




                                            31
8 Tables

             Table 1: Linkage rates from hospital records to childhood census

                                          Census year linked to hospital records
                                  (1)                  (2)          (3)              (4)
                                 1881                 1891         1901              Any
                                    Panel A: Hospital to childhood census linkage
     No match                    1,016                1,243        1,779              983
                                (0.064)              (0.054)      (0.167)           (0.035)
     Multiple matches           10,603               15,318        6,255            17,702
                                (0.667)              (0.662)      (0.586)           (0.622)
     Unique match                4,284                6,562        2,635             9,763
                                (0.269)              (0.284)      (0.247)           (0.343)
     Sibling present             4,007                5,945        2,240             9,171
                                (0.252)              (0.257)      (0.210)           (0.322)
     Long-run censuses        1901, 1911          1901, 1911       1911        1901, 1911
                                          Panel B: Linkage to census in adulthood
     Patient matched             2,968                3,749        1,380             6,238
                                (0.187)              (0.162)      (0.129)           (0.219)
     Patient and sibling         1,195                1,572         362              3,105
                                (0.075)              (0.068)      (0.034)           (0.109)
     In nal sample                970                 1,082         269              2,320
                                (0.061)              (0.047)      (0.025)           (0.082)
     Total admissions            15,903              23,123       10,669            28,448

  Notes: Panel A of this table presents sample sizes and linkage rates (in parentheses) from
  inpatient hospital admission records to the 1881, 1891, and 1901 census (columns 1 to 3),
  as well from pooling together linkages across the three censuses (column 4). "Total ad-
  missions" represents the number of admissions that we a empt to match to the census
  in each case.    e sample includes all patients from the 1870 to 1890 birth cohorts who
  were admi ed at ages 0 to 11 between 1870 and 1902 no more than 10 years before or af-
  ter enumeration in the census. In the top panel we rst show the number of admissions
  with either multiple matches, no match or a unique match in each census. en, we indi-
  cate the subset of the unique matches for whom we also match a brother. Panel B of the
  table shows the number of patients who were also linked to a census during adulthood,
  the subset of these individuals for whom a sibling was also matched, and the nal sample
  of observations.




                                                32
                   Table 2: Occupational status and intergenerational mobility

                                 (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)            (5)
                             White collar     Skilled +    Semi-skilled +      Class          Class 
                                              Panel A: E ects of hospital admission
 Patient                        ­0.041***      ­0.040**        ­0.034***         0.039**      ­0.039**
                                (0.014)        (0.016)         (0.011)          (0.015)       (0.015)
 % e ect                        14.9            7.3              4.0            13.9            5.5
                                            Panel B: E ects of health de ciency index
 Health de ciency index         ­0.122***      ­0.120**        ­0.104***         0.108**      ­0.106**
                                (0.044)        (0.053)         (0.037)          (0.053)       (0.053)
 % e ect ()                     5.8             2.8             1.6             5.0            1.9
 Mean of Y                       0.273           0.544           0.850           0.279          0.721
 N                              3,996           3,996           3,996           2,606          2,606

Notes:     e dependent variables in columns 1 to 3 are indicators of occupational status: the probabil-
ity of entering a white-collar occupation; the probability of entering a white-collar or skilled occupa-
tion; and the probability of entering a white-collar, skilled, or semi-skilled occupation. In columns 4
and 5, the dependent variables are measures of intergenerational occupational mobility: the probabil-
ity of having a lower occupational status than one's father, and the likelihood of the same or higher
occupational status than one's father, respectively. Each regression includes age-by-outcome census
year and birth-order xed e ects, an indicator for the older sibling in each pair of observations from a
household, standardized measures of rst name frequency, an interaction of rst name and surname
frequency, and indicators for match quality (exact matches on rst name, surname, and birth parish
between censuses, or cleaned birth places). e speci cations with the intergenerational outcomes
restrict the sample to cases where fathers and sons were less than 20 years apart in age at the time of
census enumeration when occupational outcomes were observed. Standard errors are clustered by
childhood household.
Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically signi cant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, re-
spectively.




                                                   33
                                     Table 3: School a endance

                                Single sex samples                   Both sexes in sample
                                (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)
                               Males         Females       Same sex     Opposite sex        Mixed
                                            Panel A: E ects of hospital admission
 Patient                      ­0.019*        ­0.030**      ­0.024***       ­0.019**         ­0.020***
                              (0.011)        (0.012)       (0.008)         (0.008)          (0.006)
 % e ect                       2.5            4.1            3.2            2.5              2.7
                                          Panel B: E ects of health de ciency index
 Health de ciency index       ­0.068*        ­0.077*       ­0.072***       ­0.059**         ­0.061***
                              (0.038)        (0.040)       (0.027)         (0.029)          (0.020)
 % e ect ()                    1.2            1.3            1.2            1.0              1.1
 Mean of Y                     0.750          0.736          0.743          0.741            0.745
 N                             1,530          1,510          3,040          2,830            4,832

Notes: In all columns, the dependent variable is an indicator for school a endance, which is prox-
ied by the recording of "scholar" as an individual's occupation in the 1881 or 1891 Census of Eng-
land. In each regression, the sample includes children aged 5 to 10 at the time of census enumera-
tion. In panel A, the explanatory variable of interest is an indicator for hospital admission, and in
panel B, it is the health de ciency index. Each regression includes age-by-census year and birth-
order xed e ects, an indicator for the older sibling in each pair of observations from a household,
standardized measures of rst name frequency, an interaction of rst name and surname frequency,
and indicators for match quality (exact matches on rst name and surname). In column 3, we pool
together the samples in columns 1 and 2, and make same-gender comparisons within households.
Column 4 is also based on a pooled sample, but makes opposite-gender comparisons within house-
holds, and thus also includes a control for gender. Column 5 is based on a larger sample that al-
lows for both same-gender and opposite-gender comparisons within households, and also includes
a control for gender. Standard errors are clustered by childhood household.
Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically signi cant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels,
respectively.




                                                    34
                Table 4: Long-run outcomes: Robustness to selective mortality

                   (1)           (2)              (3)           (4)          (5)                (6)
                Baseline      Drop high        Drop low     Drop infant Drop multiple         Drop
                Estimate      mortality        mortality    admission    admissions         contagious
                                           Panel A: E ects on P(White collar)
 Patient        ­0.041***      ­0.045***        ­0.046***    ­0.044***        ­0.048***       ­0.047***
                (0.014)        (0.014)          (0.014)      (0.014)          (0.014)         (0.015)
 Mean of Y        0.273          0.270           0.279         0.276            0.268          0.275
                                            Panel B: E ects on P(Skilled +)
 Patient        ­0.040**       ­0.046***        ­0.043***    ­0.031*          ­0.037**        ­0.041**
                (0.016)        (0.016)          (0.017)      (0.016)          (0.016)         (0.017)
 Mean of Y        0.544          0.543           0.547         0.550            0.539          0.542
                                         Panel C: E ects on P(Semi-skilled +)
 Patient        ­0.034***      ­0.035***        ­0.033***    ­0.034***        ­0.034***       ­0.043***
                (0.011)        (0.011)          (0.011)      (0.012)          (0.012)         (0.012)
 Mean of Y        0.850          0.848           0.853         0.851            0.852          0.850
 N                3,996          3,596           3,594         3,628            3,528          3,282
                                            Panel D: E ects on P(Class )
 Patient          0.039**        0.039**         0.038**       0.035**           0.040**        0.034**
                 (0.015)        (0.016)         (0.017)       (0.016)           (0.016)        (0.017)
 Mean of Y        0.279          0.273           0.281         0.278            0.279          0.283
                                             Panel E: E ects on P(Class )
 Patient        ­0.039**       ­0.041***        ­0.038**     ­0.034**         ­0.038**        ­0.038**
                (0.015)        (0.016)          (0.017)      (0.016)          (0.016)         (0.017)
 Mean of Y        0.721          0.728           0.719         0.721            0.721          0.718
 N                2,606          2,338           2,330         2,356            2,310          2,126

Notes: Each cell displays the coe cient for the hospitalization indicator from a separate regression.
   e dependent variables in panels A to E mirror those in columns 1 to 5 of Table 2, respectively.
Column 1 reproduces the estimates in panel A of Table 2. Columns 2 and 3 drop households with
patients admi ed for conditions in the upper and lower deciles of the health de ciency index distri-
bution, respectively. Column 4 excludes households with patients aged 0 or 1 at admission, column
5 drops households with patients admi ed multiple times, and column 6 leaves out households with
patients admi ed for contagious illnesses. See Table 2 for a description of control variables. Standard
errors are clustered by childhood household.
Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically signi cant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, re-
spectively.




                                                    35
                         Table 5: Long-run outcomes: Robustness to sample selection

                  (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)
               Baseline      Add multiple   Add multiple    County of      Drop Guy's    Unique within Hospital-census
               Estimate        siblings     patient hhlds. London only      Hospital     census county county match
                                                  Panel A: E ects on P(White collar)
 Patient       ­0.041***       ­0.037***      ­0.036***       ­0.043***      ­0.040***      ­0.043***         ­0.054***
               (0.014)         (0.013)        (0.013)         (0.015)        (0.014)        (0.014)           (0.017)
 Mean of Y       0.273          0.274           0.274            0.281        0.278           0.277             0.287
                                                    Panel B: E ects on P(Skilled +)
 Patient       ­0.040**        ­0.032**       ­0.030**        ­0.041**       ­0.047***      ­0.037**          ­0.056***
               (0.016)         (0.014)        (0.014)         (0.017)        (0.016)        (0.016)           (0.019)
 Mean of Y       0.544          0.543           0.543            0.551        0.553           0.544             0.554
                                                  Panel C: E ects on P(Semi-skilled +)
 Patient       ­0.034***       ­0.026**       ­0.027***       ­0.037***      ­0.034***      ­0.033***         ­0.028**
               (0.011)         (0.010)        (0.010)         (0.012)        (0.012)        (0.012)           (0.014)
 Mean of Y       0.850          0.848           0.849            0.860        0.857           0.850             0.861
 N               3,996          4,828           4,870            3,270        3,596           3,578             2,568
                                                    Panel D: E ects on P(Class )
 Patient         0.039**        0.030**         0.028**         0.031*         0.040**        0.035**           0.033*
                (0.015)        (0.013)         (0.013)         (0.017)        (0.016)        (0.016)           (0.019)
 Mean of Y       0.279          0.280           0.282            0.281        0.278           0.278             0.276
                                                     Panel E: E ects on P(Class )
 Patient       ­0.039**        ­0.030**       ­0.028**        ­0.031*        ­0.040**       ­0.035**          ­0.034*
               (0.015)         (0.013)        (0.013)         (0.017)        (0.016)        (0.016)           (0.019)
 Mean of Y       0.721          0.720           0.718            0.720        0.722           0.722             0.724
 N               2,606          4,021           4,053            2,198        2,334           2,292             1,700

Notes: Each cell displays the coe cient for the hospitalization indicator from a separate regression. e dependent vari-
ables in panels A to E mirror those in columns 1 to 5 of Table 2, respectively. Column 1 reproduces the estimates in panel A
of Table 2. Column 2 compares patients to all male siblings linked between censuses instead of restricting the comparison to
the male sibling closest in age. Column 3 adds households with multiple patients, column 4 restricts the sample to patients
and siblings residing in the Greater London area during childhood, and column 5 drops households with patients admi ed
to Guy's Hospital. Column 6 restricts the sample to households with patients whose name and age combinations are unique
within their county of residence in the childhood census to which they are linked. Column 7 further restricts to individuals
residing in the same county at the time of hospitalization and census enumeration. See Table 2 for a description of control
variables. Standard errors are clustered by childhood household.
Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically signi cant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                            36
For Online Publication: Online Appendix

A Data Linking Procedure

In this section we describe the linking algorithms used to match inpatient admission records to
census records and to match individuals across censuses. We explain the census-to-census linkage
in detail as it is the most basic procedure and it is the basis for the hospital-to-census linkage with
some modi cations.


A.1 Census-to-census linkages

We use the complete count data for the Census of England from the I-CeM project to create the
following linked samples:


   1. 1881 to 1901
   2. 1891 to 1901
   3. 1881 to 1911
   4. 1891 to 1911
   5. 1901 to 1911


In each case, we start with all males aged 0 to 21 in the base year census. We exclude females
due to name changes at marriage which prevent matching based on maiden surname. Census-
to-census linkages are based on time-invariant characteristics such as rst name, surname, birth
year, and county of birth28 . We begin by separating given names into rst and middle names, and
then standardize diminutives and common nicknames of rst names to their proper equivalents.
We follow the procedure in Parman (2015b) and construct the Phonex codes for the rst and last
names in each data set, which enables us to allow for di erences in the spelling of phonetically
similar names across data sets that might arise from factors such as typographical errors.29 Prior
to the implementation of the matching algorithm, we perform a "blocking" step in which the two
data sets are joined using four blocking variables: the Phonex code of the rst and last names,
age in years when enumerated in the later census, and county of birth (Christen 2012).
  28 We   choose not to match on birth parish during the initial step given that the variable is a non-standardized text
string and parish boundaries changed signi cantly over the time period of study
   29 See Nix and Qian (2015) and the supplemental materials to Parman (2015b) for discussions of the Phonex algo-

rithm.


                                                          37
       e linkage procedure draws on elements of the methods pioneered by Ferrie (1996) and
utilized by Abramitzky et al. (2012), modi cations developed by Feigenbaum (2016) and Mill and
Stein (2016), and recommendations made by Bailey et al. (2017).30 It proceeds as follows:


   1. Re-code all births in the counties of Kent, Middlesex and Surrey as births in "London" to
      account for changes in county boundaries over time and the fact that many people simply
      report their place of birth as "London" in the 1911 census.

   2. Drop all pairs of linked observations that do not have matching Phonex codes or county of
      birth, while allowing discrepancies in the reported age of up to 5 years.

   3. Compute the Jaro-Winkler score between the rst names and last names in each pair of
      observations. Discard all pairs with a Jaro-Winkler score less than 0.75 for either the rst
      or last name.31

   4. For each record in the earlier census, determine the maximum Jaro-Winkler score averaged
      over the rst and last names, and the minimum discrepancy in age among all records iden-
      ti ed in Step 2. Count the number of records in the later census with a Jaro-Winkler score
      (Js ) satisfying (1 + 0.1) Js J, where J ¯ is the Jaro-Winkler score of the best match, and
      having a reported age within one year of the closest match.

   5. Prioritize linked observations that match on birth parish.

   6. Drop all pairs of linked observations with a discrepancy in reported age greater than the
      minimum discrepancy across all later-year census records matched to an earlier-year cen-
      sus record.

   7. Drop any remaining pairs of linked records with a Jaro-Winkler score (Js ) satisfying (1 +
                         ¯ is the Jaro-Winkler score of the best match. In other words, we consider
      0.1) Js < J, where J
      a record uniquely matched on name-age combinations if it is su ciently "be er" than the
      next closest match.
  30 While  the linking methods used in this paper are not exact replications of traditional methods, the approach
of incorporating features from di erent methods is validated by the ndings of Bailey et al. (2017) that using a
combination of samples generated with the Ferrie (1996) and Feigenbaum (2016) methods results in a much lower
Type I error rate.
   31 Economic historians have preferred the Jaro-Winkler score as a string distance measure for linking names across

censuses because it places greater weight on characters that match at the beginning of a string (Feigenbaum 2016;
Mill and Stein 2016). Jaro-Winkler scores range from 0 to 1, where a score of 0 indicates no common le ers, while
a score of 1 indicates a perfect match. For more details on the Jaro-Winkler method, and other string comparison
algorithms, see Christen (2012).




                                                         38
   8. Keep all pairs of linked records with a Jaro-Winkler score greater than 0.80 averaged across
      the rst and last name, that satisfy the following conditions: each earlier-year census has
      a unique match in the later-year census, and each later-year census record has a unique
      match in the earlier-year. We exclude records that have unique name-age combinations if
      the second best match is su ciently similar.


    We present linkage rates separately for all census-to-census linkages in panel A of Table A8.
   e share of unique matches ranges from 49 to 58 percent across the set of census pairs, with
higher match rates for censuses that are closer together, especially those that are only 10 years
apart. e census-to-census linkage rates typically found in the literature using complete-count
US census data are somewhat lower. is di erence can be explained in part by applications with
longer windows of time between censuses, typically 30 to 40 years, where sample a rition is of
greater concern. Furthermore, the U.S. censuses have less precise information on birth place, at
the state level instead of county or parish, which reduces the likelihood of nding unique matches.


A.2 Hospital-to-census linkage

   e procedure for linking inpatient hospital admission records to population censuses follows the
steps outlined above for census-to-census linkages with a few important modi cations. First, we
do not observe place of birth in the hospital records and thus do not use it as a linking variable.
Second, we do not require that each census record is linked to a unique admission record, given
that we do not observe a patient identi er and some patients may be admi ed multiple times.
Instead, we treat multiple admission records that match to the same census records as belonging
to the same person.
     We link each hospital admission record to the 1881, 1891 and 1901 censuses provided that the
admission occurred within 10 years of the census enumeration date. We use information on the
age in years on the day of the hospital admission to determine the age in years on the days of
census enumeration. We require the age to di er by no more than 3 years between sources, which
is a tighter window than the census-to-census match since age heaping is less of a concern when
individuals are observed as children in both the census and hospital records. In the absence of
information on place of birth, we prioritize linkages of records that match on county of residence,
but we do not require either district or county of residence to match since individuals moved o en,
even in short time windows between hospital admission and census enumeration.
    We discuss the overall linkage rates from hospital records to censuses in Section 3.2. In Ta-
ble A16 we present the share of hospital admissions that remain a er each stage in the matching


                                                39
procedure, separately by hospital and census year. Overall, the linkage rates are very similar
across the three hospitals at each stage of the procedure.


A.3 Multiple linkages to a sample of unique individuals

In order to execute our empirical strategy we must perform three separate linkages:

   1. Patients, from hospital admission records to childhood census records

   2. Patients, from childhood census record to census record during adulthood

   3. Siblings, from childhood census record to census record during adulthood

As a substantial portion of the starting sample is lost through multiple linkages, we must compen-
sate by pooling together multiple hospital-to-census and census-to-census linkages. is section
describes the procedure used to identify which records belong to the same individual, and which
linked records to use in the analysis for a given individual.
   As described in Section 3.1, the hospital admission records do not include a unique patient
identi er. We start by assuming that separate admissions belong to the same person if the sur-
name, rst name, middle name, implied birth year, and registration district of residence all match
across a set of admission records. We use the grouping of records based on these variables as a
proxy patient identi er.

    Among those patients linked to census records during childhood, we update the unique iden-
ti ers based on the census linkages. In a small number of cases, admissions of patients with
di erent proxy identi ers are linked to the same census record in either 1881, 1891, or 1901, and
we consider them to be the same individual. When we conduct the second linkage to census
records during adulthood, we further consolidate the proxy identi ers. For example, if one ad-
mission record is linked to the 1881 census, and another record is linked to the 1891 census, and
both census records are linked to the same individual in either the 1901 or 1911 census, then
we consider the two admission records to belong to the same patient. As illustrated in Table 1,
many patients are linked to more than one census, with hospital-to-census linkage rates ranging
from 25 to 28 percent for each of the 1881 through 1901 censuses, but only 38 percent of patients
matched to any census.
    To select the patient and census record pair to use in the analysis of long-run occupational
outcomes, we implement an algorithm which prioritizes linkages according to the following cri-
teria:

                                               40
   1. Choose the census closest to the admission year.

   2. Select the census record with the smallest deviation in age between the hospital admission
      record and the childhood census.

   3. Choose the childhood census record linked to the latest census year during adulthood (1901
      or 1911).

   4. Choose the earliest childhood census record (1881, 1891 or 1901).


Upon completion of these steps, we update the proxy patient identi ers and repeat the procedure
once more. e sample used in the main analysis is formed by pooling together individuals from
the three childhood census years (1881, 1891 or 1901) who were linked to either of the adulthood
census years (1901 or 1911).
      e algorithm for prioritizing a pair of records within a set of census linkages for a given
patient when considering school a endance as an outcome di ers slightly in comparison to the
case of long-run outcomes and proceeds as follows:


   1. Choose the census closest to the admission year.

   2. Select the census record with the smallest deviation in age between the hospital admission
      record and the childhood census.

   3. Prioritize matches to census records of individuals aged 5 to 12 at enumeration.

   4. Choose the most recent census data (1881 or 1891).


      is procedure ensures that we choose the highest quality match for the analysis sample,
before we impose additional restrictions so that we observe the individual in the census during
the compulsory schooling years and a er the hospital admission.


A.4 Patient-sibling comparisons

When linking the male siblings of male hospital patients across census years, we a empt to match
all siblings within 8 years of age of the patient. In the main regression analysis, we impose some
restrictions to limit the sample to comparisons of one patient and one sibling per household:

   1. Drop households with multiple patients.


                                                41
   2. Among successfully matched male siblings, keep the sibling who is closest in age to the
      hospital patient. In the cases where we link both an older and younger sibling with the
      same age gap in comparison to the hospital patient, we randomly choose one of the two
      siblings, in order to avoid biasing the sibling xed e ects comparisons to either younger or
      older siblings.

We test robustness of the results to these additional restrictions in Section 6.




                                                 42
B     Health De ciency Index

In this section we describe the procedure used to construct the health de ciency index introduced
in Section 3.1. We start with the set of all admissions of male and female patients from the 1870
to 1902 birth cohorts who were admi ed to a hospital between 1870 and 1902. Note that the
estimation sample includes patients from the 1891 to 1902 birth cohorts who are excluded from
the main analysis since they are too young to have occupational outcomes in the available census
years. We clean the cause-of-admission text strings and categorize the information into one of
seven groups:

    1. Disease or medical condition

    2. Symptoms

    3. Conditions requiring surgery

    4. External factors (e.g. poisoning or collisions)

    5. Foreign objects

    6. Descriptors of severity

    7. Body part


If an individual's admission record reports one or more diseases or medical conditions we take
the set of these diagnoses as the cause of admission. If not, we go sequential down the list, adding
information until we have assigned a primary diagnosis to all possible individuals.

    For each diagnosis, we compute its frequency and observed inpatient mortality rate by gender.
   en, for individuals with multiple diagnoses, we choose the diagnosis with the highest mortality
rate. We break ties by choosing the most frequently occurring diagnosis. is procedure leaves
us with a single primary diagnosis per admission record.
    Next, we estimate the following linear probability model separately by gender and save the
residuals:


                         P(Death in hospital)g                     g
                                             nhay =  + h + a + y + nhay                          (3)

where ng indexes individual in-patient admissions for gender g, h indexes hospitals, a indexes
age in years at admission, and y indexes the year of admission.        e dependent variable is an
indicator that takes the value of one when a patient dies in the hospital. We include hospital (),


                                                 43
age at admission (), and year of admission () xed e ects. We save the residuals g    n from the
regression to use as an input in the next step of computing the health de ciency index.
      e estimation excludes observations with no diagnosis and diagnoses with at least 25 obser-
vations for which there is no variation in observed inpatient mortality.32 Next, we assign patients
the average residual mortality risk for their primary diagnosis as a proxy for childhood health.
For each diagnosis dgj of gender g, we compute the following:


                                                Ng
                                                n=1    I(dg   g     g
                                                          j  Cn ) · n
                                      Hg
                                       j   =
                                                    Ng
                                                    n=1    I(dg   g
                                                              j  Cn )


which is the average unexplained mortality risk across all admission of gender g containing di-
agnosis dgj . Finally, we compute the health de ciency index by the following steps:


   1. Among diagnoses for which the average residual mortality Hg
                                                                j was computed, we construct
      a max-min standardized score according to:

                                                      Hg        g
                                                       j - min(Hj )
                                           Zg   =
                                            j
                                                    max(Hg          g
                                                         j ) - min(Hj )


   2. For diagnoses with at least 25 observations by gender and no observed variation in inpatient
      mortality, we assign Zg                                                g
                             j = 1 if all patients died in the hospital and Zj = 0 if no patients died
      in the hospital.




  32 We  take 25 observations as the threshold at which we are con dent that the cause of admission is certain not
to result in a death in the hospital. ere are no causes of admission with more than 25 observations for which all
patients die in the hospital. Results are similar when we use a threshold of 10 or 50 observations.


                                                          44
     C Appendix Tables

                             Table A1: Common causes of admission in hospital population and the nal sample

                                          Hospital population                                          Hospital male population                                     Final sample
            Cause of admission    Frequency    Percent Mortality rate      Cause of admission    Frequency    Percent Mortality rate      Cause of admission    Frequency    Percent
            Abscess                    3,202      4.45            0.04     Abscess                    1,901      4.52             0.04    Abscess                      112      4.83
            Diphtheria                 2,773      3.85            0.38     Pneumonia                  1,513      3.59             0.11    Fracture                      72      3.10
            Tubercular Disease         2,396      3.33            0.04     Diphtheria                 1,499      3.56             0.36    Pneumonia                     71      3.06
            Pneumonia                  2,368      3.29            0.11     Tubercular Disease         1,422      3.38             0.04    Bronchitis                    58      2.50
            Chorea                     2,104      2.92            0.01     Bronchopneumonia           1,120      2.66             0.32    Phimosis                      58      2.50
            Bronchopneumonia           1,937      2.69            0.30     Bronchitis                   999      2.37             0.17    Typhoid Fever                 48      2.07
            Bronchitis                 1,766      2.45            0.16     Fracture                     939      2.23             0.03    Chorea                        47      2.03
            Fracture                   1,251      1.74            0.02     Meningitis                   718      1.71             0.77    Diphtheria                    45      1.94
            Meningitis                 1,226      1.70            0.77     Empyema                      686      1.63             0.14    Tubercular Disease            44      1.90
            Cle Palate                 1,093      1.52            0.00     Chorea                       618      1.47             0.01    Injury                        41      1.77
            Empyema                    1,090      1.51            0.13     Fever                        613      1.46             0.11    Empyema                       40      1.72
            Typhoid Fever              1,006      1.40            0.06     Phimosis                     601      1.43             0.01    Rheumatism                    38      1.64
            Fever                      1,003      1.39            0.11     Injury                       581      1.38             0.04    Cle Palate                    38      1.64
            Tuberculosis                 983      1.37            0.57     Typhoid Fever                569      1.35             0.07    Talipes                       35      1.51
            Morbus Cordis                954      1.33            0.17     Harelip                      556      1.32             0.02    Fever                         33      1.42
45




            Rheumatism                   931      1.29            0.02     Tuberculosis                 539      1.28             0.57    Necrosis                      33      1.42
            Harelip                      852      1.18            0.02     Cle Palate                   535      1.27             0.01    Harelip                       33      1.42
            Talipes                      799      1.11            0.01     Rheumatism                   524      1.24             0.02    Rickets                       32      1.38
            Rickets                      794      1.10            0.04     Talipes                      517      1.23             0.00    Pleurisy                      31      1.34
            Injury                       776      1.08            0.03     Morbus Cordis                456      1.08             0.16    Morbus Cordis                 28      1.21
            Phthisis                     775      1.08            0.23     Burn                         451      1.07             0.25    Disease Knee                  25      1.08
            Burn                         773      1.07            0.27     Rickets                      440      1.05             0.05    Diarrhea                      25      1.08
            Diarrhea                     713      0.99            0.26     Diarrhea                     418      0.99             0.24    Scarlet Fever                 25      1.08
            Disease Hip                  704      0.98            0.02     Laryngitis                   412      0.98             0.16    Eczema                        24      1.03
            Necrosis                     679      0.94            0.03     Necrosis                     409      0.97             0.03    Disease Hip                   24      1.03
            Total (top 25)            32,948     45.76            0.16     Total (top 25)            19,036     45.22             0.15    Total (top 25)             1,060     45.70
            Outside top 25            39,006     54.24            0.11     Outside top 25            23,064     54.78             0.11    Outside top 25             1,260     54.30

           Notes:     is table lists the 25 most common causes of admission in the hospital population, the population of hospitalized males, and the nal sample used in the analysis.
             e hospital population consists of all admissions by male and female patients born between 1870 and 1902 and admi ed at ages 0 to 11 between 1870 and 1902 at GOSH,
           Barts, or Guy's Hospitals. e causes of admissions are tabulated a er cleaning the text strings transcribed from the admissions registers. e mortality rate refers to the
           share of admissions in which a patient died in the hospital. e nal sample refers to the set of hospital admissions corresponding to the 1998 male patients included in the
           main analysis in columns 1 to 3 of Table 2. e mortality rate is not shown for the nal sample since it only includes patients who survived until adulthood.




                                                                                              45
            Table A2: Common occupational titles by occupational class

           (1)                   (2)                    (3)                  (4)
       White collar            Skilled              Semi-skilled          Unskilled
 1   Clerk                 Carpenter          Carman                  General Labourer
 2   Railway Clerk         Cabinet Maker      Coal Miner Hewer        Labourer
 3   Commercial Clerk      Bricklayer         House Painter           Farm Labourer
 4   Police Constable      French Polisher    Postman                 Gardener Domestic
 5   Insurance Agent       Butcher            Porter                  Railway Porter

Notes:     is table lists the ve most common occupations in each of four occupational
classes for the nal sample of patients and siblings used in the main regressions. Col-
umn (1) combines professional, managerial and clerical occupations (Classes 1 and 2
in the seven category HISCLASS scheme) into a white collar class, Column (2) sub-
sumes farmers into skilled workers (HISCLASS 3 and 4), Column (3) displays low-
skilled workers (HISCLASS 5), and Column (4) combines unskilled workers as well as
low and unskilled farm workers (HISCLASS 6 and 7).


       Table A3: Number of beds and admissions to hospitals in London, 1893

        Hospital in 1894     # Beds Inpatients Outpatients Inpatient %
                                          Panel A: General hospitals
        Barts                    675         6,474      159,802              4.05
        Guy's                    695         6,325        57,223            11.05
        Top-12 General         4,937        52,231      688,187              7.59
        Barts share (%)         13.7              12.4         23.2
        Guy's share (%)         14.1              12.1          8.3
                                         Panel B: Children's hospitals
        GOSH                    178          1,801         27,334            6.59
        Top-6 Children's        497          6,281       110,386             5.69
        GOSH share (%)          35.8              28.7         24.8

       Notes:     is table displays the number of hospital beds, the number
       of inpatients, the number of outpatients, and the share of inpatients
       among outpatients from 1894 for hospitals used in the analysis. e
       original source does not indicate whether inpatients are included in
       the outpatient totals. e table also shows the shares for the sample
       hospitals relative to the twelve largest general and children's hospi-
       tals in London.
       Source: Cha o and Windus (1897).


                                             46
           Table A4: Descriptive statistics for hospital catchment areas (1891 census)

                                             (1)            (2)           (3)              (4)
                                                                                         Rest of
                                            Barts         GOSH           Guys
                                                                                         London
 Share aged 0 to 4                          0.121          0.110         0.131            0.119
 Share aged 5 to 11                         0.149          0.136         0.158            0.149
 Sibship size                               4.029          3.906         4.081            4.108
 Share age 0 to 11 living with mother       0.920          0.913         0.925            0.912
 Share age 0 to 11 living with father       0.864          0.853         0.875            0.857
 Share of unskilled fathers                 0.109          0.120         0.202            0.157
 Share of unskilled household heads         0.103          0.110         0.193            0.148
 Share of household heads married           0.865          0.844         0.884            0.869
 Share of immigrants                        0.083          0.103         0.070            0.102
 Catchment area size (N)                   589,024       1,174,261      341,354       2,722,614

Notes:     is table presents descriptive statistics from the 1891 Census of England for the catch-
ment areas of each hospital used in the analysis. A hospital's catchment area is de ned as the set
of registration districts from which the most patients are admi ed and which together account
for at least 50 percent of total admissions by children age 0 to 11. e Barts Hospital catchment
area includes: Holborn, Shoreditch, and Islington. GOSH catchment area includes: Holborn, Is-
lington, Pancras, Kensington, Marylebone, Shoreditch, and St Giles. e Guy's Hospital catch-
ment area includes: St Olave Southwark and St Saviour Southwark. Results are similar when
using the 1881 or 1901 census.




                                               47
        Table A5: Selection into hospitalization for male patients

                            Observed in hospital records [× 100]
                                (1)              (2)                 (3)
 Father skilled                 0.061***         0.039            0.038
                               (0.020)          (0.031)          (0.024)
 Father semi-skilled            0.069***         0.053*           0.053**
                               (0.020)          (0.027)          (0.022)
 Father unskilled               0.089***         0.074*           0.071**
                               (0.025)          (0.037)          (0.030)
 Mean of Y                     0.430            0.430            0.430
 Catchment controls            Yes              No               No
 District FE                   No               Yes              No
 Parish FE                     No               No               Yes
 N                           715,103          715,103          715,103

Notes:      e sample consists of individuals who were ages 0 to 5
and residing in the County of London when enumerated in the
1881, 1891 or 1901 censuses. e dependent variable is an indi-
cator for a unique match to an inpatient hospital admission that
occurred up to 10 years a er the census enumeration date and
when the individual was age 0 to 11 at the time of admission. e
regressions also include age at enumeration by census year xed
e ects for patients and their fathers.      e sample is further re-
stricted to male children with fathers age 21 to 50 at enumeration.
Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically signi cant at
the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.




                                      48
                                            Table A6: Sibling-speci c determimants of hospitalization

                                       Hospitalization (Patients vs. siblings)           Health de ciency index | Hospitalization (Patients only)
                                 (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)         (5)           (6)           (7)            (8)
                                1881            1891           1901              Any        1881          1891          1901            Any
      First born               ­0.073*         ­0.158***      ­0.054         ­0.109***     ­0.004        ­0.002        ­0.001         ­0.003
                               (0.039)         (0.039)        (0.101)        (0.027)       (0.008)       (0.007)       (0.015)        (0.005)
      Female                   ­0.043**        ­0.063***      ­0.101**       ­0.057***     ­0.000        ­0.001          0.001        ­0.001
                               (0.020)         (0.020)        (0.045)        (0.013)       (0.006)       (0.006)        (0.014)       (0.004)
      First born × female       0.123**          0.122**        0.007         0.110***     ­0.006          0.012       ­0.002           0.002
49




                               (0.056)          (0.053)        (0.133)       (0.037)       (0.012)        (0.011)      (0.026)         (0.008)
      Mean of Y                 0.395           0.426           0.413         0.411          0.300         0.313         0.333         0.310
      N                        6,868            6,973          1,512         15,353         2,712         2,970          624           6,306

     Notes: Columns 1 to 4 present sibling xed e ects estimates with an indicator for hospitalization as the dependent variable, while columns
     5 to 8 show OLS estimates with the health de ciency index as the dependent variable when restricting to patients only. Linkages from the
     1881, 1891, and 1901 censuses, respectively, to hospital records up to 10 years a er the census enumeration date are shown in columns 1
     to 3 (and 5 to 7). e samples consists of all individuals enumerated at ages 0 to 5 in the County of London in households with at least one
     patient admi ed to the hospital at ages 0 to 11 years old no more than 10 years a er the census enumeration date. Columns 4 and 8 pool
     together the samples in the preceding columns. All regressions include age-at-enumeration by census year xed e ects. Columns 1 to 4
     cluster standard errors by household while columns 5 to 8 report heteroskedasticity robust standard errors.
     Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically signi cant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
    Table A7: Patient health de ciency index and likelihood of linkage to census

                                    Census year linked to hospital records
                                 (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)
                                1881           1891          1901           Any
 Health de ciency index        ­0.097         ­0.019        ­0.090**       ­0.059**
                               (0.069)        (0.038)       (0.040)        (0.026)
 Mean of Y                      0.265          0.272          0.251         0.263
 N                             4,758          12,355         9,774         26,887

Notes: Columns 1 to 3 present results for linkages from the hospital records to the
1881, 1891, and 1901 censuses, respectively. e samples consists of all patients ad-
mi ed to the hospital at ages 0 to 11 years old no more than 10 years prior to the
census enumeration date and discharged from the hospital prior to the census enu-
meration date. Column 4 pools together the samples in the preceding columns.
Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically signi cant at the 1, 5, and 10
percent levels, respectively.




                                         50
           Table A8: Census-to-census linkage rates and patient vs. sibling di erences

                         Outcome year = 1901                   Outcome year = 1911
                            (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)               (5)
                           1881          1891           1881           1891              1901
                          Panel A: Census-to-census linkage rates for County of London
 No match                  0.332          0.284          0.364          0.319            0.258
 Multiple matches          0.169          0.180          0.151          0.170            0.164
 Unique match              0.498          0.535          0.485          0.511            0.579
 Baseline sample         814,157        976,877        814,157        976,877       1,059,496
                             Panel B: E ects of hospital admission on match success
 Patient                    0.023          0.024**        0.010         0.024**           0.020
                           (0.014)        (0.010)        (0.015)       (0.011)           (0.015)
 % e ect                   4.4            4.1            2.0            4.3               3.0
 Mean of Y                 0.531          0.597          0.508          0.559            0.653
 N                        5,447          8,338          5,447          8,338             4,432

Notes: Panel A presents census-to-census linkage rates for boys residing in the County of
London in the base-year census. See appendix A.1 for a description of the linkage proce-
dure. Panel B presents sibling xed e ects estimates with indicators for a unique match be-
tween censuses as the dependent variable. e sample includes male patients linked from
the hospital records to a census during childhood and their brother closest in age. Each re-
gression includes age-at-enumeration and birth order xed e ects, as well as standardized
measures of rst name frequency and an interaction of rst name and surname frequency.
Standard errors are clustered by childhood household.
Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically signi cant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
levels, respectively.




                                                51
       Table A9: Scaling of health estimates by intergenerational transmission of status

                                       (1)                     (2)                (3)
                                   White collar             Skilled +        Semi-skilled +
                                  Panel A: E ect of  change in health de ciency index
 Health de ciency index               ­0.016***              ­0.015**             ­0.013***
                                      (0.006)                (0.007)              (0.005)
 % e ect                               5.8                    2.8                 1.6
 Mean of Y                             0.273                  0.544               0.850
 N                                     3,996                  3,996               3,996
                                    Panel B: Intergenerational occupational elasticities
 Father's status                        0.251***               0.220***            0.184***
                                       (0.001)                (0.001)             (0.001)
 Mean of Y                              0.240                  0.488                0.805
 N                                   2,004,077              2,004,077            2,004,077
                                                    Panel C: Scaled e ects (%)
 Health de ciency index ()             6.3                     7.0                 7.3
 Patient                              16.2                    18.1                18.6

Notes: Estimates in Panel A represent the e ect of a 1 s.d. change in the health de ciency
index. Panel B presents estimates using data on males aged 0 to 11 linked from the 1881 to
the 1911 complete-count census. In each column, Father's status is an indicator for the fa-
ther's occupational status equivalent to the dependent variable. e regressions also con-
trol for an indicator for above-median sibship size, match quality dummies, as well as own
and father's birth year xed e ects. e sample restricts a ention to fathers and sons no
more than 20 years apart in age when occupational outcomes are observed. Panel C dis-
plays the coe cients in Panel A and the coe cients on the hospitalization indicator from
columns 1 to 3 in Table 2 scaled by the estimates in Panel B.
Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically signi cant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
levels, respectively.




                                               52
                                        Table A10: Intergenerational mobility matrix, sample vs. population

                                                         Father's occupational class                                          Total           N
                     Professional     Clerical      Skilled       Farmer      Semi-skilled    Unskilled    Farm laborer
                                                     Panel A: Sons in 1901/1911 (Patients and siblings, nal sample)
      Professional         0.0           5.5           3.4           5.6           3.7             1.4          0.0             3.6                95
      Clerical             0.0          41.4          15.9          22.2          23.3           17.7           0.0            23.4               611
      Skilled              0.0          18.9          40.3          16.7          20.2           24.7           0.0            26.9               701
      Farmer               0.0           1.1           0.6          20.4           1.8             0.3          0.0             1.5                38
      Semi-skilled         0.0          23.1          29.3          18.5          38.3           34.6           0.0            31.7               827
      Unskilled            0.0           7.6           9.1           1.9          11.1           19.7           0.0            10.8               282
      Farm laborer         0.0           2.5           1.4          14.8           1.6             1.7          0.0             2.0                52
      Total              100.0         100.0         100.0         100.0          100.0         100.0          100.0          100.0            2,606
      N                    0            476           832           54             888           356             0            2,606
53




                                                                    Panel B: Sons age 18 to 41 in 1911
      Professional        20.5           7.8           3.9            4.1           3.4            2.8           2.0            4.6           75,182
      Clerical            30.0          37.9          18.6           16.4          15.9           15.2          11.7           19.4          319,758
      Skilled             15.7          18.3          35.2           12.1          18.3           18.9          13.2           21.2          350,483
      Farmer               2.5           2.1           1.8           32.6           1.6            2.2           5.6            3.9           64,141
      Semi-skilled        22.3          23.4          28.3           18.5          47.8           35.8          29.4           34.0          560,377
      Unskilled            6.3           7.8           9.1            5.1           9.6           18.0          11.4            9.9          163,764
      Farm laborer         2.8           2.6           3.2           11.3           3.3            7.1          26.7            7.0          116,279
      Total              100.0         100.0         100.0          100.0         100.0         100.0          100.0          100.0        1,649,984
      N                 64,047        218,500       386,781        83,751        521,179       156,829        218,897       1,649,984

     Notes:     is table displays the transition matrix for intergenerational mobility between fathers and sons in the nal sample and the population.
     Panel A shows the occupational transition probabilities for patients and siblings in the nal sample observed in the 1901 or 1911 census, in com-
     parison to their fathers. Panel B presents occupational transition probabilities for fathers and sons across England from the 1881 to 1911 linked
     sample using the complete count les. e linked sample restricts a ention to sons age 18 to 41 in 1911 and fathers observed in 1881 within 20
     years of the son's age in 1911.
           Table A11: Benchmark for e ects on intergenerational mobility

                                   (1)         (2)              (3)           (4)
                                    Linked sample              England, 1881-1911
                                Class          Class         Class          Class 
                                         Panel A: Estimates of mobility rates
 Sample mean                     0.279          0.721          0.267            0.733
                              Panel B: E ects of poor health scaled by mobility rates
 Patient                         0.139          0.055          0.146            0.054
 Health de ciency index ()       0.050          0.019          0.052            0.019

Notes: Columns 1 and 2 of panel A present means of the dependent variable in the esti-
mation sample from columns 4 and 5 in Table 2. e dependent variables are indicators
for an individual who enters a lower occupational class than his father (column 1) or
an individual with the same or higher occupational class (column 2). Columns 3 and 4
show the sample means of downward and of upward mobility from the population of
fathers linked from the 1881 census to sons age 18 to 41 in the 1911 censuses. Columns
1 and 2 of panel B presents coe cients from columns 4 and 5 of Table 2 scaled by the
sample means in Panel A.




                                          54
              Table A12: Hetergeneity by severity, age at admission, and baseline SES

                            (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)            (6)
                          Scholar      White collar     Skilled +     Semi-skilled +     Class          Class 
                                        Panel A: Interaction with above vs. below median HDI
 Patient × low-HDI        ­0.023***       ­0.045***      ­0.032*         ­0.030**          0.047**      ­0.049**
                          (0.007)         (0.017)        (0.019)         (0.014)          (0.020)       (0.020)
 Patient × high-HDI       ­0.015*         ­0.035*        ­0.049**        ­0.039**          0.029        ­0.027
                          (0.009)         (0.019)        (0.023)         (0.016)          (0.022)       (0.022)
 P-value                    0.415          0.687          0.552           0.666            0.518         0.440
                               Panel B: Interaction with early (0-4) vs. late (5-11) childhood admissions
 Patient × [0-4]          ­0.023***       ­0.053**       ­0.057**        ­0.039**          0.036        ­0.038
                          (0.008)         (0.021)        (0.024)         (0.017)          (0.024)       (0.024)
 Patient × [5-11]         ­0.015**        ­0.033**       ­0.028          ­0.032**          0.037*       ­0.034*
                          (0.007)         (0.017)        (0.019)         (0.013)          (0.019)       (0.019)
 P-value                    0.370          0.451          0.334           0.732            0.978         0.891
                                          Panel C: Interaction with high vs. low parental SES
 Patient × low-SES        ­0.033***       ­0.049***      ­0.030          ­0.018            0.033*       ­0.033*
                          (0.008)         (0.019)        (0.022)         (0.017)          (0.017)       (0.017)
 Patient × high-SES       ­0.013*         ­0.032*        ­0.037*         ­0.040***         0.045*       ­0.045*
                          (0.007)         (0.019)        (0.021)         (0.014)          (0.024)       (0.024)
 P-value                    0.035          0.514          0.822           0.285            0.678         0.651
 Mean of Y                  0.745          0.273          0.544           0.850            0.279         0.721
 N                          4,832          3,996          3,996           3,996            2,606         2,606

Notes: Panel A presents estimates in which we interact the indicator for hospital patients with indicators for
being admi ed for conditions with above and below median health de ciency index. Panel B interacts the in-
dicator variable for hospitalization with separate indicators for early- (age 0 to 4) and late-childhood (age 5 to
11) admission, which are coded based on a patient's rst observed admission to a hospital. Panel C presents re-
sults from interacting the hospital indicator with indicators for high and low parental SES, where high SES is
de ned as having a father with a white collar or skilled occupation. In column 1, the dependent variable is an
indicator for school a endance in the sample of mixed gender patient vs. sibling comparisons corresponding
to column 5 of Table 3. Columns 2 to 6 present estimates for the outcomes variables shown in Table 2. Standard
errors are clustered by childhood household.
Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically signi cant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                        55
                  Table A13: Long-run outcomes: Robustness to selective mortality

                                 (1)          (2)              (3)            (4)          (5)              (6)
                              Baseline     Drop high        Drop low      Drop infant Drop multiple       Drop
                              Estimate     mortality        mortality     admission    admissions       contagious
                                                       Panel A: E ects on P(White collar)
 Health de ciency index       ­0.122***      ­0.159***      ­0.125***      ­0.135***       ­0.160***      ­0.164***
                              (0.044)        (0.051)        (0.045)        (0.047)         (0.048)        (0.053)
 Mean of Y                     0.273          0.270            0.279        0.276             0.268        0.275
                                                         Panel B: E ects on P(Skilled +)
 Health de ciency index       ­0.120**       ­0.162***      ­0.123**       ­0.097*         ­0.124**       ­0.141**
                              (0.053)        (0.058)        (0.054)        (0.054)         (0.056)        (0.061)
 Mean of Y                     0.544          0.545            0.546        0.550             0.539        0.542
                                                       Panel C: E ects on P(Semi-skilled +)
 Health de ciency index       ­0.104***      ­0.124***      ­0.102***      ­0.112***       ­0.105***      ­0.141***
                              (0.037)        (0.041)        (0.037)        (0.038)         (0.039)        (0.044)
 Mean of Y                     0.850          0.849            0.853        0.851             0.852        0.850
 N                             3,996          3,638            3,594        3,628             3,528        3,282
                                                         Panel D: E ects on P(Class )
 Health de ciency index         0.108**       0.102*            0.118**      0.092*          0.123**        0.092
                               (0.053)       (0.058)           (0.054)      (0.055)         (0.055)        (0.062)
 Mean of Y                     0.279          0.275            0.283        0.278             0.279        0.283
                                                          Panel E: E ects on P(Class )
 Health de ciency index       ­0.106**       ­0.109*        ­0.114**       ­0.096*         ­0.118**       ­0.107*
                              (0.053)        (0.058)        (0.054)        (0.055)         (0.055)        (0.062)
 Mean of Y                     0.721          0.726            0.717        0.721             0.721        0.718
 N                             2,606          2,360            2,346        2,356             2,310        2,126

Notes:    is table is identical to Table 4 with the exception that the treatment variable is changed from an indicator
for hospitalization to the continuous health de ciency index. Standard errors are clustered by childhood household.
Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically signi cant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                          56
                       Table A14: Long-run outcomes: Robustness to sample selection

                                (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)                  (5)            (6)            (7)
                             Baseline     Add multiple Add multiple    County of           Drop Guy's    Unique within Hospital-census
                             Estimate       siblings   patient hhlds. London only           Hospital     census county county match
                                                                  Panel A: E ects on P(White collar)
 Health de ciency index       ­0.122***      ­0.109***       ­0.106***        ­0.119**       ­0.132***       ­0.129***         ­0.157***
                              (0.044)        (0.042)         (0.041)          (0.048)        (0.048)         (0.047)           (0.056)
 Mean of Y                     0.273          0.274            0.274           0.281          0.278           0.277             0.287
                                                                    Panel B: E ects on P(Skilled +)
 Health de ciency index       ­0.120**       ­0.094*         ­0.085*          ­0.117**       ­0.150***       ­0.111**          ­0.159**
                              (0.053)        (0.049)         (0.048)          (0.057)        (0.056)         (0.055)           (0.065)
 Mean of Y                     0.544          0.543            0.543           0.551          0.553           0.544             0.554
                                                                 Panel C: E ects on P(Semi-skilled +)
 Health de ciency index       ­0.104***      ­0.078**        ­0.079**         ­0.109***      ­0.101***       ­0.090**          ­0.072
                              (0.037)        (0.034)         (0.034)          (0.039)        (0.039)         (0.039)           (0.046)
 Mean of Y                     0.850          0.848            0.849           0.860          0.857           0.850             0.861
 N                             3,996          4,828            4,870           3,270          3,596           3,578             2,568
                                                                    Panel D: E ects on P(Class )
 Health de ciency index        0.108**         0.085*          0.075*          0.095*         0.120**         0.083              0.091
                              (0.053)         (0.044)         (0.043)         (0.057)        (0.057)         (0.055)            (0.065)
 Mean of Y                     0.279          0.280            0.282           0.281          0.278           0.278             0.276
                                                                    Panel E: E ects on P(Class )
 Health de ciency index       ­0.106**       ­0.085*         ­0.075*          ­0.093         ­0.118**        ­0.084            ­0.098
                              (0.053)        (0.044)         (0.043)          (0.057)        (0.057)         (0.056)           (0.064)
 Mean of Y                     0.721          0.720            0.718           0.720          0.722           0.722             0.724
 N                             2,606          4,021            4,053           2,198          2,334           2,292             1,700

Notes:    is table is identical to Table 5 with the exception that the treatment variable is changed from an indicator for hospitalization to
the continuous health de ciency index. Standard errors are clustered by childhood household.
Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically signi cant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                       57
                                 Table A15: Robustness in schooling outcomes

                                 (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)             (5)                (6)
                             Column (5)       Drop high        Drop low      Drop infant    Drop multiple         Drop
                              Table 3         mortality        mortality     admissions      admissions         contagious
                                                         Panel A: Selective mortality and scarring
 Patient                       ­0.020***       ­0.019***        ­0.020***      ­0.018***       ­0.020***          ­0.020***
                               (0.006)         (0.006)          (0.006)        (0.007)         (0.006)            (0.006)
 Health de ciency index        ­0.061***       ­0.062***        ­0.062***      ­0.055**        ­0.063***          ­0.058***
                               (0.020)         (0.023)          (0.021)        (0.022)         (0.022)            (0.022)
 Mean of Y                      0.745            0.756             0.745         0.752           0.753             0.752
 N                              4,832            4,344             4,360         4,242           4,244             3,970
                                 (7)             (8)           (9)              (10)             (11)          (12)
                            Add multiple    Add multiple    County of        Drop Guy's     Unique within Hospital-census
                              siblings      patient hhlds. London only        Hospital      census county county match
                                                 Panel B: Sample selection and de nition of treatment
 Patient                       ­0.020***       ­0.020***        ­0.022***      ­0.023***       ­0.017***          ­0.021***
                               (0.006)         (0.006)          (0.007)        (0.006)         (0.006)            (0.007)
 Health de ciency index        ­0.057***       ­0.056***        ­0.060***      ­0.069***       ­0.054**           ­0.057**
                               (0.020)         (0.020)          (0.021)        (0.022)         (0.021)            (0.024)
 Mean of Y                      0.744            0.744             0.731         0.745           0.751             0.734
 N                              5,940            6,002             3,874         4,424           4,436             3,150

Notes: Each cell comes from a separate regression. Column 1 of panel A reproduces the main estimates for the schooling
outcomes from column 5 of Table 3, which is based on a sample of individuals aged 5 to 10 when enumerated in the census.
See Table 3 for a list of variables included in the regressions. See Tables 4 and 5 for a description of the sample restrictions
in the remaining columns and panels. Standard errors are clustered by childhood household.
Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically signi cant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.




                                                              58
          Table A16: Linkage rates to census records by hospital (males)

                                    Census year linked to hospital records
                            (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)
                           1881              1891             1901              Any
                                            Panel A: Barts hospital
 No match                  0.063             0.050            0.155            0.031
 Multiple matches          0.664             0.660            0.582            0.616
 Unique match              0.273             0.290            0.263            0.353
 Sibling present           0.257             0.265            0.222            0.334
 Patient matched           0.192             0.172            0.143            0.232
 Patient and sibling       0.078             0.074            0.036            0.117
 In nal sample             0.063             0.050            0.026            0.086
 Total admissions          8,441            11,551            4,850            14,221
                                       Panel B: GOSH for Sick Children
 No match                  0.069             0.064            0.213            0.044
 Multiple matches          0.664             0.657            0.559            0.622
 Unique match              0.267             0.279            0.229            0.334
 Sibling present           0.247             0.251            0.195            0.311
 Patient matched           0.181             0.150            0.116            0.204
 Patient and sibling       0.073             0.060            0.032            0.099
 In nal sample             0.059             0.045            0.024            0.078
 Total admissions          6,052             9,042            4,524            11,319
                                            Panel C: Guy's Hospital
 No match                  0.045             0.035            0.052            0.018
 Multiple matches          0.696             0.692            0.698            0.650
 Unique match              0.260             0.273            0.250            0.331
 Sibling present           0.243             0.244            0.214            0.309
 Patient matched           0.178             0.161            0.125            0.218
 Patient and sibling       0.071             0.069            0.036            0.109
 In nal sample             0.058             0.039            0.029            0.075
 Total admissions          1,410             2,530            1,295            2,908

Notes:     is table presents linkage rates from the hospital records to the censuses during
childhood and adulthood separately by hospital. See Table 1 for a description of each sam-
ple restriction.


                                            59
D     Appendix Figures

                    Figure A1: London hospital locations and surviving records




Notes: A map of central London marking the locations of hospitals in empirical sample (red squares and
triangle), general hospitals (squares symbol) and children's hospitals (triangle symbol). e subset of these
hospitals with surviving archival records is marked in green.




                                                    60
        Figure A2: Sample inpatient admission register from St. Bartholomew's Hospital




Notes: Sample page from inpatient admission register for St. Bartholomew's Hospital in London. Each
page contains the date of admission, the patient's name, age, complaint and address, the name of the ward
in which the patient was admi ed, the name of the physician or surgeon who treated the patient, and
the date of discharge or death. Source: Photographed by authors at St. Bartholomew's Hospital Archive
(archival reference number BH/M/3).




                                                   61
                        Figure A3: In-hospital mortality by age at admission

                              P(death in hospital)
                        .35

                         .3

                        .25

                         .2

                        .15

                         .1

                        .05

                         0
                              0              2           4             6          8   10   12
                                                               Age at admission


                                                             (a) Raw data

                              Estimated mortality rate
                        .35

                         .3

                        .25

                         .2

                        .15

                         .1

                        .05

                         0
                              0              2           4             6          8   10   12
                                                               Age at admission


                                                     (b) Regression adjusted

Notes: Panel A plots the in-hospital mortality rate by age at admission and Panel B presents regression-
adjusted estimates. Panel B plots estimated xed e ects on age at admission (with age 0 as the excluded cat-
egory) from a linear probability model which also includes admission year, hospital, gender, and number-
of-comorbidity xed e ects, as well as indicators for above or below median length of stay, being treated
by a doctor, and transferred to another hospital as covariates. We compute predicted mortality for age 0
by se ing all age xed e ects and evaluating the remaining variables in the model at their means, then
add the predicted value to each of the age xed e ects. e samples include data on all in-patients aged 0
to 11 born between 1869 and 1902, and admi ed between 1870 and 1902 to the Hospital for Sick Children
at Great Ormond Street, Guy's Hospital, or St. Bartholomew's Hospital, in London.




                                                                  62
                           Figure A4: In-hospital mortality by year of admission

                           P(death in hospital)
                     .3




                     .2




                     .1




                     0
                          1870        1875         1880       1885        1890    1895   1900   1905
                                                              Year of admission


                                                            (a) Raw data

                            Estimated mortality rate
                      .3




                      .2




                      .1




                      0




                     -.1
                           1870        1875        1880       1885        1890    1895   1900   1905
                                                              Year of admission


                                                       (b) Regression adjusted

Notes: Panel A plots the in-hospital mortality rate by year of admission and Panel B presents regression-
adjusted estimates. Panel B plots estimated xed e ects on year of admission (with 1870 as the excluded
category) from a linear probability model which also includes admission age, hospital, gender, and number-
of-comorbidity xed e ects, as well as indicators for above or below median length of stay, being treated
by a doctor, and transferred to another hospital as covariates. e samples include data on all in-patients
aged 0 to 11 born between 1869 and 1902, and admi ed between 1870 and 1902 to the Hospital for Sick
Children at Great Ormond Street, Guy's Hospital, or St. Bartholomew's Hospital, in London.




                                                                  63
                                                               Figure A5: Admissions by age group and period


                                                                    Fraction of sample
                                                0         .2           .4         .6         .8        1
                                          1
   Fraction of admissions by age group




                                         .75

                                                                                                               Age 0 to 2
                                                                                                               Age 3 to 5
                                          .5
                                                                                                               Age 6 to 8
                                                                                                               Age 9 to 11

                                         .25



                                          0
                                               5
                                                     1


                                                               6


                                                                        1



                                                                                   6




                                                                                                  2
                                               -7
                                                     -8


                                                           -8


                                                                       -9



                                                                                 -9




                                                                                                  -0
                                          70
                                                    76


                                                          82


                                                                     87



                                                                                92




                                                                                             97




                                                               Admission periods (18XX-XX)

Notes:     is gure provides a visualization of in-patient admissions by age group (0 to 2, 3 to 5, 6 to 8, and
9 to 11) and admission period (1870-75, 1876-81, 1882-86, 1887-91, 1892-96, 1897-1902). It uses data on all
in-patients aged 0 to 11 admi ed between 1870 and 1902 to the Hospital for Sick Children at Great Ormond
Street, Guy's Hospital, or St. Bartholomew's Hospital, in London.




                                                                                      64
                  Figure A6: Share of children living with a parent in 1881, by age


         P(Living with a parent)
    1



    .8



    .6



    .4



    .2



    0
         0         2         4        6         8         10       12        14        16        18
                                                Child's age

Notes:    is gure plots the share of children who were enumerated in the 1881 census in a household in
which at least one parent was present.     e sample consists of all households in the County of London.
Results are similar in the 1891 census.




                                                  65
            Figure A7: Labor force participation and school enrollment by age in 1881


         Labor force participation and school enrollment rates
     1

                                  School enrollment rate
    .8



    .6



    .4



    .2


            Labor force participation rate
     0
                6             8              10             12           14            16             18
                                                      Age

Notes:     is gure plots the labor force participation rate (solid lines) and school enrollment rate (dashed
line) by age (5 to 18) in the 1881 Population Census of England, for male individuals residing in the county
of London. An individual is considered in school if the census records their occupation as "scholar," or in
the labor force if any other gainful occupation (i.e. valid HISCO code) is recorded in the census. Results
are similar in the 1891 census.




                                                    66
         Figure A8: Density of health de ciency index in population vs. estimation sample


         Density of health deficiency index
    20
                                                                             Estimation sample
                                                                             All male patients


    15




    10




     5




     0
          0                .2              .4                 .6                .8                1
                                          Health deficiency index

Notes:   is gure presents a histogram of the health de ciency index for the population of male patients
admi ed to the hospitals in the full sample (white) and for the patients in the nal estimation sample
(solid).




                                                  67
               Figure A9: Robustness to changing Jaro-Winkler distance threshold

                                                                   White collar                    Skilled +                  Semi-skilled +
                                                      .05




                    Coefficient on hospital patient
                                                        0




                                                      -.05




                                                       -.1
                                                             0   .05    .1    .15   .2   0   .05      .1       .15   .2   0   .05      .1       .15   .2
                                                                         Maximum Jaro-Winkler distance for matching names


                                                                       (a) Individual occupational outcomes

                                                                   Class down                      Class up                         Schooling
                                                        .1
                    Coefficient on hospital patient




                                                      .05




                                                        0




                                                      -.05




                                                       -.1
                                                             0   .05    .1    .15   .2   0   .05      .1       .15   .2   0   .05      .1       .15   .2
                                                                         Maximum Jaro-Winkler distance for matching names


                                                                   (b) Intergenerational/schooling outcomes

Notes:     is gure presents estimated coe cients on the patient indicator variable and 95-percent con -
dence intervals from separate regressions in which we decrease the Jaro-Winkler distance threshold for
inclusion in the sample, moving from the right to the le side of the gures. e le side (x = 0) corre-
sponds to the restriction that names must match exactly across censuses and hospital-to-census linkages,
while the right side (x = 0.2) corresponds to the main sample where Jaro-Winkler distances of up to 0.2 are
tolerated. Panel A presents the individual occupational outcomes and panel B presents the intergenera-
tional outcomes and school a endance results. See Table 2 for a description of the empirical speci cations.




                                                                                              68
                                                                  Figure A10: Robustness to changing similar names threshold

                                                        White collar                  Skilled +                 Semi-skilled +                                                                    White collar                  Skilled +                 Semi-skilled +
                                         .05                                                                                                                                       .05
       Coefficient on hospital patient




                                                                                                                                                 Coefficient on hospital patient
                                           0                                                                                                                                         0




                                         -.05                                                                                                                                      -.05




                                          -.1                                                                                                                                       -.1
                                                4   8       15     50   1000 4    8      15       50   1000 4   8      15       50   1000                                                 4   8       15     50   1000 4    8      15       50   1000 4   8      15       50   1000
                                                                          Number of similar records                                                                                                                 Number of similar records



                                                          (a) Individual (JW = 0.05)                                                                                                                (b) Individual (JW = 0.10)

                                                        Class down                    Class up                      Schooling                                                                     Class down                    Class up                      Schooling
                                           .1                                                                                                                                        .1
       Coefficient on hospital patient




                                                                                                                                                 Coefficient on hospital patient




                                         .05                                                                                                                                       .05




                                           0                                                                                                                                         0




                                         -.05                                                                                                                                      -.05




                                          -.1                                                                                                                                       -.1
                                                4   8       15     50   1000 4    8      15       50   1000 4   8      15       50   1000                                                 4   8       15     50   1000 4    8      15       50   1000 4   8      15       50   1000
                                                                          Number of similar records                                                                                                                 Number of similar records



       (c) Intergenerational/schooling (JW = 0.05)                                                                                               (d) Intergenerational/schooling (JW = 0.10)

Notes:     is gure presents estimated coe cients on the patient indicator variable and 95-percent con-
  dence intervals from separate regressions in which we vary the number of similar names within one
year of birth allowed for a uniquely matched record to be included in the sample. Moving from the le to
the right side of the gures, we increase the number of similar records allowed from 4 to 1000. In panels
A and C, similar names are de ned as di ering in Jaro-Winkler scores by less than 0.05 for the rst and
last names compared to the name of the matched individual, while in panels B and D the threshold for
the di erences in Jaro-Winkler scores threshold is changed to 0.10.      e main speci cation corresponds
to the estimates with 20 similar names and a Jaro-Winkler threshold of 0.10. Panels A and B present the
individual occupational outcomes and panels C and D present the intergenerational outcomes and school
a endance results. See Table 2 for a description of the empirical speci cations.




                                                                                                                                            69
