                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   WHAT DIFFERENCE DOES A DIAGNOSIS MAKE? EVIDENCE FROM MARGINAL
                              PATIENTS

                                         Mattan Alalouf
                                          Sarah Miller
                                        Laura R. Wherry

                                      Working Paper 26363
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26363


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019


This work benefited from helpful comments from seminar participants at the University of
Michigan, UCLA, Harvard Kennedy School, UC Santa Barbara, CU Denver and the NBER
Health Economics Summer Institute group. We would also like to thank Doug Bell, Marianne
Bitler, John Mafi, Tannaz Moin, and Yusuke Tsugawa for helpful conversations, as well as
Amanda Do, Rob Follett, and Javier Sanz for their help in accessing and interpreting the UCLA
medical records data. An additional thank you to Sonia Iyengar for research assistance. Laura
Wherry benefited from non-financial support from the California Center for Population Research
at UCLA (CCPR), which receives core support (R24-HD041022) from the Eunice Kennedy
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD). Research with
UCLA medical records data was supported by NIH National Center for Advancing Translational
Science (NCATS) UCLA CTSI Grant Number UL1TR001881. Mattan Alalouf was supported by
the National Institute on Aging of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number
T32AG000221. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily
represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Mattan Alalouf, Sarah Miller, and Laura R. Wherry. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Difference Does a Diagnosis Make? Evidence from Marginal Patients
Mattan Alalouf, Sarah Miller, and Laura R. Wherry
NBER Working Paper No. 26363
October 2019
JEL No. I1,I12

                                           ABSTRACT

Over the past 30 years, the criteria used to diagnose many illnesses have been relaxed, resulting
in millions more relatively healthy individuals receiving treatment. This paper explores the
impact of receiving a diagnosis of a common disease among such "marginally ill" patients. We
apply a regression discontinuity design to the cutoff in blood sugar levels used to classify patients
as having diabetes. We find that a marginally diagnosed patient with diabetes spends $1,097
more on drugs and diabetes-related care annually after diagnosis, but find no corresponding
changes in self-reported health or healthy behaviors. These increases in spending persist over the
6-year period we observe the patients. These marginally diagnosed patients experience improved
blood sugar after the first year of diagnosis, but this improvement does not persist in subsequent
years. Other clinical measures of health, such as BMI, blood pressure, cholesterol, and mortality
show no improvement. The diagnosis rates for preventable disease-related conditions such as
diabetic retinopathy, neuropathy, and kidney disease increase following a diagnosis, likely due to
more intensive screening. Our results imply that a small relaxation in the diagnosis cutoff would
increase total spending on diabetes-related care by about $2.4 billion annually and minimally
impact patient health.

Mattan Alalouf                                    Laura R. Wherry
University of Michigan                            University of California at Los Angeles
mattan@umich.edu                                  lwherry@mednet.ucla.edu

Sarah Miller
Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street Ann
Arbor, MI 48109 and
NBER
mille@umich.edu
    Since the late 1990s, the criteria for diagnosing several chronic diseases have been relaxed, creat-

ing millions of new patients who were considered healthy under previous diagnosis guidelines. For

example, new guidelines on diagnosing hypertension outlined by the American College of Cardiology

and the American Heart Association in 2017 increased the number of patients with hypertension by

over 40 percent, resulting in an additional 31 million Americans recommended to receive treatment for

the disease (Muntner et al., 2018; Whelton et al., 2018). These guideline redefinitions can have outsized

impacts on the composition of sick patients because patients diagnosed with an illness disproportion-

ately have lab values that fall near the threshold for diagnosis. The trend towards diagnosing and

treating progressively healthier patients has led some researchers in the medical field to express con-

cern that such interventions may be, at best, wasteful, if not actually harmful and counterproductive

(Welch et al., 2011).

    This paper explores the impact of a diagnosis on such "marginally" sick patients by exploiting a

cutoff in the diagnosis criteria for a common chronic illness, diabetes mellitus. Diabetes is a condition

characterized by the body's inability to regulate blood sugar and its diagnosis presents an ideal sce-

nario in which to explore the treatment of marginally diagnosed patients for several reasons. First, it

is a common disease, making it an empirically relevant example; over 24 million individuals in the

United States are currently diagnosed with diabetes, and annual spending on medical care related to

diabetes and complications of diabetes is estimated at $237 billion, with over $50 billion spent on in-

sulin and diabetes-controlling drugs alone (American Diabetes Association, 2018b). Second, diabetes

is diagnosed using a sharp cutoff in blood sugar levels, which are smoothly distributed in the pop-

ulation, allowing us to compare the effect of diagnosis for patients with similar underlying health.

The American Diabetes Association (ADA) recommends diagnosing diabetes in patients whose gly-

cated hemoglobin (A1c) levels are at or above 6.5% (American Diabetes Association, 2018b). Patients

with A1c values just below this threshold are otherwise similar to those with A1c values just above

the threshold, but may receive very different types of care because they are not considered to have

diabetes. Finally, the blood test used to diagnosis diabetes is difficult to manipulate, making both

self-selection by patients and strategic coding by providers extremely unlikely.

    Marginally diagnosed patients are a relevant group to study because they represent a large frac-

tion of those diagnosed with any given disease due to the underlying distribution of health in the

population (Welch et al., 2011). In our setting, most people have blood glucose levels in or near the

normal range, and blood glucose levels in the extremes are rare. As a result, even though spending is


                                                   1
relatively low among the "marginal" patients with diabetes whose A1c falls just above the threshold,

they have an outsized impact on total costs due to their large numbers. The distribution of A1c values

makes it clear why patients near the cutoff are disproportionately represented among those with dia-

betes: in our data, over one quarter of all patients whose first A1c test puts them in the diabetes range

have an A1c value within 0.1 percentage points of the cutoff, and over 15 percent have an A1c value

of 6.5%, the lowest possible value one can receive and still be considered to have diabetes.

     We use claims data from a large national insurer to examine the impact of receiving a diagnosis

of diabetes on such marginally diagnosed patients. We explore the impact of a diagnosis on different

types of spending, use of care, and on clinical measures of health (blood sugar, cholesterol, and mor-

tality). We also use matched survey data to examine how the diagnosis affects self-reported health

and healthy behaviors. In addition, we examine data from electronic health records to measure the

impact of a diagnosis on two additional clinical measures of health, BMI and blood pressure. We im-

plement this analysis with a regression discontinuity design using A1c values from an initial blood

test and follow patients' outcomes over the next six years. We require individuals to be in the sample

for at least one year prior to the initial A1c test in order to exclude those with previous diagnoses of

diabetes. This also allows us to test for and rule out pre-test differences in utilization for patients on

either side of the cutoff.

     We find that patients with initial A1c values that fall right above the 6.5% threshold are 11 per-

centage points more likely to have a diabetes diagnosis appear on their health insurance claim in the

first year following the initial test.1 Receiving a diagnosis at the cutoff is associated with approxi-

mately $1,097 additional spending on recommended diabetes-related care and $139 in endocrinology

specialty care during that first year. Spending increases related to office-based care and laboratory

tests are particularly large (representing most of the observed increase in spending), although we

also detect increases in the probability of purchasing a diabetes-related drugs and spending on vision

screening. Notably, this elevated rate of spending for patients with A1c values just above the threshold

persists for all six years that we observe patients; there is no evidence that patients with slightly lower

A1c values catch up, despite the natural progression of disease that leads many who were initially

below the cutoff to be diagnosed at later points during our study period. It appears that receiving a

"marginal" diagnosis sets patients on a path of persistently higher spending.

     The rates of diagnoses for complications related to diabetes (diabetic retinopathy, neuropathy, and
   1 A patient who receives an A1c value at or above 6.5% may not be counted in this diagnosis if, for example, their provider

chose not to classify them as having diabetes or if the patient did not seek any follow-up care that would result in a claim.


                                                              2
diabetic kidney disease) also increase for individuals right above the cutoff, likely due to increased in-

teraction with the health care system and more intensive screening. We see no evidence that diagnosis

rates for these complications fall over time among the marginally diagnosed group, nor do we find

changes in the rates of serious, life-threatening complications related to diabetes (diabetic coma and

ketoacidosis). We also find no evidence of changes in self-reported health or in healthy behaviors

such as diet, exercise, drinking alcohol, or smoking following the initial lab test, even though clin-

ical practice recommendations include lifestyle education and management for patients regarding

diet, exercise, alcohol intake and smoking. We find short-term improvements in blood sugar among

marginally diagnosed patients, but these improvements do not persist past the first year, despite the

persistence of higher levels of diabetes-related medical spending over the entire period. We also find

no evidence of improvements in total cholesterol or mortality. Using electronic health records data

available for up to three years following the initial lab test, we find no evidence of improvements in

BMI or blood pressure during this period.

     Taken together, our results imply that further relaxation of the diagnosis guidelines would result

in higher costs with minimal health improvements in the short term. Our spending results suggest

that relaxing the diagnosis threshold further, from 6.5 to 6.4, would increase diabetes-related spending

by at least $2.4 billion annually and generate only short-lived improvements in patient health over a

6-year period. At the same time, tightening the diagnosis criteria by moving the threshold from 6.5 to

6.6 would reduce spending by about $1.8 billion annually.

     Our analysis builds on existing work in economics that evaluates the impact of diagnoses and

subsequent care on health. One of the first studies in this literature documents that infants born near

the diagnosis threshold for "very low birthweight" (birthweights of less than 1500g) receive more

intensive medical care and experience a reduction in infant mortality (Almond et al., 2010).2 More

recent work examining other types of medical conditions also highlights that there may important

effects on patient behavior, as well as psychological effects of diagnosis. For instance, among female

students in New York City who receive BMI report cards with weight classifications, those with values

of BMI just above an "overweight" threshold experience small increases in BMI and body weight during

the subsequent year compared to those just below the threshold (Almond et al., 2016). However,

individuals receiving a diagnosis of abdominal aortic aneurysm and told they will receive increased
   2 Follow up work has found evidence of longer-run effects of this diagnosis on health and human capital outcomes in the

U.S., Chile, and Norway (Bharadwaj et al., 2013; Chyn et al., 2019), indicating high cumulative returns to spending on this
margin.



                                                            3
monitoring in a Swedish screening program have improved psychological well-being, compared to

those just missing the diagnosis criteria but informed that they are at risk (Dahlberg et al., 2016).3

     Most relevant to this paper, recent work by Iizuka et al. (2017) uses an identification strategy sim-

ilar to ours to examine the use of health care around the diabetes and lower "pre-diabetes" thresholds

using data from Japan. The authors find that patients who exceed the pre-diabetes threshold have

small but statistically significant increases in diabetes-related doctor visits and outpatient medical

spending in the following year. They find no evidence, however, that this increased utilization leads

to improvements in health over the short- or medium-term. In addition, the authors find no evidence

that patients with test values above the diabetes threshold receive more care or see health improve-

ments. However, they provide evidence that this latter diagnostic threshold is not frequently used in

their setting.

     In addition, using a similar design, Kim et al. (2019) examine the effects of diagnoses of diabetes,

obesity, and hyperlipidemia under a national health screening program in Korea on health, healthy

behaviors, and health care utilization. The authors test for discontinuities at "medium risk" and "high

risk" thresholds for diabetes, noting that individuals diagnosed as high risk are also prompted to un-

dergo a free secondary examination with recommendations for treatment, if needed. They find that

high risk individuals are more likely to take diabetes medication and experience weight loss in the

short-run. The authors find no effects on healthy behaviors and the effects on weight loss appear

to dissipate in the long-run (3-4 years after testing). They find no effects for individuals receiving a

medium risk diagnosis for diabetes, and little evidence of effects of diagnoses of obesity or hyperlipi-

demia.

     Our work is similar to these studies but differs in several important ways. In contrast to Iizuka

et al. (2017), we focus on the higher cutoff for the actual diagnosis of diabetes and its treatment, rather

than pre-diabetes and the use of preventive care. While the standard of care for pre-diabetes in Japan is

limited to a recommended physician visit (Iizuka et al., 2017), a diagnosis of diabetes in the U.S. carries

recommendations for more extensive intervention including comprehensive and ongoing surveillance

and management, initiation of drug therapy, aggressive treatment for comorbidities such as hyperten-

sion, and significant lifestyle changes that may be more relevant for long-term health. Indeed, we

observe increases in spending at the diabetes diagnosis threshold that are 11 to 18 times larger in size
   3 Other examples include: Zhao et al. (2013) find that individuals in China with systolic blood pressure above the hyper-

tension diagnosis cutoff reduce their fat intake upon receiving a diagnosis; and, Oster (2018) documents that U.S. households
in which someone was recently diagnosed with diabetes exhibit small reductions in their purchases of unhealthy food.



                                                             4
than those documented in Iizuka et al. (2017) at the prediabetes threshold.4 Our paper also contrasts

with Kim et al. (2019) in that we are able to incorporate information on costs of care to document

changes in spending; we also have a much larger sample (approximately 142,500 individuals with

lab values near the diabetes cutoff versus fewer than 5,000 in Kim et al., 2019), which provides more

power to detect changes in health measures (e.g. blood sugar, cholesterol) that were not statistically

significant in their analysis. In addition, our context is the United States, which differs substantially

from Japan and Korea both in terms of health policy and population health. Finally, our paper builds

on this prior work by extending the period of analysis to six years after the patient receives her first

lab test. We show that even over this longer time horizon, the spending effects of a diagnosis persist

without any sustained improvements in the health outcomes observed in the data.

     Finally, our work also contributes to a literature in economics devoted to measuring the marginal

impact of additional medical care. This work seeks to disentangle patient selection into care from the

benefit of the care itself, usually with the goal of determining whether certain types of care reflect

wasteful "flat of the curve" spending. In general, the results that have been previously documented

on this topic are mixed, with some studies showing large benefits of additional medical spending (e.g.

Doyle, 2011; Doyle et al., 2015) and other papers showing limited or no benefit associated with addi-

tional spending (e.g. Fisher et al., 2003a,b; Frakes, 2013). A limitation in the existing literature is that

much of it focuses on care for the onset of acute conditions (such as heart attack or hip fracture) and

mortality, with very little attention to treatment for chronic illnesses and more intermediate outcomes.

This paper contributes to this literature in three ways: first, we evaluate the marginal benefit of disease

care and management for a common chronic illness that affects a large share of the population. Un-

derstanding the marginal impact of this type of care is particularly relevant given that treatment for

chronic illnesses represents a substantial fraction of total medical spending (e.g. 86 percent of health

care spending is for patients with one or more chronic illnesses, see Gerteis et al., 2014) and that over

100 million individuals in the United States are diagnosed with diabetes or pre-diabetes (Centers for

Disease Control and Prevention, 2017). Second, our data permit us to observe a variety of intermediate

outcomes, such as blood sugar, cholesterol, and disease complications, that may be more responsive

to interventions than mortality. Finally, we are able to look at the benefits of medical intervention over

a longer time horizon to understand the dynamic nature of these types of health investments.
   4 Table 2 in Iizuka et al. (2017) reports effects on diabetes-related outpatient spending ranging from 1249 Japanese Yen, or

$11.43, to 1968 Japanese Yen, or $18.01. In contrast, we find a reduced form increase in spending of $207.61 at the diabetes
cutoff.



                                                              5
1    Background
Many chronic illnesses are diagnosed by comparing the outcome of a laboratory test to a "cutoff"

value specified in guidelines created by health or medical associations.5 To diagnose type 2 diabetes,

physicians primarily rely on a measure of blood sugar called glycated hemoglobin A1c ("A1c"), which

is collected via a blood draw. A1c measures the exposure of hemoglobin cells to plasma glucose (blood

sugar) over the past three months. Normal A1c levels range from 4.0% to 5.6%. High A1c levels are

considered a marker of diabetes, as they indicate poor control of glucose.

     Although diabetes may be diagnosed using alternative tests of single or episodic glucose levels,

A1c tests are considered the preferred diagnostic tool since they measure chronic glycemic exposure.6

The International Expert Committee recommended A1c as a superior method to diagnose diabetes in

a 2009 consensus report, noting that it is convenient (does not require the patient to fast) and more

stable (less fluctuation within and between days).7 Using data from cross-sectional epidemiological

studies, this committee observed that the rate of any retinopathy, a long-term complication of diabetes,

"increases substantially at A1c values starting between 6.0 and 7.0%." The committee also noted that

when A1c levels were examined in 0.5% increments, the incidence of diabetes-specific "moderate"

retinopathy noticeably increases at A1c levels 6.5%.8 They concluded that this justifies assigning an

A1c cutoff value of 6.5% for the diagnosis of diabetes, although they note that "this cut point should

not be construed as an absolute dividing line between normal glycemia and diabetes." The committee

also emphasized that while there is evidence for a continuum of risk for the development of diabetes

based on A1c levels, "there does not appear to be a specific level at which risk for diabetes clearly

begins" (The International Expert Committee, 2009).9

     Concordant with the IEC guidelines, the American Diabetes Association subsequently issued the
    5 Interestingly, recent work suggests that additional discontinuities may also exist in terms of who is tested due to rules

of thumb used by physicians for administering diagnostic tests. Coussens (2018) finds that, in the emergency department
setting, physicians use heuristics based on patient age when determining whether to test for ischemic heart disease, resulting
in a discontinuity in diagnosis for this condition.
    6 Other tests that can be used to screen for diabetes are the measurement of fasting plasma glucose (FPG) and plasma

glucose during a two-hour oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). The OGTT is not commonly used other than among pregnant
women to screen for gestational diabetes.
    7 The IEC was convened in 2008 to consider the diagnosis of diabetes among nonpregnant individuals. Members were

appointed by the American Diabetes Association, the European Association for the Study of Diabetes, and the International
Diabetes Federation.
    8 The analysis included data on approximately 28,000 individuals from nine countries. The IEC also considered specificity

and sensitivity and relied on a receiver operating characteristic curve analysis when determining the optimal cutpoint.
    9 A study by Tsugawa et al. (2012) examines the validity of the new diagnostic threshold by examining the association

between A1c values and the 3-year incidence of retinopathy among a cohort of Japanese adults. The authors do find an
increase in risk for those with A1c levels of 6.5-6.9% relative to 5.0-5.4%. However they do not find evidence of an explicit
threshold effect of A1c.



                                                              6
recommendation of a diagnosis of diabetes if a patient's A1c is greater than or equal to 6.5% (Amer-

ican Diabetes Association, 2010).10 Once diagnosed, recommended care includes a comprehensive

medical evaluation to form a care management plan, annual diagnostic tests (urinary albumin, lipid

panel, glomerular filtration rate) to detect comorbid conditions or complications, A1c monitoring at

least twice per year, antidiabetic medication, statin therapy (for those age 40 and above),11 annual as-

sessment for diabetic retinopathy by an ophthalmologist, annual comprehensive foot evaluation, and

receipt of flu, pneumonia, and hepatitis B vaccines (American Diabetes Association, 2017). Patients

are also advised to engage in regular exercise (2-3 times per week), decrease sedantary behavior, eat

a healthful diet, and quit smoking if relevant. In addition, the ADA recommends that patients with

diabetes receive more aggressive treatment for comorbid conditions. For example, patients with di-

abetes with blood pressure above 140/90 mmHg should have prompt initiation of drug therapy at

the "maximum tolerated dose" to achieve blood pressure goals, while patients at high risk for kidney

disease require additional monitoring and treatment.

    Because individuals with A1c values falling just below or above the 6.5 threshold have similar

underlying health, we can use the cutoff in diabetes classification to evaluate the impact of receiving

a diabetes diagnosis on the health care utilization and associated costs, health, and behaviors for

patients at the margin of being diagnosed. Patients whose A1c falls below 6.5, but at or above 5.7, are

considered to have "pre-diabetes," with impaired glucose tolerance and at a higher risk of developing

diabetes in the future. As such, they also receive some care aimed at lowering their risk for developing

diabetes; specifically, the ADA recommends that the patients have their A1c tested annually and that

the provider counsel them to make lifestyle changes such as losing weight and increasing exercise.

The ADA also recommends that drug therapy should be discussed as an option for certain risk groups

(e.g., those with a BMI of at least 35). Our analyses will document the average difference in utilization

and spending for individuals on the margin of receiving diagnoses of pre-diabetes versus diabetes.

    Understanding the effect of a diabetes diagnosis for a marginally diagnosed patient is particularly

interesting because of the underlying distribution of A1c in the population of those who are tested. In

our data, comprised of claims from a large health insurer, among patients receiving a test and whose

A1c level meets the diagnostic threshold for diabetes, over 25 percent have a blood test between 6.5%
  10 Beginning in 2011, the ADA guidelines specify a value of 6.5% or higher on two separate tests be used to diagnose

diabetes, unless the patient exhibits "unequivocal" hyperglycemia. However, in practice, we do not find that patients are
receiving multiple tests. For example, in our data, less than 0.5% of patients who received an A1c value of 6.5 received a
follow-up test within two weeks.
  11 This guideline for statin therapy was recommended in 2013 by the American College of Cardiology and the American

Heart Association and confirmed by the American Diabetes Association at the end of 2014.


                                                            7
and 6.6%, inclusive. Although these patients are the healthiest within the diabetes group, they have

the potential to have an outsized impact on total spending because of their large numbers. In addition,

most discussions about changing treatment guidelines involve adjusting diagnosis criteria around the

"margins" of existing rules.


2     Data

2.1    OptumInsight Claims

To assess the impact of a diagnosis on health care utilization and spending, self-reported health and

healthy behaviors, and subsequent lab values (blood sugar and total cholesterol), we use the Optu-

mInsight (Optum) database from 2009 to 2017.12 Optum provides claims data from a large health

insurance company; over our sample period, 61 million patients are included in these data. The data

include all claims associated with these patients that are paid for by the health insurance company.

The claims data include procedure and diagnosis codes, as well as the date the procedure occurred

and the cost of the claim (including the amount paid by the patient and by the insurance company); for

pharmacy claims, the data include the national drug code, quantity dispensed, and cost. Additionally,

the data contain some limited information on demographic characteristics of the patient, such as age

and gender. Optum data are primarily composed of private or employer-sponsored health insurance

plans, but includes some Medicare Advantage plans as well (see Table 1).

      When an A1c test is used for diagnosis, the provider sends a blood sample to a lab for evaluation.

In the Optum data, we observe the lab test results for laboratories that are affiliated with Optum. We

do not observe test results for unaffiliated laboratories, although we do see spending associated with

these tests. In nearly all cases, lab test results are rounded to the nearest 0.1 percent; for the small

number of lab results that are reported with greater precision, we round to the nearest 0.1 percent so

the data are comparable across all labs reported.

      The data include unique patient identifiers that allow us to track patient spending and utilization

over time. We are able to track patient spending if patients change insurance plans as long as the

insurance plan is offered by an insurance company associated with Optum. If patients drop their

insurance coverage, or switch to an insurance plan offered by a different company, we are no longer

able to observe them in the data. However, Optum provides records of patients' enrollment, so we
  12 Although OptumInsight data are available for earlier years, we use only individuals with the initial A1c test taken in

2009 or later because this was the first year that the A1c test was recommended for the diagnosis of diabetes.




                                                            8
can distinguish patients who dropped coverage from patients who had no claims in a given year. We

do not find any evidence of differential attrition from the sample based on A1c value relative to the

diagnosis threshold (see Section 5.2). Therefore, as described in more detail below, we include patients

in analyses for all years when they are enrolled in an Optum plan, regardless of whether they exit at

a later point during the sample period. In Section 5, we examine the sensitivity of our estimates to

restricting the analysis to members enrolled during the entire sample period.

    To construct our sample, we pull all adult patients in Optum who have an A1c test at an Optum

affiliated lab during our study period. From this group, we drop individuals who had a diagnosis of

diabetes on their claim at any time before their first observed A1c test in order to eliminate patients

who are receiving the test for monitoring, rather than the diagnosis of, diabetes.13 We also exclude

individuals with a pregnancy-related diagnosis during the year prior to their first A1c test in order to

drop cases associated with gestational diabetes, which has different treatment and diagnostic guide-

lines than type 2 diabetes (Vandorsten et al., 2013). We further restrict to patients who are in the sample

at least 12 months prior to and 12 months following the initial lab test in order to observe their annual

spending before and after the test. This leaves us with 142,541 patients in year 1 (the calendar year

following the initial lab test). Figure A1 in the Appendix provides a diagram of our sample definition

with patient counts for each exclusion criterion.

    We observe patients for up to 6 years following their initial test. For subsequent years following

the initial test, we require that patients are enrolled in an Optum plan for at least half the year to

be included in the analysis. We define year relative to the date of the initial test. For example, if an

individual was tested on March 1, 2010 we would consider the first year after the test to be March 2,

2010 through March 1, 2011. For patients enrolled in an Optum plan for less than a year, we scale their

spending proportionally to their enrollment time in order to annualize the outcome. For example, if

the patient is enrolled for 6 months and spends $300, we double spending to $600 to account for the

fact that we observe only one half of the year's spending.

    In our first stage analysis, we estimate the change in the diagnosis of diabetes at the A1c cutoff

value of 6.5%. We define the diagnosis of diabetes as the presence of any claim with a diagnosis

code for diabetes during the first year following the test. In later analyses, we also examine how

the likelihood of diagnosis evolves over time by looking at the cumulative likelihood of diagnosis

through year 2, year 3, etc. Our primary outcome measures look at spending for all types of care
  13 Although we are examining A1c tests starting in 2009 only, we have Optum claims dating back to 2001 and the entire

period of claims data is used to implement this sample restriction.


                                                          9
recommended for patients with diabetes by the American Diabetes Association (ADA). This includes

doctor office visits and consultations related to diabetes; spending on diabetes-controlling drugs such

as metformin; spending on two other types of drugs that are commonly prescribed for diabetes: statins

and ACE inhibitors; lab tests for relevant conditions; and spending related to vision testing for diabetic

retinopathy. We examine total spending on recommended care as well as each category individually.

We also examine spending on endocrinology specialty care, which is not specifically recommended,

but that may be affected by a diabetes diagnosis. In addition, we evaluate how receiving a diagnosis

affects the quantity of care received by looking at the number of diabetes-related visits, the number of

A1c or glucose lab tests, indicators that either of these two outcomes are positive, and an indicator for

the presence of any spending on diabetes-controlling drugs.

    Next, we evaluate changes in diabetes-related conditions and overall health at the cutoff. We first

examine indicators for diagnoses of five conditions associated with uncontrolled diabetes: diabetic

retinopathy, neuropathy, kidney disease, diabetic coma, and diabetic ketoacidosis. Finally, we exam-

ine changes in individuals' A1c scores and total cholesterol from their baseline levels taken on the

date of the first test (for A1c) or the year prior to the first test (for total cholesterol). Individuals with

initial A1c test values just above the diagnostic cutoff have a significantly greater number of A1c tests

in subsequent years but are not more likely to have any A1c test (see Appendix Table A17). To address

this, we randomly select one A1c test per individual per year. For consistency across measures, we

similarly select a random total cholesterol value in each year following the initial A1c test, although

there does not appear to be a statistically significant larger number of tests for this measure at the

diagnosis cutoff (see Appendix Table A17). Since we require individuals to be in the sample for at

least one year following the initial test, we examine mortality in years 2 and later. Additional details

on the diagnosis and procedure codes used to construct the outcome variables may be found in Ap-

pendix Table A1. Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the Optum patients in the left panel. Of

these patients, 52 percent are female, average age is 51.1 years, and 28 percent are enrolled in a Medi-

care Advantage plan with the remaining on individual private plans (such as those purchased from

the Affordable Care Act health insurance exchanges) or employer-sponsored insurance. Women are

slightly over-represented relative to men, likely because screening is recommended for women with a

previous diagnosis of gestational diabetes.




                                                     10
2.2    Health Risk Assessment Data

A small subset of Optum enrollees completes a Health Risk Assessment (HRA) survey in any given

year.14 This survey asks a wide range of questions about self-assessed health and behaviors and is

typically administered by the insurance company at the behest of an employer. As such, patients

who take the HRA are not necessarily representative of patients in the Optum database. The middle

panel of Table 1 presents statistics for the HRA sample. Because the HRA tends to be administered for

employers, the sample is composed almost entirely of individuals enrolled in private (non-Medicare)

insurance plans. This sample is also somewhat younger (44.2 years old on average) and more female

(55.4 percent). However, the characteristics of individuals who take the HRA appear to be balanced

across the A1c threshold (see Section 5). Therefore, our estimates provide an internally valid measure

of these self-assessed outcomes within the HRA subsample.

      A full list of variables considered from the HRA is found in Appendix Section 2. In order to avoid

conducting an excessive number of statistical tests, which might generate a large number of false

positives, and to improve our statistical power, we construct four summary indices for the following

question domains: self-assessed health, physical and emotional well-being, healthy diet and exercise

behavior, and smoking and drinking behavior. We do this by constructing a standardized z-score

(subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation) for each component and taking the

average. This applies equal weight to each index component and is similar to the approach used in

Finkelstein et al. (2012) and Kling et al. (2007). Positive values of the index indicate better outcomes

(i.e., better health or lower rates of unhealthy behavior).

2.3    Electronic Health Records Data

We supplement our analysis of the Optum data with information on additional health outcomes from

electronic health records (EHR) for patients receiving care in the University of California, Los Angeles

health system. UCLA implemented its current EHR program CareConnect, which uses Epic Systems

technology, on March 2, 2013. Our analysis uses UCLA data available after this date through 2016.

Like the Optum data, the UCLA data allow us to follow individual patients over time. We are able

to track a patient as long as they continue to have encounters within the UCLA health system, which

includes two large hospitals and over 170 primary care and specialty practices. There are records for
  14 SinceHRA survey responses are typically observed only once per year, we do not impose the 6-month enrollment
requirement described above for the Optum claims data; we include any patient with a survey response in any given year
for analyses using the HRA data.



                                                         11
approximately 1.2 million distinct patients during this period and these data include clinical health

measures recorded any time a patient visits a UCLA medical provider. We limit our sample to patients

with a primary care provider (PCP) at UCLA in order to increase the likelihood that we observe their

ongoing care. We explore differential attrition in Section 5.2 below.

    We construct an analytic sample using similar criteria to those used with the Optum data (see

appendix for additional details and Appendix Figure A2 for a flowchart). We present results for

individuals with A1c tests conducted in 2013 and later, allowing for up to 3 years of follow up. Our

outcomes of interest are two measures that are collected for a large percent of patients: body mass

index and blood pressure. The data also include some information on utilization of services (number

of encounters within the UCLA system), diagnoses, procedures, and prescription drugs, although

they do not include cost measures.

    Descriptive statistics from the UCLA data are presented in the third column of Table 1. The in-

dividuals in the UCLA data are relatively similar to those in the Optum data, although the average

age at first encounter is slightly lower at 47.2 years and small shares of the sample pay for care with

Medicaid or out of pocket.


3   Empirical Strategy
We use a regression discontinuity (RD) design framework to analyze the impact of a diagnosis of

diabetes across patients with similar underlying health. This is an example of a "fuzzy" regression

discontinuity design since a diabetes diagnosis may depend on patient- and physician-specific factors

separate from an A1c value. We estimate two versions of this model. The first version is a "reduced

form" model that looks at the change in the outcome at the cutoff. The second version is an instru-

mental variables estimate of the effect of receiving a diagnosis of diabetes, using the diagnostic cutoff

as an instrument for being diagnosed. To implement these analyses, we use local linear regression and

the Fuji et al. (2009) optimal bandwidth selector, although we also assess the sensitivity of our results

to alternative specification and bandwidths.

    If all patients with A1c values below the cutoff were not diagnosed with diabetes, and all patients

above the cutoff did receive a diagnosis, the reduced form and IV estimates would be identical. How-

ever, the change in the prevalence of a diagnosis does not change from 0 to 1 at the 6.5% threshold.

As will be seen in the analysis that follows, a non-trivial share of patients with an A1c value below

the threshold receive a diabetes diagnosis within the first year. This may be due to physician discre-


                                                   12
tion, but it may also the result of a later positive test. Clinical guidelines recommend that physicians

repeat the test in 3 to 6 months for patients with test values close to the threshold (American Diabetes

Association, 2018a).

    It is also the case that a sizeable share of individuals with values above the cutoff do not receive

a diabetes diagnosis. This may also result from physician discretion in assigning a diagnosis, but

it could also be due to measurement error. For instance, if physicians do not record the diagnosis

of diabetes on the claim or medical record, or a patient does not seek additional care after learning

about the diagnosis (and thus never generates additional claims), we would not be able to observe

that the patient is diagnosed. That is, some patients may not appear to have received the diagnosis

when, in fact, they did. In this case, our first stage would be attenuated and the IV estimate biased

upwards, as it scales the reduced form estimate by the observed (not actual) change in diagnosis

prevalence. To explore this further, we conduct a bounding exercise for the IV estimate in Appendix

Table A14 that assumes that all patients with A1c values at 6.5 and above receive a diabetes diagnosis,

regardless of whether we observe a diabetes diagnosis in their claims or medical record. This approach

naturally results in a larger first stage and smaller IV estimates; however, our results still indicate that

meaningful increases in spending occur at the diagnosis cutoff.

    A potential concern about the validity of our design is whether or not patients or physicians can

manipulate the test score in some way so as to generate selection across the threshold. However, due

to the nature of the test, this is unlikely in our setting. The patient's A1c reflects the plasma glucose

levels of the patient during the past 3 months, making the test difficult to manipulate with short term

changes to diet or exercise. In addition, the test values are reported to Optum or recorded in the

patient's medical record directly from the lab, making physician or patient manipulation impossible.

    The absence of manipulation is also apparent in the first panel of Figure 1, which shows the sample

size in the Optum data for each A1c value from the initial lab test. There are three noticeable features.

First, the density is smooth across the threshold, with no apparent evidence of bunching on either

side. Second, given the shape of the distribution of A1c values within the population of test takers, a

substantial fraction of patients whose A1c is at or above the threshold fall very close to the threshold.

Indeed, 15 percent of patients with A1c at or above 6.5% in the Optum data have an A1c of 6.5%

exactly; over 25 percent have an A1c value of 6.5% or 6.6%.

    We see similar patterns in the EHR data, presented in the second panel of Figure 1. The UCLA

sample appears healthier overall, with more of the distribution falling in the normal A1c range. This


                                                    13
could reflect differences in the underlying health of the UCLA population relative to the national

population captured in the Optum database, or it could reflect more aggressive A1c testing within the

UCLA health system. While these differences do not affect the internal validity of our estimates, they

could affect the generalizability of the results to other settings.

      An initial investigation revealed that there were some differences in baseline (pre-test) outcomes

measured during the year prior to the lab test associated with the diagnosis cutoff in the UCLA data.

We did not see a similar pattern in the Optum data (see later discussion of these tests in Section 5.1).

To account for this, we control for pre-test values of the outcome variable in all models with the UCLA

data. Similarly, the RD figures for this data source plot the residual from a regression on the pre-test

outcome measures.


4     Results

4.1    Short Run Effects: Year 1

We first analyze the impact of having an A1c value exceeding the 6.5% threshold on diabetes diagno-

sis and medical care spending in the first 12 months following the initial lab test. The first panel of

Figure 2 plots the rates of diagnosis by A1c value for the year following the initial test. We see a large

and discontinuous increase in diagnosis rates at the cutoff value of 6.5%. At the 6.5% value, diagno-

sis rates jump by over 10 percentage points. The second panel of Figure 2 shows average spending

on all recommended diabetes care. Here, we observe a clear discontinuous increase in spending at

the diagnosis threshold. The subsequent panels show the results for spending on specific types of

diabetes-related care: office-based care (consultations and evaluation), vision care, lab test spending,

and endocrinology specialty care. We observe noticeable jumps in all outcomes, although spending

on endocrinology specialty care is particularly noisy.

      Figure 3 displays similar graphs for two other measures of utilization: number of diabetes-related

office visits and number of labs for glucose or A1c. The figure also displays graphs for spending

on drugs that are commonly prescribed to patients with diabetes: antiglycemic medications such as

metformin, statins, and ACE inhibitors. We observe noticeable jumps for the first two outcomes,

but less evidence of an increase in prescription drug spending in the first year. Because the first-line

diabetes controlling drug, metformin, is available as an inexpensive generic (about $4 for a 30-day

supply), it may be difficult to observe spending increases even if use of this drug increases. For that

reason, we also examine an indicator that the patient has any spending for a diabetes-controlling drug;


                                                     14
this indicator exhibits a small but less obvious jump at the diagnosis threshold. In the next two plots,

we see some evidence of an increase in spending for statins and ACE inhibitors, with a larger jump

for the latter drug.

    Table 2 presents the local linear regression estimates associated with the outcomes in Figure 2.

We see a statistically significant increase in the presence of a diabetes diagnosis of 10.8 percentage

points (row 1). The next row shows the effect of crossing the diagnosis threshold on spending on

recommended care, as defined by the ADA recommendations. At the cutoff of A1c equal to 6.5%,

we observe a discontinuous increase in spending of $208. We scale this increase in spending by the

fraction of the sample who gain a diagnosis of diabetes at the cutoff with an IV estimate in column 2.

This estimate shows that a diagnosis of diabetes is associated with approximately $1,097 of additional

spending on recommended care.15 When we break this spending down into subcategories, we see that

the spending increase in the first year is split primarily between office consultations and evaluations,

which exhibit an increase of $508 associated with a marginal diagnosis, and spending related to lab

work, which experiences an increase of $505. We also see a significant increase in spending related to

screening for diabetic retinopathy, of $28 in the first year. In addition, we estimate a marginally signif-

icant increase in spending on endocrinology specialty care ($139) among the marginally diagnosed.

    Table 3 presents similar results for the additional measures of utilization and drug spending. We

find that a diagnosis of diabetes is associated with about 3 additional office visits for diabetes-related

care in the 12 months following diagnosis and about 0.4 more A1c or glucose labs. A diagnosis of

diabetes also significantly increases the probability that a patient takes a diabetes-controlling drug by

4.3 percentage points. We also find increases in total spending on ACE inhibitors, but no significant

effect on spending on statins or the amount spent on diabetes-controlling drugs.

    We next examine complications related to diabetes and health outcomes in the Optum data. Fig-

ure 4 shows the effect of receiving an A1c value above the diabetes diagnosis cutoff on the incidence

of preventable conditions associated with diabetes: diabetic retinopathy (eye damage), diabetic neu-

ropathy (nerve damage), diabetic kidney disease, ketoacidosis, and diabetic coma. The incidences

of diabetic neuropathy and diabetic kidney disease appear to increase at the A1c cutoff. This is not

necessarily surprising given that the ADA guidelines stipulate that much of the recommended care

for diabetes involves screening for these conditions. Changes at the cutoff in rates of ketoacidosis and

diabetic coma are substantially noisier and harder to discern; these conditions are more serious and
  15 Note that because the bandwidth selector chooses a different bandwidth for every outcome based on the variance of

that outcome, the "first stage" varies across rows.


                                                         15
also very rare. The remaining panels display the results for the direct health outcomes we measure

in the Optum data: change in A1c from the initial test value, change in total cholesterol from pre-test

values, and mortality. There appears to be a larger negative value in the difference between current

and initial A1c levels, indicating greater improvement relative to the initial test for those above the

cutoff16 relative to those just below. We see no visible evidence of a change in mortality.

     The associated estimates are reported in Table 4. We find statistically significant increases in the

diagnoses of retinopathy, neuropathy, and diabetic kidney disease, but no change in the two most

life-threatening (and rare) complications associated with diabetes, ketoacidosis and diabetic coma.

The bottom two rows of Table 4 present the results for the health outcomes derived from the Optum

claims data. First, we look at the change in A1c from the initial test for patients who received an A1c

test from an Optum-affiliated laboratory (i.e., for patients for whom we can observe the lab result).

We see that A1c relative to the prior year falls by about 0.06 percentage points for patients at the

cutoff, and is associated with a reduction in A1c of about 0.34 percentage points for the marginally

diagnosed. For context, metformin, a drug commonly provided to newly diagnosed patients with

diabetes, typically lowers A1c by a bit over 1 percentage point in clinical trials (Hirst et al., 2012), so

a reduction in A1c of 0.34 is within the range of what might be expected with the initiation of drug

therapy. We find no effect on changes in total cholesterol (relative to levels observed prior to the initial

test), nor do we find an effect on mortality.

     The results from the Optum claims data demonstrate substantial increases in spending associated

with the A1c 6.5% cutoff value, indicating that patients with otherwise similar underlying health are

treated differently depending on where their A1c falls relative to the diagnostic guideline. Next, we

evaluate whether these additional interventions affect other clinical measures of health reported on

the UCLA electronic health record. We examine the effect of a diabetes diagnosis on BMI, systolic, and

diastolic blood pressure. Since patients often have more than one reading for each of these measures

during a given year, we use the average value. We also create binary variables indicating that BMI

falls in the "normal," "overweight," or "obese" range, and that blood pressure falls in the "high blood

pressure" range.17
  16 Recall that those right below or right above the cutoff are equally likely to receive any A1c test, but those right above

the cutoff tend to receive more A1c tests in a given year (see Appendix Table A17). We address this by selecting one A1c test
result at random for those with more than one A1c value available.
  17 We define high blood pressure as 140/90 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) and higher, which was the definition at the

start of our project. The guideline for diagnosis by the American Heart Association and the American College of Cardiology
has since been updated to 130/80 mm Hg, although 140/90 mm Hg is the cutoff used for Stage 2 Hypertension (American
College of Cardiology, 2017).



                                                             16
      The figures associated with these outcomes, as well as a plot for the diagnosis of diabetes, are

presented in Figure 5. Despite a large increase in diabetes diagnoses, there is no visible change in any

of the clinical health measures at the cutoff. Table 5 presents the regression discontinuity estimates

from this analysis. In the first row, we find a significant increase in the diagnosis of diabetes at the

cutoff A1c value of 29 percentage points. In the subsequent rows, we show that the diabetes diagnosis

is not associated with changes in any of the health outcomes. The estimated coefficients are small

relative to the control mean and statistically insignificant.

      Finally, we examine the effect of diabetes diagnosis on measures of self-reported health and

healthy behaviors in the Optum Health Risk Assessment (Figure 6 and Table 6). As with the other

two samples, we observe a significant increase in the incidence of diabetes diagnosis in this sam-

ple (by 16 percentage points). However, we do not find any statistically significant changes in self-

reported health or healthy behaviors associated with the diagnosis of diabetes. In fact, the direction

of the coefficient estimates suggest that the marginally diagnosed report worse subjective health and

healthy behaviors. Results for the components of these indices also indicate no effect of diagnosis on

self-reported health or behaviors; these are reported in Appendix Table A2.

4.2    Medium Run Effects: Years 2 through 6

The initial effects of a diabetes diagnosis may not persist if, for example, those with A1c values directly

below the cutoff gain a diagnosis relatively soon after the initial test. Therefore, we first examine the

likelihood of later diagnosis in each year. We also examine the persistence of spending and health

effects by re-estimating our IV model using outcomes from years 2 to 6 following the initial test.

These estimates demonstrate how a diagnosis in year 1 affects spending in subsequent years.

      Figure 7 shows how diagnosis and spending evolves over time, in years 2 through 6 following

the initial lab test. The first panel shows the reduced form estimates on the probability of ever being

diagnosed with diabetes by each subsequent year. After the initial year, the difference in diagnosis

rates across the threshold closes somewhat but does not entirely disappear until year 6; we observe

significantly higher diagnosis rates 3 years after the initial test and positive point estimates for the first

5 years.

      The second panel of Figure 7 shows the effect of diagnosis in year 1 on spending on subsequent

years (i.e. IV estimates). In contrast to the diagnosis estimates, which show convergence between the

marginally diagnosed and marginally undiagnosed, we see fairly stable impacts of a year 1 diagno-



                                                     17
sis on spending on recommended care in each subsequent year, with little evidence that the gap in

spending between those above and below the threshold closes. The estimates become less precise due

to some individuals leaving the sample over the study period, but we see consistently positive effects

for all years and a statistically significant effect even five years after the initial test. Our estimated

effects on spending related to lab and office-based care are similarly stable over time. Spending on

vision care for retinopathy screening appears to increase over time, with higher spending observed

in later years. In contrast, spending on endocrinology specialist care is not consistently higher in the

years following the initial test.

    We document similar results when examining the effect of a diabetes diagnosis on our other uti-

lization measures in Figure 8. The increased number of diabetes-related office visits and glucose/A1c

labs remain stable, for the most part, for all 6 years following the test. The effect of a diagnosis on

spending on diabetes-controlling drugs increases over time, as does the probability a patient takes

any diabetes-controlling drug. In contrast, we do not find any evidence that statin or ACE inhibitor

spending are larger in years 2-6 as a result of diagnosis.

    Overall, our results using claims data show large increases in spending and use of care among

those marginally diagnosed in year 1. These spending increases stay relatively stable or, in the case

of drug spending and vision care, appear to grow larger over time. This pattern is consistent with

physicians delaying pharmacologic treatment if first recommending lifestyle changes, or starting with

the inexpensive first-line therapy (metformin) and later switching to more expensive drug therapies.

These results also support the hypothesis that receiving a diagnosis puts a patient on a path to persis-

tently higher spending.

    Next, we examine how the impact of a diabetes diagnosis affects the diagnosis of complications

related to diabetes and health as measured in the Optum dataset. These results, displayed in Figure

9, show significantly higher diagnoses of neuropathy and diabetic kidney disease in year 2. Subse-

quent years show neither statistically significant increases nor reductions in the rates of complications

related to diabetes. Note that because ketoacidosis and diabetic coma are rare conditions and we have

smaller samples in later years, we are unable to estimate an effect of diabetes diagnosis on these con-

ditions after five years (for ketoacidosis) or four years (for diabetic coma) following the initial test due

to insufficient variation to compute the optimal bandwidth. The estimates show no change in these

conditions, although the effect for later years is imprecisely estimated. Finally, the last four panels of

Figure 9 show the effects on changes in A1c, total cholesterol, and mortality in the years following


                                                    18
the test. In contrast to the spending effects, which persisted over the entire period, the improvement

in A1c observed in the first year does not continue in subsequent years. We also do not observe any

changes in total cholesterol or mortality in subsequent years.

    We also use the EHR data to evaluate whether improvements in clinical health emerge in later

years. For these measures, we observe only 3 years of data after the initial test. Effects are similar

across all three years, indicating no health improvements associated with a diabetes diagnosis for

marginal patients (Figure 10). Finally, we look at the impact of a diagnosis on the self-reported out-

comes in the health risk assessment survey. We continue to find no statistically significant effect on

these outcomes in subsequent years, but our confidence intervals are large. These results are reported

in the Appendix in Figure A3.

    To summarize, we find that the diagnosis of diabetes for individuals with A1c values just above

the diagnosis cutoff leads to greater spending on diabetes-related medical care. This spending increase

is not only present in the year following the test but persists over time. Our point estimates suggest

a cumulative $8,107.86 in additional spending on recommended care over 6 years, in present value

terms. We can use this estimate in a back-of-the-envelope calculation to explore how tightening the

diagnosis threshold, from 6.5% to 6.6%, would affect total U.S. spending on diabetes-related care. The

ADA estimates that 1.4 million individuals are newly diagnosed with diabetes each year. If we assume

that the distribution of A1c values among the population being tested is similar to that observed in

the Optum data, this suggests that 15.4 percent, or 216,000, of these individuals have A1c values of

6.5%. Moving the diagnosis threshold to 6.6% would, therefore, be expected to decrease diabetes-

related spending over the next 6 years for each of these individuals, for a total reduction in spending

of $1.75 billion (=$8,107.86 x 216,000). This calculation assumes that spending is only elevated for the

initial 6 years following a diagnosis and falls to zero in subsequent years. A similar exercise may be

performed for a scenario that relaxes the diagnosis cutoff from 6.5% to 6.4%. Assuming that the change

in spending would be similar for the newly and previously marginally diagnosed, this would suggest

an increase in spending of $2.4 billion associated with the nearly 300,000 additional individuals who

would be diagnosed each year.




                                                  19
5     Specification Checks and Additional Analyses

5.1    Checking for Discontinuities in Baseline Characteristics

The regression discontinuity model relies on the assumption that patients with A1c values near the

threshold differ only in the way they are treated by the medical system; i.e., that there are no sys-

tematic underlying differences between patients with A1c values just above and just below the 6.5%

cutoff. We can assess this empirically by evaluating whether there are discontinuities in demographic

characteristics, spending, and health measures at the cutoff in the year prior to the initial test. These

variables are not expected to change at the diagnosis threshold, providing a check on the assumption

behind our research design. If we find discontinuities in these characteristics, it suggests that there

may be pre-existing differences in individuals above and below the cutoff.

      We conduct this test by evaluating whether age, gender, race (available in the EHR sample only),

and insurance type (Medicare versus non-Medicare) change discontinuously at the cutoff (results in

the top panel of Table 7). In the second panel, we conduct a similar test using spending measures ob-

served in the year prior to the initial lab test. We examine total spending, spending on recommended

care, statins, ACE inhibitors, and endocrinology specialty care. We operationalize this test by using

each of these demographic, insurance, and spending characteristics as a dependent variable in our

reduced form model for each of the study samples.

      We do not find statistically significant discontinuities in any of the five demographic character-

istics we consider, although we do find a statistically significant reduction in Medicare coverage and

baseline total spending at the cutoff in the Optum sample. This indicates that individuals with A1c

values just above the cutoff had less medical spending in the year prior to the test and were slightly

less likely to have Medicare coverage. To evaluate whether these differential characteristics affect our

results, we have re-estimated our spending models to include these covariates. The inclusion of these

variables have little effect on our results, suggesting that the spending effects are not driven by differ-

ential baseline characteristics (see Appendix Tables A3 and A4). We do not see any significant effects

in the other four spending variables we examine. Taken together this information suggests that there

are not systematic differences in patient characteristics at the diabetes diagnosis threshold that are

confounding our analysis.

      As mentioned earlier, we did find evidence of pre-existing discontinuities in outcomes during the

baseline year for the UCLA clinical health measures. For this reason, we have included baseline mea-


                                                    20
sures as control variables in our regression analyses with the UCLA data. We are unable to rule out,

however, that there might remain some unobserved differences in the characteristics of individuals on

either side of the cutoff.

5.2     Sample Attrition

5.2.1    Testing for Discontinuities in Sample Inclusion by Year

The sample sizes for our analyses decline with each year of observation for two reasons. First, the

length of follow up for each patient depends on the timing of their initial A1c test. For example,

if a patient has her initial test in 2016, we are only able to observe one post-test year (2017), so the

patient will not be in the sample for regressions that estimate effects in year 2 and beyond. Second,

both our Optum and UCLA samples are comprised only of patients who are associated with these

organizations. Some patients leave Optum-associated plans or the UCLA health care system before

the end of our study period. These types of attrition should only be a concern for our research design

to the extent that patients on either side of the cutoff are differentially more likely to exit the sample

over time. For example, if a diabetes diagnosis causes patients to switch out of Optum-associated

plans or out of the UCLA health system, this could affect the interpretation of our outcomes for later

years.

      We test for differential attrition and report the results in Table 8. Our dependent variable in these

models is whether or not the individual appears in the sample in each subsequent year (i.e. years 2-6).

We find no significant discontinuities in the probability of attrition for either the UCLA or the Optum

sample, demonstrating that selective attrition out of the sample based on A1c relative to the diagnosis

cutoff is unlikely. The results from these tests indicate that differential selection at the cutoff is not

a threat to the internal validity of our estimates. We should note, however, that it is necessarily the

case that the estimates of the long-term effects of diagnosis rely on the sample of patients who were

tested during the earlier part of the sample period. To the extent that the treatment of diabetes (or

pre-diabetes) has changed since 2009, this limits the generalizability of the results to individuals who

are currently screened for diabetes. However, we have little reason to think that physician practice

has changed noticeably since 2009.18
  18 Practice
            guidelines for the treatment of diabetes have not changed considerably since then; essentially the only practice
guideline that meaningfully changed was the recommendation to initiate statin therapy for all patients with diabetes age 40
and older regardless of cholesterol levels beginning in 2013.




                                                            21
5.2.2    Balanced panel

Although we find no evidence of sample attrition associated with the diagnosis cutoff, it could be the

case that individuals who remain in our sample all six years vary systematically from those we only

observe for one or two years. As a result, the effects we estimate in years 2-6 following the initial

lab test may reflect changes in the underlying sample rather than time-varying treatment effects. We

examine this by comparing the results obtained from our main (unbalanced) sample, from those we

obtain when we restrict the sample to only those who remain enrolled all 6 years (balanced). The

results of this exercise are presented in Figures 11 and 12, which plot the coefficient in each year for

the unbalanced panel (black) against those obtained in the balanced panel (red). We provide results

just for the spending and utilization outcomes, given the low rates of mortality and some of the pre-

ventable conditions, and the relatively small size of the balanced panel. Although the balanced panel

has much larger confidence intervals, the point estimates indicate that diagnosis rates and spending

are similar across the two samples. Similar analysis of the UCLA (Figure 13) data shows that results

remain null for all three years in the version of the sample that uses a balanced panel. Based on these

analyses, there do not appear to be systematic differences in the effect of diabetes diagnosis across the

groups that remain in the sample continuously and the main sample.

5.3     Alternative Specifications, Samples, and Variable Definitions

In this section, we conduct several additional analyses to probe the robustness of our results to dif-

ferent variable definition and model specification choices. First, we examine the extent to which the

increase in diabetes-related care represents new utilization, or simply a different focus or style of treat-

ment that largely occurs during interactions with the health care system that would take place regard-

less of the diagnosis. For example, diabetes and non-diabetes patients may have the same number of

office visits, but diabetes patients receive information and treatment specific to their illness and physi-

cians now code these visits as diabetes-related. We assess this in two ways. First, we look at the total

number of office visits for evaluation and management and total spending on this category, including

visits unrelated to diabetes. These results are presented in the first panel in Appendix Table A5. We

find no significant change in the total number of office visits or total spending on office visits, despite

the fact that we see increases in visits and spending for diabetes-related care; our standard errors are

such that we cannot reject that large increases or decreases occurred. This suggests that, at least for

office visits, diabetes-related care could be delivered in the context of existing health care interactions.


                                                    22
Next, we examine diabetes-related care that more clearly represents new utilization by focusing on the

elements of recommended care that are not identified by a diagnosis code: spending on statins, ACE

inhibitors, diabetes-controlling drugs, endocrinology specialist care, and spending on glucose labs.

Among this subset of recommended care, we find that diagnosis results in a statistically significant

increase in spending of about $250 in the first year, which represents about one-quarter of our main

spending estimate. Thus, we find clear evidence of an increase in "new" utilization associated with

a diabetes diagnosis, although we are unable to rule out that some care is provided in the context of

office visits that may have otherwise occurred in the absence of diagnosis.

    We next conduct additional analyses to compare the UCLA EHR and Optum data results. Since

these are very different samples, the lack of health effects in the EHR data may be less likely to trans-

late to the Optum setting if the treatment patterns for diabetes diagnosis are very different. While,

the UCLA EHR data do not contain information on spending (making it difficult to produce similar

estimates as those presented in Table 2 for the Optum sample), they do contain some information on

utilization that can be used to assess changes at the cutoff. The effect of a diabetes diagnosis on such

utilization measures are presented in Appendix Table A6. We find that a diagnosis of diabetes is as-

sociated with 4.5 additional ambulatory encounters for diabetes care, 0.4 additional A1c labs, and a

14 percentage point increase in the probability of taking a diabetes-controlling drug during the first

12 months following the initial test. These estimates are similar to those in the Optum sample and

indicate a clear increase in utilization following diagnosis. In addition, the EHR data allow physicians

to note health problems of patients on a "problem list." In addition to seeing a higher probability of

having a diabetes diagnosis associated with an encounter, we see a higher probability that diabetes

is on a patient's problem list at the diagnosis cutoff. The probability of a diabetes diagnosis on the

problem list increases by 31 percentage points for the marginally diagnosed.

    Next, we assess the robustness of our results to using a quadratic model and alternative band-

widths in the local linear model, reported in Appendix Tables A7-A10. In the first column, we re-

report the results from our main reduced form specification to facilitate comparison. We then report

the results from a model that estimates the RD effect using a quadratic in initial lab value that is al-

lowed to vary at the cutoff. Results with this model are very similar to our baseline estimates for

most outcomes in the Optum data (Appendix Tables A7-A8). We no longer find a decrease in A1c as-

sociated with diabetes diagnosis in the first year, however. Subsequent columns show the results for

larger (twice) and smaller (one half) multiples of the optimal bandwidth. Results are very similar both


                                                   23
quantitatively and qualitatively when alternative bandwidths are used, although larger bandwidths

tend to result in somewhat larger estimates. For our estimates of the change in A1c from its baseline

value, however, we find a larger decline under a smaller bandwidth, suggesting that the difference in

values is most apparent for those individuals closest to the threshold. The estimates for preventable

conditions, clinical health measures, and self-reported health measures (Appendix Tables A9-A10)

look, for the most part, similar across specifications.

    We also examine the sensitivity of our results to our sample inclusion criteria. In particular, we

require that individuals be enrolled in an Optum plan for at least 1 year prior to their initial A1c

test so that we can adequately assess whether they have previously been diagnosed with diabetes.

It may be the case, however, that some individuals in our sample were misclassified as having no

diabetes diagnosis prior to their first test when, in fact, they had already been diagnosed. This might

be the case if, for example, they were diagnosed before entering the Optum data. In Appendix Tables

A11 and A12, we conduct our analysis but only include those who were enrolled in an Optum plan

for 2 years prior to the initial test. Approximately 70 percent of our main analytic sample met this

criterion. Our spending results are very similar, indicating that our initial sample definition likely

performed well at excluding those who were already diagnosed with diabetes. When we implement

similar sample criteria in the UCLA data, we estimate a larger first stage with a 41 percentage point

increase in diagnosis, but still find no evidence of health effects (Appendix Table A13). Omitted here

in the interest of space, results on self-reported health and healthy behaviors are also similar under

this sample refinement.

    Finally, we conduct a bounding exercise to determine a lower bound on the treatment effect of

receiving a diabetes diagnosis on spending. If doctors are not recording the diabetes diagnosis on

their submitted claims (Optum) or on the electronic health record (EHR), some individuals with A1c

values above the diagnosis cutoff may in fact receive a diagnosis even though it is not visible in the

data. This would result in an underestimation of the first stage (i.e., the effect of an A1c above the

cutoff on diagnosis) and an overestimation of the treatment effect of receiving a diagnosis on other

outcomes (e.g., the effect of receiving a diagnosis on spending). In Appendix Table A14, we re-estimate

our IV models assuming that everyone with an A1c value above 6.5 receives a diagnosis of diabetes,

even if we do not observe it on the claim or EHR. That is, the variable indicating the individual

has received a diabetes diagnosis is coded to be one for all individuals with A1c 6.5 or higher. This

assumption results in a much larger first stage of about 56 percentage points, and smaller effects for


                                                    24
the marginally diagnosed on spending outcomes. Although these lower bounds are, naturally, much

smaller than the IV estimates reported in Table 2, the estimates indicate that a diagnosis of diabetes

increases spending by at least $242 in the first year following the initial A1c test.


6    Conclusion
The distribution of health in the population is such that many individuals with a chronic illness are

near the margin of being diagnosed. This paper explores the impact of a diagnosis on such "marginal"

patients. We find that individuals whose blood glucose levels are just above the threshold for a dia-

betes diagnosis have significantly higher spending on recommended care than similar patients whose

blood glucose levels fall just below this cutoff. Receiving such a diagnosis appears to put patients on

a path of persistently higher spending and utilization of diabetes-related care. Even after 5 years, pa-

tients whose initial test put them above the diagnosis cutoff have spending that is significantly higher

than those with lab tests just below this cutoff. A back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that even

a small increase in the threshold at which diabetes is diagnosed would reduce total diabetes spending

by over $1.8 billion per year, while a small decrease in this threshold would increase spending by $2.4

billion.

    Among these marginally diagnosed patients, this additional spending appears to be associated

with only minimal improvements in health. We observe a reduction in A1c in the first year following

diagnosis, but this improvement does not persist through years 2 through 6 and is somewhat sensitive

to model specification. We do not detect any improvements in blood pressure or BMI as measured on

electronic health records, nor in total cholesterol or mortality rates. We also do not detect any changes

in self-reported measures of health or healthy behaviors.

    Our analysis has limitations, the most obvious being that we only observe patients for 6 years

following the initial diagnosis of diabetes. It may be the case that improvements in health manifest in

year 7 or later. Indeed, we find strong evidence that receiving a diagnosis of diabetes is associated with

early diagnosis of several complications associated with diabetes, such as retinopathy, neuropathy,

and diabetic kidney disease; since these complications were detected earlier, we might expect patients

to experience improved health trajectories over a longer time horizon. However, the fact that we find

minimal effects on intermediate measures of health such as blood sugar, blood pressure, cholesterol,

and BMI reduces optimism about the likely magnitude of longer term health improvements.

    Overall, results suggest that the effects of increased spending on relatively healthy diabetes pa-


                                                    25
tients are likely modest, and would indicate that future revisions of diagnosis guidelines for chronic

diseases should exercise caution when relaxing these guidelines to include healthier populations.




                                                 26
                                              Figure 1: Sample size by A1c Value, Optum and EHR




                                                                                                           3000
                         0.10




                                                                                                           2500
                         0.08




                                                                                                           2000
     # of Observations




                                                                                       # of Observations
                         0.06




                                                                                                           1500
                         0.04




                                                                                                           1000
                         0.02




                                                                                                           500
                         0.00




                                                                                                           0
                                5.0     5.5    6.0      6.5       7.0   7.5     8.0                               5.0   5.5   6.0       6.5     7.0   7.5   8.0

                                                     A1c Value                                                                      A1c Value




Source: Authors' calculations from the Optum claims data (left panel) and UCLA EHR data (right panel).
Horizontal axis indicates each value of A1c. Vertical axis indicates sample size within each A1c bin.




                                      Table 1: Demographic Statistics, Optum, HRA and UCLA EHR Data

                                                                 Optum        Health Risk Assessment                          UCLA EHR
                                              Female              0.523                0.554                                     0.612
                                              Age                 51.13                44.22                                     47.15
                                              White               N/A                  N/A                                       0.654
                                              Black               N/A                  N/A                                       0.048
                                              Hispanic            N/A                  N/A                                       0.111
                                              Asian               N/A                  N/A                                       0.105
                                              Medicare            0.281                0.006                                     0.181
                                              Private             0.719                0.994                                     0.749
                                              Medicaid              0                    0                                       0.016
                                              Self-Pay              0                    0                                       0.046
                                              N                  142,541              16,916                                    23,882
   Note: Authors' calculations from Optum claims, Health Risk Assessment, and UCLA EHR data.
   This table contains descriptive statistics for patients with an A1c test who meet all sample criteria
   described in the text.




                                                                                      27
                                          Figure 2: Diabetes Diagnosis and Spending in 12 Months Following Initial Lab Test


                                                                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                    0.8




                                                                                                                                                                               q

                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                    q    q        q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1200
                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                                 q   q
                                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                   q

                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                              q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                q                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                    Spending on Recommended Care




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                     q
                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                    0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             300
 Any Diagnosis of Diabetes




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Office-Based Care Related to Diabetes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                           q                q
                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                           q                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q   q
                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   800




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                    q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                                                                     q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                    0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   600




                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q

                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                    0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             100
                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                     q

                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   200




                                                                                  q
                                                                              q                                                                                                                                                                  q    q
                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                    q   q   q                                                                                                                                                              q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                           q    q                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                          5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                   7.0                   7.5                   8.0                                         5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                   7.0                   7.5                   8.0                                                        q   q   q   q    q    q   q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q




                                                                                                    A1C Value                                                                                                                                                                       A1C Value
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                   7.0                   7.5                   8.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A1C Value
                                                            (a) Any Diagnosis                                                                                                                                                   (b) Recommended Care
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (c) Diabetes-related Office Visits

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                    40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   500




                                                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             100




                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                    Diabetes-Related Labs




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q        q
                                    30
 Diabetes-Related Vision Spending




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             80




                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Endocrinology Specialty Care




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   300




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                              q    q                                                                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             60




                                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                       q
                                    20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                    q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                          q             q
                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q

                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                    10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q            q                                                                 q             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q   q                                                                                                                                                      q                         q                                                   q
                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q        q   q   q                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                    q
                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                  q    q
                                                    q   q   q    q    q   q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                   7.0                   7.5                   8.0
                                    0




                                           q    q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A1C Value
                                          5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                   7.0                   7.5                   8.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                   7.0                   7.5                   8.0

                                                                                                    A1C Value                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A1C Value
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (e) Diabetes-related Labs
                                    (d) Diabetes-related Vision Care                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (f) Endocrinology Specialist Care

Source: Authors' calculations from the Optum claims data. Horizontal axis displays the test value. Vertical axis
displays within test value averages of outcome variable. Vertical line at 6.5 is the diagnosis cutoff for diabetes.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    28
Figure 3: Drug Spending and Other Utilization Measures in 12 Months Following Initial Lab
Test
                                    2.5




                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q    q        q
                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                   q            q
                                                                                                                                                                           q                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                     q         q                                                                                                                                                                                             q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               120
                                    2.0




                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                    q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                 q
 Number of Diabetes Office Visits




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                     Number of Glucose/A1c Labs




                                                                                                                               q                                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q            q
                                                                                                                           q
                                    1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Diabetes-Controlling Drugs
                                                                                                                       q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               80
                                                                                                                   q                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                              q
                                    1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.4




                                                                                                         q
                                    0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                     q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q


                                                                                                 q

                                                                                             q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.2




                                                                                        q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                   q                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                               q                                                                                                                                                      q
                                    0.0




                                                                       q   q                                                                                                                                                  q   q       q
                                            q    q   q   q   q    q                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q    q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                           5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                   7.0                   7.5                   8.0                                      5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                   7.0                   7.5                   8.0                                       q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q   q    q    q   q   q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q




                                                                                                     A1C Value                                                                                                                                                                    A1C Value
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                   7.0                   7.5                   8.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A1C Value
                                    (a) # of Diabetes-Related Office                                                                                                                                                          (b) # Glucose/A1c Labs
                                                 Visits                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (c) Diabetes-Controlling Drugs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  250




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               160




                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                    0.12




                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               140




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  200




                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q                                                                                                                                                                            q                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                               q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                    0.10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                                          q                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                               q                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               120




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
 Any Diabetes-Controlling Drug




                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ACE Inhibitors




                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                             q                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                     q
                                    0.08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  150




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                     Statins




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                      q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                    0.06




                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               80




                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q


                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                    0.04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               60




                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               40
                                    0.02




                                                                                                              q                                                                                                                   q                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                         q                                                                                                               q                                                                                                                                                                                 q


                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                 q
                                                                                             q
                                                                                   q    q
                                    0.00




                                            q
                                                 q   q
                                                         q   q    q    q   q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                   7.0                   7.5                   8.0                                      5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                   7.0                   7.5                   8.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A1C Value                                                                                                                                                                    A1C Value
                                           5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                   7.0                   7.5                   8.0

                                                                                                     A1C Value
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (e) Statins                                                                                                                                            (f) ACE Inhibitors
 (d) Any Diabetes-Controlling Drug
             Spending

Source: Authors' calculations from the Optum claims data. Horizontal axis displays the test value. Vertical axis
displays within test value averages of outcome variable. Vertical line at 6.5 is the diagnosis cutoff for diabetes.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  29
Figure 4: Diagnosis of Complications Related to Diabetes and Optum Health Outcomes in 12
Months Following Initial Lab Test




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                                      q
                0.04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                                      q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.05
                                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                             q


                                                                                                                                           q
                0.03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q   q                                                                                                                                                                                 q                q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Kidney Disease
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
 Retinopathy




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Neuropathy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q                              q                                                                                                                                        q        q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.03
                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                                                           q
                0.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                q
                                                                                                                                      q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.02
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                0.01




                                                                                                  q                         q
                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.01                                                                  q   q

                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                              q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                 q
                0.00




                                                                     q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.00
                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                    q                              q                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.00



                                      q                 q                                                                                                                                                                                             q       q   q    q    q                                                                                                                                                                            q            q   q    q    q
                         q    q   q       q    q    q                                                                                                                                                                                                     q                                                                                                                                                                                                   q   q




                        5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                                             7.0                   7.5                   8.0                                                       5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                             7.0                   7.5                   8.0                                                       5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                   7.0                   7.5                   8.0

                                                                                  A1C Value                                                                                                                                                                                                               A1C Value                                                                                                                                                                                               A1C Value



                             (a) Diabetic Retinopathy                                                                                                                                                                                                (b) Diabetic Neuropathy                                                                                                                                                                                              (c) Kidney Disease
                0.007




                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.008




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q   q
                                                                                                                                                    q
                0.006




                                                                                                                                                                              q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                0.005




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.006




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                0.004




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Diabetic Coma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Change in A1c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
 Ketoacidosis




                                                                                                                                  q                         q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.004




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                            q
                0.003




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                                 q




                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -0.4
                0.002




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.002




                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                0.001




                                                                          q
                         q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                    q                                 q
                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q       q
                                  q                     q                                                                                                                                                                                                              q            q
                0.000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.000




                                                                     q        q                                                                                                                                                                                   q             q
                                               q                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                      q                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q                 q                     q
                              q                                                                                                            q    q       q        q    q   q            q                                                         q    q                                                                                       q         q   q            q        q   q   q                                                                                                                                                                                             q




                        5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                                             7.0                   7.5                   8.0                                                       5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                             7.0                   7.5                   8.0                                                       5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                   7.0                   7.5                   8.0

                                                                                  A1C Value                                                                                                                                                                                                               A1C Value                                                                                                                                                                                               A1C Value



                                               (d) Ketoacidosis                                                                                                                                                                                                   (e) Diabetic Coma                                                                                                                                                                                       (f) Change in A1c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.035




                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                           q


                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                            -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.030




                                                                                                                                                                                                q

                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                            q    q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                      q       q   q

                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.025




                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                          Change in Total Cholesterol




                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                       q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                            -10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.020




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mortality




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                                                                              q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.015




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.010




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                            -15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                                                    q                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q   q                     q                                   q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.005




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                            -20




                                                                                                                                          5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                                 7.0                   7.5                   8.0                                                   5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                                 7.0                   7.5                   8.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                    A1C Value                                                                                                                                                                                               A1C Value



                                                                                                                            (g) Change in Total Cholesterol                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (h) Mortality

Source: Authors' calculations from the Optum claims data. Horizontal axis displays the test value. Vertical axis
displays within test value averages of outcome variable. Vertical line at 6.5 is the diagnosis cutoff for diabetes.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30
                                                       Figure 5: Clinical Measures of Health in 12 Months Following Initial Lab Test
                                 0.8




                                                                                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q       q       q                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q       q               q                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q                                                                                          q                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                 0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.05
                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                       q                       q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Normal BMI (residualized)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.5
 Diabetes Diagnosis




                                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BMI (residualized)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                       q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                       q
                                                                                                                               q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q               q               q                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                                       q                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                 0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q   q             q


                                                                                                       q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -0.10
                                 0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -1.5
                                                                                                   q
                                                                                               q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -0.15
                                                                                           q

                                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q

                                                                             q   q
                                 0.0




                                                                q    q   q
                                          q    q   q   q   q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q




                                         5.0                   5.5                   6.0                        6.5                                  7.0                                     7.5                                     8.0                                                        5.0                                     5.5                                     6.0                        6.5                                  7.0                                     7.5                                     8.0                                                           5.0                                     5.5                                     6.0                     6.5                   7.0                   7.5                   8.0

                                                                                                   A1c value                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A1c value                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A1c value



                                          (a) Diagnosis of Diabetes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (b) BMI                                                                                                                                                                                                               (c) BMI in normal range
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.10
                                 0.20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                               q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.05
                                 0.15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q   q                              q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2
 Overweight BMI (residualized)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Diastolic bp (residualized)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Obese BMI (residualized)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q               q           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                 0.10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.00




                                                                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q


                                                                                                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                             q                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                 0.05




                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                               q                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                           q    q    q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                 0.00




                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -1
                                          q                                  q
                                               q
                                                                                 q
                                                                         q            q    q                                             q
                                                                                               q       q
                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                 q                               q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                             q                   q
                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                 -0.05




                                                                                                   q                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -2


                                                                                                                               q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q




                                         5.0                   5.5                   6.0                        6.5                                  7.0                                     7.5                                     8.0                                                        5.0                                     5.5                                     6.0                        6.5                                  7.0                                     7.5                                     8.0                                                           5.0                                     5.5                                     6.0                     6.5                   7.0                   7.5                   8.0

                                                                                                   A1c value                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A1c value                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A1c value



                                                                (d) Overweight                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (e) Obese                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (f) Diastolic BP

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                        6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                                                               q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                        4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q                                                                    q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                       Systolic bp (residualized)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                        2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    High bp (residualized)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                              q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q       q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                     q       q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q               q                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                     q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q       q       q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                        -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.1
                                                                                                                                        -4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                        -6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q




                                                                                                                                                 5.0                                     5.5                                     6.0                         6.5                                    7.0                                     7.5                                     8.0                                                     5.0                                     5.5                                     6.0                          6.5                                      7.0                                     7.5                                     8.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A1c value                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A1c value



                                                                                                                                                                                                 (g) Systolic BP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (h) High BP

Source: Authors' calculations from the UCLA Electronic Health Record data. Horizontal axis displays the test
value. Vertical axis displays within test value averages of outcome variable. Vertical line at 6.5 is the diagnosis
cutoff for diabetes. Note that all panels except panel (a) use data that is first residualized by regressing the
outcome on the previous year's value. The resulting error term is then binned by test value and the average
within each test value is plotted.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            31
                               Figure 6: Self-Reported Health and Behavior in 12 Months Following Initial Lab Test


                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                         q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                             0.8




                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q       q
                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                              q             q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.6
                                                                                                                                                                   q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                        q

                                                                                                                                    q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Physical and Emotional Well-Being
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.4
                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                              q
                             0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
 Any Diagnosis of Diabetes




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Health VG or Exc




                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                             0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                                                  q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.0
                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.6




                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                q            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q       q             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                                  q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.2
                                                                                         q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                             0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                                                                                                               q
                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                           q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.8




                                                                   q
                                                               q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0.4
                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                     q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                             q   q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                    q    q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q




                                   5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                                    7.0                   7.5                   8.0                                                         5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                                            7.0                   7.5                   8.0                                                                          5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                   7.0                   7.5                   8.0

                                                                                             A1C Value                                                                                                                                                                                                        A1C Value                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A1C Value



                                             (a) Diabetes Diagnosis                                                                                                                                                                                               (b) Health VG or Exc                                                                                                                                                                                                    (c) Physical and Emotional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Well-Being
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                             0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q   q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Smoking/Drinking Behavior




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                             0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                              q           q
                                                                                                     Diet and Exercise




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                         q

                                                                                                                                                                                    q                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.1




                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                  q   q
                                                                                                                                                          q                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q                q                     q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                             q         q                                                       q
                                                                                                                             -0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q   q         q   q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                             -0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.2




                                                                                                                                            5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                                   7.0                   7.5                   8.0                                                                  5.0                   5.5                   6.0                   6.5                                                    7.0                   7.5                   8.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                      A1C Value                                                                                                                                                                                                                A1C Value



                                                                                                                                                          (d) Diet and Exercise                                                                                                                                       (e) Healthy Smoking and Drinking
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Choices

Source: Authors' calculations from the Optum Health Risk Assessment data. Horizontal axis displays the test
value. Vertical axis displays within test value averages of outcome variable. Vertical line at 6.5 is the diagnosis
cutoff for diabetes.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              32
                            Figure 7: Optum Diagnosis and Spending Outcomes by Year After Initial Lab Test

                         0.05 0.10 0.15
 Reduced form estimate




                                                                                                      4000
                                          q

                                                    q




                                                                                        IV estimate

                                                                                                      2000
                                                            q
                                                                                                                                        q      q     q
                                                                     q       q                                                 q
                                                                                                              q         q
                                                                                   q




                                                                                                      0
                         -0.05




                                                                                                      -2000
                                          1         2       3        4       5     6                          1         2      3        4      5     6

                                                          Years from Test                                                    Years from Test


                                               (a) Any Diagnosis of Diabetes                                          (b) Recommended Care




                                                                                                      400
                         1500




                                                                                                      300
 IV estimate




                                                                                        IV estimate

                                                                                                      200



                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                             q     q
                                                                     q
                         500




                                          q                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                      100




                                                    q
                                                            q                                                                           q
                                                                                                              q         q
                         0




                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                               q




                                          1         2       3        4       5     6                          1         2      3        4      5     6

                                                          Years from Test                                                    Years from Test


                                              (c) Diabetes-related Office Visits                                  (d) Diabetes-related Vision Care
                                                                                                      300
                         3000




                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                      100
 IV estimate




                                                                                        IV estimate




                                                                                                                        q      q                     q
                         1000




                                                                             q     q
                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                      -100




                                                            q
                                          q         q                                                                                          q
                         0




                                                                                                      -300
                         -1000




                                          1         2       3        4       5     6                          1         2      3        4      5     6

                                                          Years from Test                                                    Years from Test


                                                 (e) Diabetes-related Labs                                    (f) Endocrinology Specialist Care

Source: Authors' calculations from the Optum claims data. Horizontal axis indicates the year relative to the
initial lab test. Vertical axis indicates size of the regression discontinuity effect estimated using local linear
regression. 95 percent confidence intervals displayed.

                                                                                       33
                                Figure 8: Optum Utilization Outcomes by Year After Initial Lab Test

               8




                                                                                       3
               6
 IV estimate




                                                                         IV estimate

                                                                                       2
               4




                                                       q
                           q                                q       q                                                                q
                                    q                                                                                            q
               2




                                                                                                                        q




                                                                                       1
                                            q
                                                                                                        q      q
                                                                                                 q
               0




                                                                                       0
               -2




                           1        2       3          4    5       6                            1      2      3        4        5   6

                                          Years from Test                                                    Years from Test


                          (a) # of Diabetes-Related Office Visits                                    (b) # Glucose or A1c Labs




                                                                                       1.2
                                                                                       0.8
 IV estimate




                                                                         IV estimate
               500 1000




                                                            q                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                    q
                                                                                       0.4




                                                       q
                                                                                                                        q

                                            q
                                    q
                           q
               0




                                                                                                               q
                                                                                       0.0




                                                                                                 q      q




                           1        2       3          4    5       6                            1      2      3        4        5   6

                                          Years from Test                                                    Years from Test


                               (c) Diabetes-Controlling Drugs                                    (d) Any Diabetes-Controlling Drug
               500




                                                                                       200 400




                                            q
 IV estimate




                                                                         IV estimate




                           q        q
               0




                                                       q
                                                                                                 q      q                        q
                                                            q
                                                                                       0




                                                                    q                                          q                     q
                                                                                                                        q
               -500




                                                                                       -400
               -1000




                           1        2       3          4    5       6                            1      2      3        4        5   6

                                          Years from Test                                                    Years from Test


                                         (e) Statins                                                     (f) ACE Inhibitors

Source: Authors' calculations from the Optum claims data. Horizontal axis indicates the year relative to the
initial lab test. Vertical axis indicates size of the regression discontinuity effect estimated using local linear
regression. 95 percent confidence intervals displayed.

                                                                        34
                                 Figure 9: Incidence of Complications by Year After Initial Lab Test




                                                                                                 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.4
                0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.2
  IV estimate




                                                                                   IV estimate




                                                                                                                                                                                     IV estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                            q
                0.2




                                                                                                                                                                           q                                                                      q




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.0
                                                                         q                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                   q

                                                                                                                   q       q
                                                                                                                                     q                 q
                                                      q
                        q          q
                0.0




                             q
                                                                                                 -0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                   -0.4
                        1    2     3                  4          5       6                                         1       2         3                 4           5       6                              1         2         3        4      5   6

                                 Years from Test                                                                                   Years from Test                                                                          Years from Test


                        (a) Diabetic Retinopathy                                                                   (b) Diabetic Neuropathy                                                                    (c) Kidney Disease
                0.10




                                                                                                 0.02 0.04




                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q        q
  IV estimate




                                                                                   IV estimate




                                                                                                                                                                                     IV estimate
                0.05




                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                                   q
                        q                                                                                          q       q
                             q     q                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                 q




                                                                                                                                                                                                   -1
                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                 -0.02
                -0.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                   -2
                        1    2     3                  4          5       6                                         1       2         3                 4           5       6                              1         2         3        4      5   6

                                 Years from Test                                                                                   Years from Test                                                                          Years from Test


                            (d) Ketoacidosis                                                                           (e) Diabetic Coma                                                                          (f) Change in A1c
                                                      50




                                                                                                                                                       0.05
                                       IV estimate




                                                                                                                                         IV estimate
                                                      0




                                                             q       q         q
                                                                                                 q                             q
                                                                                                                                                       0.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                   q          q
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                      -50




                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                      q

                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                       -0.05
                                                      -150




                                                             1       2         3                 4                     5       6                               1       2         3                 4          5         6

                                                                             Years from Test                                                                                   Years from Test


                                                     (g) Change in Total Cholesterol                                                                                   (h) Mortality

Source: Authors' calculations from the Optum claims data. Horizontal axis indicates the year relative to the
initial lab test. Vertical axis indicates size of the regression discontinuity effect estimated using local linear
regression. 95 percent confidence intervals displayed.




                                                                                                                                     35
Figure 10: Diagnosis and Health Outcomes in 12 Months Following Initial Lab Test, UCLA
EHR Data




                                                                                         0.3
                                                                                         0.2
                0.5




                                                                                                                                                                     0.1
                       q
  IV estimate




                                                                           IV estimate




                                                                                                                                                       IV estimate
                                                                                         0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                q         q
                                     q
                                                           q                                                                          q                                                               q
                -0.5




                                                                                                                                                                     -0.1
                                                                                         0.0
                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                    q
                -1.5




                                                                                                                                                                     -0.3
                                                                                         -0.2




                       1             2                     3                                           1            2                 3                                         1         2           3

                            Years from Test                                                                Years from Test                                                          Years from Test


                           (a) BMI                                                              (b) BMI in normal range                                                         (c) Overweight
                                                0.20




                                                                                                                               2
                                                0.10




                                                                                                                               0
                                  IV estimate




                                                                                                                 IV estimate




                                                                                                                                          q               q
                                                                                                                               -2




                                                                                                   q                                                                        q
                                                0.00




                                                                              q

                                                               q
                                                                                                                               -4
                                                -0.10




                                                                                                                               -6




                                                               1              2                    3                                      1               2                 3

                                                                     Years from Test                                                             Years from Test


                                                                   (d) Obese                                                              (e) Diastolic BP
                                                                                                                               0.2
                                                10 15 20




                                                                                                                               0.1
                                  IV estimate




                                                                                                                 IV estimate




                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                               0.0
                                                5




                                                                                                                                          q                                 q
                                                                                                   q
                                                                              q
                                                0




                                                                                                                               -0.1




                                                               q
                                                                                                                               -0.2
                                                -10




                                                               1              2                    3                                      1               2                 3

                                                                     Years from Test                                                             Years from Test


                                                               (f) Systolic BP                                                                (g) High BP

Source: Authors' calculations from the UCLA EHR data. Horizontal axis indicates the year relative to the
initial lab test. Vertical axis indicates size of the regression discontinuity effect estimated using local linear
regression. 95 percent confidence intervals displayed.




                                                                                                             36
Figure 11: Optum Spending Outcomes Using a Balanced (red) vs. Unbalanced (black) Panel




                                                                                                   4000
                    0.15




                                                                                     IV estimate
                                q                                                                                                                    q




                                                                                                   2000
      IV estimate




                                                                                                                  q       q                  q
                                             q                                                                                       q   q       q       qq
                                         q
                                                                q                                                                q
                                    q               q                                                         q       q
                    0.05




                                                                                q
                                                        q   q




                                                                                                   0
                                                                    qq

                                                                            q




                                                                                                   -2000
                    -0.05




                                                                                                              1       2         3        4       5       6
                                1        2         3        4       5       6
                                                                                                                              Years from Test
                                                 Years from Test
                                                                                                                  (b) Recommended Care
                               (a) Any Diagnosis of Diabetes
                    2500




                                                                                                   300
                    1500
      IV estimate




                                                                                     IV estimate




                                                                                                                                                         qq

                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                   0 100



                                                                        q                                                            q
                                                                                                                  q       q
                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                q   q       qq
                                    q                                                                         q       q
                    500




                                                        q   q
                                q                                                                                                q
                                         qq
                                                    q
                    0




                                                                                                   -200




                                1        2         3        4       5       6                                 1       2         3        4       5       6

                                                 Years from Test                                                              Years from Test


                            (c) Diabetes-related Office Spending                                           (d) Diabetes-related Vision Care
                    3000




                                                                                                   200
      IV estimate




                                                                                                              q
                                                                                     IV estimate




                                             q                                                                    q   q
                    1000




                                                                    qq                                                           q                       qq
                                                                                                   0




                                                            qq              qq
                                                                                                                                     q   q
                                    q               qq                                                                    q
                                q        q                                                                                                       qq
                    0




                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                   -400
                    -1000




                                1        2         3        4       5       6
                                                                                                              1       2         3        4       5       6
                                                 Years from Test
                                                                                                                              Years from Test
                                    (e) Diabetes-related Labs
                                                                                                           (f) Endocrinology Specialist Care

Source: Authors' calculations from the Optum Health Risk Assessment claims data. Horizontal axis indicates
the year relative to the initial lab test. Vertical axis indicates size of the regression discontinuity effect estimated
using local linear regression. 95 percent confidence intervals displayed.



                                                                                    37
Figure 12: Optum Utilization Outcomes Using a Balanced (red) vs. Unbalanced (black) Panel




                                                                                                    4
                    8 10




                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                      q   qq
      IV estimate




                                                                                     IV estimate
                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                       q          qq
                    6




                                                                                                              qq
                                                                   q




                                                                                                    0
                                       q                                   q
                                                           q
                    4




                                                               q                                                           q
                                   q                                   q       qq
                                               q
                                           q
                    2




                                                                                                    -2
                                                       q
                    -2 0




                                   1       2          3        4       5       6                              1        2         3        4       5       6

                                                    Years from Test                                                            Years from Test


                               (a) # Diabetes-Related Office Visits                                               (b) # Glucose/A1c Labs
      IV estimate

                    500 1000




                                                                                                    1.0

                                                                           q
                                                                       q
                                                                                     IV estimate




                                                                               qq                                                                     q
                                                               q                                                                              q           qq
                                                                                                    0.5




                                                                   q                                                                              q
                                                       q
                                           q               q                                                                              q
                                   q           q                                                                                      q
                    0




                                       q                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                    0.0




                                                                                                              q        q


                                   1       2          3        4       5       6
                                                                                                              1        2         3        4       5       6
                                                    Years from Test
                                                                                                                               Years from Test
                       (c) Diabetes-controlling Drug Spending
                                                                                                   (d) Any diabetes-controlling drug spending
                                                                                                    200 400
                    500




                                               q
      IV estimate




                                                                                     IV estimate




                                       q               qq          q       q
                                   q       q                                                                      q
                    0




                                                               q                                                                                      q
                                                                                                              q        qq                         q
                                                                                                    0




                                                                       q                                                          qq                      qq
                                                                               qq                                                         qq
                    -500




                                                                                                    -400
                    -1000




                                   1       2          3        4       5       6                              1        2         3        4       5       6

                                                    Years from Test                                                            Years from Test


                                                   (e) Statins                                                        (f) ACE Inhibitors

Source: Authors' calculations from the Optum claims data. Horizontal axis indicates the year relative to the
initial lab test. Vertical axis indicates size of the regression discontinuity effect estimated using local linear
regression. 95 percent confidence intervals displayed.




                                                                                    38
   Figure 13: UCLA EHR Outcomes Using a Balanced (red) vs. Unbalanced (black) Panel




                                                                                                                         1.0
                               3
                               2




                                                                                                                         0.5
                 IV estimate




                                                                                                       IV estimate
                               1
                                          q                                                                                                       q              q




                                                                                                                         0.0
                                                                      q                                                                                                  q   q
                                                                                         q                                                   q
                               0
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                            q                        q
                               -3 -2 -1       q




                                                                                                                         -0.5
                                                                                                                         -1.0
                                          1                2                         3                                                       1               2           3

                                                  Years from Test                                                                                      Years from Test


                                                  (a) BMI                                                                              (b) BMI in normal range
                               2
                               1




                                                                                                                         0.5
                                          q                 q
                               0
                 IV estimate




                                                                      q              q
                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                             q    q          q           q



                                                                                                       IV estimate
                                                                                         q




                                                                                                                         -0.5
                               -2




                                                                                                                                                                 q



                                                                                                                         -1.5
                               -4




                                                                                                                         -2.5


                                          1                2                         3

                                                  Years from Test                                                                            1               2           3

                                                                                                                                                       Years from Test
                                          (c) Overweight
                                                                                                                                                      (d) Obese
                               10




                                                                                                                         10
                               5




                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                  q          q
                 IV estimate




                                                                                                       IV estimate
                               0




                                                                                                                         0




                                          q                 q                                                                                q
                                                                                     q
                                              q                       q                  q
                                                                                                                         -30 -20 -10




                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                               -10
                               -20




                                          1                2                         3                                                       1               2           3

                                                  Years from Test                                                                                      Years from Test


                                          (e) Diastolic BP                                                                                       (f) Systolic BP
                                                                          0.2
                                                                          -0.2 0.0




                                                                                                           q
                                                                                         q
                                                        IV estimate




                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                     q
                                                                          -0.6




                                                                                         1                2                              3

                                                                                                 Years from Test


                                                                                             (g) High BP

Source: Authors' calculations from the Optum claims data. Horizontal axis indicates the year relative to the
initial lab test. Vertical axis indicates size of the regression discontinuity effect estimated using local linear
regression. 95 percent confidence intervals displayed.

                                                                                                   39
Table 2: RD Estimates of Effects of Diabetes Diagnosis on Spending by Category in First 12
Months Following A1c Test

                                 Control Mean (Std Dev)    Reduced Form        IV Estimate of
                                                             Estimate        Effect of Diagnosis


    Diabetes Diagnosis                    0.183                0.108***             NA
                                                                (0.019)


    Spending on ADA-                 362.03 (718.09)          207.609***        1,096.894***
    Recommended Care                                           (22.912)           (112.295)


    Spending on Office-Based          26.17 (122.28)          79.112***          507.661***
    Care Related to Diabetes                                   (6.912)            (42.690)


    Spending on Diabetes-              2.26 (27.92)            5.483***           28.215***
    Related Vision Services                                    (1.446)             (7.360)


    Spending on Diabetes-             89.10 (353.69)          78.650***          505.367***
    Related Labs                                               (13.891)           (80.798)


    Endocrinology Specialist          19.95 (313.62)           38.741*            139.092*
    Care Spending                                              (23.024)           (82.668)
   Notes: Control means calculated using observations with A1c test values below 6.5 and greater
   than or equal to 6. Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth cal-
   culation from Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009).




                                                  40
Table 3: RD Estimates of Effects of Diabetes Diagnosis on Drug Spending and Other Utiliza-
tion Measures in First 12 Months Following A1c Test

                               Control Mean (Std Dev)     Reduced Form       IV Estimate of
                                                            Estimate       Effect of Diagnosis


      Number of Diabetes-            0.177 (0.775)           0.450***           3.166***
      Related Office Visits                                   (0.045)            (0.298)


      Number of A1c                   1.46 (1.01)             0.063*             0.393**
      or Glucose Labs                                         (0.032)            (0.194)


      Spending on Diabetes-           4.37 (97.04)             5.264             24.379
      Controlling Drugs                                       (3.497)           (16.183)


      Any Spending on                    0.005               0.009***           0.043***
      Diabetes Drugs                                          (0.003)            (0.014)


      Spending on Statins           151.21 (436.84)            2.073              8.939
                                                              (9.799)            (49.50)


      Spending on                   96.00 (299.36)           13.767**           55.420**
      ACE Inhibitors                                          (7.020)           (28.258)
   Notes: Control means calculated using observations with A1c test values below 6.5 and greater
   than or equal to 6. Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth cal-
   culation from Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009).




                                                    41
Table 4: RD Estimates of Effects of Diabetes Diagnosis on Subsequent Diagnoses of "Pre-
ventable" Conditions, Subsequent A1c, and Mortality in First 12 Months Following A1c Test

                                 Control Mean (Std Dev)    Reduced Form        IV Estimate of
                                                             Estimate        Effect of Diagnosis


   Diabetic Retinopathy                   0.0018               0.004**             0.021**
                                                               (0.002)             (0.010)


   Diabetic Neuropathy                    0.007                0.010**            0.068***
                                                               (0.004)             (0.029)


   Kidney Disease                         0.0063               0.018***           0.111***
                                                               (0.004)             (0.026)


   Ketoacidosis                           0.0006                0.002               0.009
                                                               (0.001)             (0.006)


   Diabetic Coma                          0.0006                0.001               0.006
                                                               (0.001)             (0.005)


   Change in A1c from                 -0.0564 (0.460)          -0.059**           -0.342**
   Previous Year                                                (0.027)            (0.166)


   Change in Total Cholesterol        -6.429 (32.62)            -1.471             -4.993
   from Previous Year                                          (1.212)             (4.114)


   Mortality                           0.005 (0.073)           0.0002               0.001
                                                               (0.001)             (0.007)
  Notes: Control means calculated using observations with A1c test values below 6.5 and greater
  than or equal to 6. Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth cal-
  culation from Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009).




                                                  42
Table 5: RD Estimates of Effects of Diabetes Diagnosis on BMI and Blood Pressure in First 12
Months Following A1c Test (UCLA EHR Results)

                                Control Mean (Std Dev)    Reduced Form        IV Estimate of
                                                            Estimate        Effect of Diagnosis


     Diabetes Diagnosis                  0.080                0.292***             NA
                                                               (0.041)


     BMI                              28.47 (5.51)              0.137              0.430
                                                               (0.245)            (0.767)


     Normal BMI                          0.267                  0.001              0.004
                                                               (0.025)            (0.070)


     Overweight                          0.343                  0.004              0.010
                                                               (0.030)            (0.082)


     Obese                               0.356                  -0.003             0.010
                                                               (0.026)            (0.083)


     Diastolic blood pressure         76.13 (8.31)              -1.041            -4.016
                                                               (0.710)            (2.764)


     Systolic blood pressure         129.34 (14.29)             -0.148            -0.384
                                                               (0.910)            (2.365)


     High blood pressure                 0.225                  -0.009            -0.022
                                                               (0.032)            (0.080)
   Notes: Control means calculated using observations with A1c test values below 6.5 and greater
   than or equal to 6. Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth cal-
   culation from Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009). Models for all outcomes, with the exception
   of diabetes diagnosis, control for the baseline (pre-test) level of the outcome variable.




                                                 43
Table 6: RD Estimates of Effects of Diabetes Diagnosis on Self-Reported Health and Behaviors
in First 12 Months Following A1c Test (Health Risk Assessment Results)

                                            Reduced Form        IV Estimate of
                                              Estimate        Effect of Diagnosis


                  Diabetes Diagnosis            0.159***             NA
                                                 (0.040)


                  Self Reported Health           -0.116              -0.728
                  Very Good or Excellent        (0.083)             (0.558)


                  Physical and Emotional         -0.077              -0.292
                  Well-Being                    (0.058)             (0.221)


                  Diet and Exercise              -0.003              -0.014
                                                (0.053)             (0.289)


                  Healthy Smoking and            -0.054              -0.323
                  Drinking Choices              (0.060)             (0.369)
   Notes: Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth calculation from
   Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009).




                                                44
                                        Table 7: Selection on Observable Characteristics at the Cutoff

                                        Female               Age             Black       Hispanic                  Asian               Medicare

     Optum                               -0.019            -0.928*            NA           NA                       NA                 -0.083***
                                         (0.010)           (0.556)                                                                      (0.011)
     UCLA EHR                            -0.002             -0.998          -0.003        -0.001                   -0.027                0.056
                                         (0.035)           (1.066)          (0.022)       (0.027)                  (0.026)              (0.037)
     Health Risk Assessment               0.029            -1.185*            NA            NA                       NA                  -0.001




45
                                         (0.026)           (0.637)                                                                      (0.005)
     Spending in Year Before Test:   Total spending   Recommended Care      Statins   ACE Inhibitors   Endocrinology Specialty Care

     Optum                            -1,808.679**          -13.21         -14.173*        4.791                    1.545
                                         (808.22)          (10.338)         (7.902)       (5.787)                  (1.916)
     Health Risk Assessment               251.64           -17.542         -42.771*       26.489                   -3.299
                                       (1,578.118)         (30.655)        (23.423)      (18.638)                  (3.240)
       Notes: Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth calculation from Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009).
                         Table 8: RD Estimates for Sample Attrition

                           Optum                                UCLA EHR
          Control Mean     Reduced Form Estimate    Control Mean Reduced Form Estimate
 Year 2      0.754                  -0.017             0.986             -0.009
                                   (0.012)                              (0.009)
 Year 3       0.484                0.016*              0.207             -0.010
                                  (0.0097)                              (0.042)
 Year 4       0.300                 0.003
                                   (0.010)
 Year 5       0.200                 -0.005
                                   (0.009)
 Year 6       0.123                 -0.001
                                   (0.008)
Notes: Control means calculated using observations with A1c test values below 6.5 and greater
than or equal to 6. Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth cal-
culation from Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009).




                                              46
References
Almond, D., J. J. Doyle, A. E. Kowalski, and H. Williams (2010, May). Estimating Marginal Returns to
  Medical Care: Evidence from At-risk Newborns. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(2), 591­634.

Almond, D., A. Lee, and A. E. Schwartz (2016, March). Impacts of classifying New York City students
  as overweight. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113(13), 3488­3491.

American College of Cardiology (2017, November). New ACC/AHA High Blood Pressure Guidelines
 Lower Definition of Hypertension.

American Diabetes Association (2010, January). Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes Mellitus.
 Diabetes Care 33(Suppl 1), S62­S69.

American Diabetes Association (2017).        Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes - 2017.          Diabetes
 Care 40(1).

American Diabetes Association (2018a, January). 2. Classification and Diagnosis of Diabetes: Stan-
 dards of Medical Care in Diabetes--2018. Diabetes Care 41(Supplement 1), S13­S27.

American Diabetes Association (2018b, May). Economic Costs of Diabetes in the U.S. in 2017. Diabetes
 Care 41(5), 917­928.

Bharadwaj, P., K. V. Løken, and C. Neilson (2013, August). Early Life Health Interventions and Aca-
  demic Achievement. American Economic Review 103(5), 1862­1891.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2017). National Diabetes Statistics Report. Technical
  report, Department of Health & Human Services.

Chyn, E., S. Gold, and J. S. Hastings (2019, April). The Returns to Early-life Interventions for Very
 Low Birth Weight Children. Working Paper 25753, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Coussens, S. (2018, August). Heuristic Thinking in the Emergency Department. Columbia School of
  Public Health Working Paper.

Dahlberg, M., K. Mani, M. Öhman, and A. Wanhainen (2016, January). Health Information and Well-
 Being: Evidence from an Asymptomatic Disease. Technical Report 2016:2, Uppsala University, De-
 partment of Economics.

Doyle, J. J. (2011, July). Returns to Local-Area Healthcare Spending: Evidence from Health Shocks to
 Patients Far From Home. American economic journal. Applied economics 3(3), 221­243.

Doyle, J. J., J. A. Graves, J. Gruber, and S. A. Kleiner (2015, February). Measuring Returns to Hospital
 Care: Evidence from Ambulance Referral Patterns. Journal of Political Economy 123(1), 170­214.

Finkelstein, A., S. Taubman, B. Wright, M. Bernstein, J. Gruber, J. P. Newhouse, H. Allen, and
  K. Baicker (2012, July). The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the first year.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics Advance Access.

Fisher, E. S., D. E. Wennberg, T. A. Stukel, D. J. Gottlieb, F. L. Lucas, and É. L. Pinder (2003a, February).
  The Implications of Regional Variations in Medicare Spending. Part 1: The Content, Quality, and
  Accessibility of Care. Annals of Internal Medicine 138(4), 273.

Fisher, E. S., D. E. Wennberg, T. A. Stukel, D. J. Gottlieb, F. L. Lucas, and É. L. Pinder (2003b, Febru-
  ary). The Implications of Regional Variations in Medicare Spending. Part 2: Health Outcomes and
  Satisfaction with Care. Annals of Internal Medicine 138(4), 288.


                                                     47
Frakes, M. (2013, February). The Impact of Medical Liability Standards on Regional Variations in
  Physician Behavior: Evidence from the Adoption of National-Standard Rules. American Economic
  Review 103(1), 257­276.
Fuji, D., G. Imbens, and K. Kalyanaraman (2009, September). Notes for Matlab and Stata Regression
  Discontinuity Software.
Gerteis, J., D. Izrael, D. Deitz, L. LeRoy, R. Ricciardi, T. Miller, and J. Basu (2014, April). Multiple
 Chronic Conditions Chartbook. Technical Report AHRQ Publications No, Q14-0038, Agency for
 Healthcare Research and Quality, Rockville, MD.
Hirst, J. A., A. J. Farmer, R. Ali, N. W. Roberts, and R. J. Stevens (2012, February). Quantifying the
  Effect of Metformin Treatment and Dose on Glycemic Control. Diabetes Care 35(2), 446­454.
Iizuka, T., K. Nishiyama, B. Chen, and K. Eggleston (2017, May). Is Preventive Care Worth the Cost?
   Evidence from Mandatory Checkups in Japan. Working Paper 23413, National Bureau of Economic
   Research.
Kim, H. B., S. A. Lee, and W. Lim (2019, May). Knowing is not half the battle: Impacts of information
  from the National Health Screening Program in Korea. Journal of Health Economics 65, 1­14.
Kling, J. R., J. B. Liebman, and L. F. Katz (2007). Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects.
  Econometrica 75(1), 83­119.
Muntner, P., R. M. Carey, S. Gidding, D. W. Jones, S. J. Taler, J. T. Wright Jr., and P. K. Whelton (2018,
 January). Potential US Population Impact of the 2017 ACC/AHA High Blood Pressure Guideline.
 Circulation 137(2), 109­118.
Oster, E. (2018, October). Diabetes and Diet: Purchasing Behavior Change in Response to Health
 Information. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10(4), 308­348.
The International Expert Committee (2009, July). International Expert Committee Report on the Role
  of the A1c Assay in the Diagnosis of Diabetes. Diabetes Care 32(7), 1327­1334.
Tsugawa, Y., O. Takahashi, J. B. Meigs, R. B. Davis, F. Imamura, T. Fukui, W. C. Taylor, and C. C. Wee
  (2012, December). New Diabetes Diagnostic Threshold of Hemoglobin A1c and the 3-Year Incidence
  of Retinopathy. Diabetes 61(12), 3280­3284.
Vandorsten, J. P., W. C. Dodson, M. A. Espeland, W. A. Grobman, J. M. Guise, B. M. Mercer, H. L.
  Minkoff, B. Poindexter, L. A. Prosser, G. F. Sawaya, J. R. Scott, R. M. Silver, L. Smith, A. Thomas,
  and A. T. N. Tita (2013, March). NIH consensus development conference: diagnosing gestational
  diabetes mellitus. NIH consensus and state-of-the-science statements 29(1), 1­31.
Welch, H. G., L. M. Schwartz, and S. Woloshin (2011). Overdiagnosed: Making People Sick in the Pursuit
 of Health. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Whelton, P. K., R. M. Carey, W. S. Aronow, D. E. Casey, K. J. Collins, C. D. Himmelfarb, S. M. DePalma,
 S. Gidding, K. A. Jamerson, D. W. Jones, E. J. MacLaughlin, P. Muntner, B. Ovbiagele, S. C. Smith,
 C. C. Spencer, R. S. Stafford, S. J. Taler, R. J. Thomas, K. A. Williams, J. D. Williamson, and J. T. Wright
 (2018, May). 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA
 Guideline for the Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Management of High Blood Pressure in
 Adults: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force
 on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Journal of the American College of Cardiology 71(19), e127­e248.
Zhao, M., Y. Konishi, and P. Glewwe (2013, March). Does information on health status lead to a health-
  ier lifestyle? Evidence from China on the effect of hypertension diagnosis on food consumption.
  Journal of Health Economics 32(2), 367­385.

                                                     48
    What Difference Does a Diagnosis Make? Evidence from
                      Marginal Patients
                                              Appendix

                          Mattan Alalouf   Sarah Miller     Laura R. Wherry


1    Additional Results
We include several additional results in the Appendix that are discussed in the text. These results are
presented in Tables A2-A14.

2    Health Risk Assessment Questions by Category
Alcohol and Tobacco Use

    · How many alcoholic drinks do you consume per week?

    · Do you currently use cigarettes?

    · Do you currently use cigars or pipes?

    · Do you currently use smokeless tobacco?

Diet and Exercise

    · How many servings of high-fat foods do you consume per day?

    · During a typical week, how many days do you do physical activity outside your job?

    · Have you made changes recently to manage your weight?

    · Have you made an effort recently to change physical activity?

Health Status

    · How would you rate your health?

Physical and Emotional Well-Being

    · In general, how often is stress a problem for you?

    · In the past year, how much effect has stress had on your health

    · In the past year, how many days have you missed an entire workday due to physical or mental
      health problems?

    · In the past two weeks, how often did physical/emotional problems make it difficult to work the
      required hours?



                                                  49
      · In the past two weeks, how often were you able to repeat the same motions working without
        difficulty cause by physical health

      · In the past two weeks, how often did physical/emotional problems make it difficult to concen-
        trate on work?

      · In the past two weeks, how often did physical/emotional problems make it difficult to handle
        your workload?

      · In the past two weeks, how often did physical/emotional problems make it difficult to help
        people get work done?

      · In the past two weeks, how often did physical/emotional problems make it difficult to feel
        capable?

      · In the past four weeks, how much did your health problems affect your ability to do your regular
        daily activities?

3      Additional Details on UCLA EHR Data
For the purposes of this research project, de-identified medical records data were acquired through
the Informatics Program of the UCLA Clinical and Translational Science Institute. The data were
extracted from UCLA's Integrated Clinical and Research Data Repository (xDR), a large scale clin-
ical data warehouse that includes a full copy of the CareConnect Clarity data warehouse linked to
"legacy" data from older outpatient and hospital billing and managed care systems. Encounter data
from xDR, which include hospitalizations, outpatient visits, and other encounter types, were used
from the period January 1, 2006 to November 30, 2016. These data include information on the type
of encounter, billing diagnoses, procedures completed (per billing data), and laboratory test results.
Data on medication orders were only available starting in March 2, 2013 with the introduction of the
CareConnect system at UCLA.
      In contrast to Optum, the UCLA data include lab results for every lab ordered by a UCLA provider,
including those processed by outside lab facilities. In addition, features of the medical records data
that are unavailable in the Optum claims are the inclusion of vital sign data and problem lists, which
are health conditions recorded by the physician during an encounter and are visible to the patient on
the electronic patient portal and in printed visit summaries. The vital sign data and problem lists are
only available starting in March 2, 2013 with the introduction of the current EHR CareConnect system
at UCLA.

4      Construction of Analytic Samples
4.1     Optum Data
We identify each patient's initial A1c lab test in the Optum lab file. The lab file contains test descrip-
tions and result values for lab tests provided by Optum affiliated laboratories. Patients who never
receive A1c tests are not included in the analytic sample. We identified A1c tests as those with LOINC



                                                    50
codes 4548-4, 27353-2, 17856-6, and 17855-8. We used the test description text to drop remaining inap-
propriate tests. We include only patients who were 18 or older at the time of the initial test. We do not
include patients whose first A1c test occurred before 2009.
      We drop patients who have any inpatient, outpatient, or drug spending related to diabetes prior
to the date of the first observed lab test (see Appendix Table A15. We treat inpatient and outpatient
spending as related to diabetes if any of the associated ICD-9 diagnosis codes begin with "249," or
"250," or if the associated ICD-10 codes begin with "E08," "E09," "E10," "E11," "E13." Individuals
with diabetes related lab tests (e.g. fasting plasma glucose, and random glucose tests) prior to the date
of the first A1c test are also excluded. We also drop patients with pregnancy related diagnosis codes
any time prior to the initial A1c test so that we can focus on standard diabetes diagnoses separately
from gestational diabetes. We treat drug spending as related to diabetes if the prescription's National
Drug Code (NDC) matches any of those in Appendix Table A16. We only observe the quarter in which
a drug was prescribed, and we treat the first date of the quarter as the time of prescription.
      We impose restrictions on how long patients must be present in the Optum data to ensure that
we are identifying each patient's first A1c test. Without requiring that patients be present in the data
prior to the date of the first test, we would likely mis-classify individuals with previously diagnosed
diabetes (diagnosed and treated prior to their first Optum claim) with initial diabetes diagnoses. The
Optum files provide records of insurance enrollment dates for each patient. We drop patients from
our analysis if they were not enrolled in an Optum-covered insurance plan for at least 366 days prior
to and following the date of the initial lab test. Many patients changed insurance plans during the
sample period. We included these patients as long as they were covered under some Optum plan
for the full 732 day period around the initial lab test, no matter how many times they switched plans.
Some patients had brief breaks in coverage in the dates before and after the initial lab test. We dropped
patients who had either had multiple breaks in coverage or had at least one break of more than 60 days.

4.2    UCLA EHR Data
The analytic sample was composed of all individuals with PCPs at UCLA aged 18 and older at the time
of their first encounter with at least one A1c test for diabetes. Since LOINC codes were unavailable
for the majority of labs, we identified A1c tests through text search of lab test descriptions to match
the selection criteria used in the Optum data.
      Since EHR vital records were only collected beginning in 2013, we exclude individuals with initial
A1c tests that occurred prior to 2013. In order to preserve patient confidentiality, the EHR data have
limited information available on dates of service. Each encounter is dated by the number of days
relative to the patient's first encounter. In addition, we have information on the calendar year of the
patient's last encounter. Therefore, we estimate the calendar year of the lab test by subtracting the
difference in the number of days between the last encounter date and the lab test date divided by 365
from the calendar year of the patient's last encounter.
      We required that each individual have at least one year of data prior to their initial diabetes test
and that they have at least one encounter one year after the test date (i.e. remained in the data for at
least one year following the test). Additional exclusions were made for individuals receiving a glucose
test prior to the initial A1c test, individuals with diagnosis codes related to diabetes at any time prior
to the test date, individuals with diagnosis codes related to pregnancy during the year prior to the test

                                                    51
date, and anyone taking a drug for diabetes management prior to the test date. Similar to the Optum
data, we have access to UCLA data prior to 2013 with information on encounters and labs dating back
to 2006. We use this entire period to implement these sample exclusions, with the exception of the
exclusion based on receipt of drugs for diabetes management. The last exclusion was only applied in
2013 or later since the prescription drug data are only available for these later years.




                                                   52
Figure A1: Details on Sample Construction: Optum




                       53
Untitled Diagram.html                                                                                                                         9/21/19, 2'45 PM

                         Figure A2: Details on Sample Construction: UCLA EHR

              All Patient-Labs for
                 A1C 2013-2016
                    (50,328)




               Patient-Labs with
                                                                                                  Patients-Labs with     Patients-Labs with
              no evidence of prior        Patients-Labs with      Patients-Labs with
                                                                                                  any other Diabetes     any Pregnancy Dx
              diabetes evaluation      any Diabetes Dx between any Diabetes Rx between
                                                                                                labs (A1C, FPG, OGTT)     up to one year
                                         2013 and the lab date   2006 and the lab date
                or management                                                                    2006 and the lab date    prior to lab date
                    (47,576)



                                                                                      (2,752)




               Patient-Labs with                                   Patient-Labs with              Patient-Labs with
               at least one year of                               eligibility that starts        eligibility that ends
              eligibility before and                                  less than one                 less than one
                                                                  year before lab date           year after lab date
                after the lab date
                  [Final Sample]
                      (23,882)


                                                                                     (23,698)




               Patients that meet
               all criteria (one lab
                    per patient)
                      (23,882)




                        (23,882)




about:blank                                                                                                                                        Page 1 of 1



                                                                54
               Figure A3: Optum Diagnosis and Spending Outcomes by Year After Initial Lab Test
               2




                                                                            1
                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                       q
               1
 IV estimate




                                                              IV estimate

                                                                            0
                                                         q                                             q
                                                                                         q
                                            q                                                   q
                            q
               0




                                                                            -1
                                                   q                                                                           q

                                   q
                     q




                                                                            -2
               -1




                     1      2      3        4      5     6                  -3          1       2      3        4      5       6

                                 Years from Test                                                     Years from Test


                     (a) Health Very Good or Excellent                                 (b) Physical and Emotional Well-Being
               400




                                                                            3
               300




                                                                            2
 IV estimate




                                                              IV estimate

                                                                            1
               200




                                                         q
                                                                                                       q               q
                                                                                                q
                                                                            0




                                                                                                                               q
                                                   q                                     q                      q
               100




                                                                            -3 -2 -1




                                            q
                     q      q
               0




                                   q




                     1      2      3        4      5     6                              1       2      3        4      5       6

                                 Years from Test                                                     Years from Test


                           (d) Diet and Exercise                              (e) Healthy Smoking and Drinking Choices

Source: Authors' calculations from the HRA survey data. Horizontal axis indicates the year relative to the
initial lab test. Vertical axis indicates size of the regression discontinuity effect estimated using local linear
regression. 95 percent confidence intervals displayed.




                                                             55
  Table A1: Diagnosis and Procedure Codes Used to Measure Spending Outcomes

Description                  ICD 9 Codes         ICD 10 Codes        CPT Codes

Diabetes Related DX          249, 250            E08, E09,    E10,   N/A
                                                 E11, E13

Preventable Conditions       2501, 2502, 2504,   E101, E111, E100,   N/A
                             2050, 2506          E110, E102, E112,
                                                 E103, E113, E104,
                                                 E114

Diabetic Ketoacidosis        2501                E101, E111          N/A

Diabeteic Coma               2502                E100, E110          N/A

Kidney Disease               2504                E102, E112          N/A

Diabetic Retinopathy         2505                E103, E113          N/A

Diabetic Neuropathy          2506                E104, E114          N/A

Consultations                N/A                 N/A                 99201-99215, 99241-
                                                                     99245

Nutritional Therapy          N/A                 N/A                 98960, 98961, 98962,
                                                                     99078

Monitoring                   N/A                 N/A                 95250, 95251

Self Management Training     N/A                 N/A                 98960, 98961, 98962,
                                                                     99078

Recommended Care             N/A                 N/A                 All Codes in "Mon-
                                                                     itoring," "Consultia-
                                                                     tions," "Nutritional
                                                                     Therapy," and "Self
                                                                     Management      and
                                                                     Training"

A1c or Random Glucose Labs   N/A                 N/A                 82947, 83036

Preventable Conditions       2501, 2502, 2504,   E101, E111, E100,   N/A
                             2050, 2506          E110, E102, E112,
                                                 E103, E113, E104,
                                                 E114




                                           56
Table A2: RD Estimates of Effects of Diabetes Diagnosis in First 12 Months Following A1c
Test (Health Risk Assessment Results)

                                                   Baseline Mean       Reduced Form         IV Estimate of
       Diet and Exercise                                                 Estimate         Effect of Diagnosis
       Eat 3+ Servings of High Fat Food                  0.193              -0.036               -0.138
       per Day                                                             (0.031)               (0.120)
       Recently made Changes to                          0.884              0.019                 0.189
       Improve Weight                                                      (0.044)               (0.467)
       Engage in Physical Activity 3+                    0.519              0.044                 0.192
       times per week                                                      (0.042)               (0.195)
       Recently Made Changes to                          0.903              0.008                 0.051
       Increase Physical Activity                                          (0.037)               (0.250)
       Physical and Emotional Well-Being
       Health Interferes with Activities                 0.131              0.012                 0.135
       of Daily Life                                                       (0.039)               (0.446)
       Stress Intereferes with Health                    0.101              0.005                 0.026
       Quite a Bit or A Lot                                                (0.029)               (0.167)
       Stress is a problem Sometimes,                    0.371              0.022                 0.174
       Almost Always or Always                                             (0.050)               (0.396)
       In the past 2 weeks, physical/emotional problems made it difficult... (some of the time or more)
       ...to feel capable                              0.147                 -0.014               -0.091
                                                                            (0.036)               (0.237)
       ...to handle workload                           0.089                 -0.008               -0.043
                                                                            (0.028)               (0.149)
       ...to help others with work                     0.152                 -0.001               -0.003
                                                                            (0.035)               (0.157)
       ...to start work right away                     0.069                 -0.035                -0.16
                                                                            (0.022)               (0.103)
       ...to concentrate at work                        0.18                 0.034                 0.201
                                                                            (0.041)               (0.248)
       ...to do repetitive tasks                       0.151                 -0.033                -0.13
                                                                            (0.034)               (0.141)
       ...to work the number of hours                  0.076                 -0.007               -0.054
       required by your job                                                 (0.030)               (0.235)
       of days missed work due to physical               0.151              0.023                 0.118
       or mental health problems                                           (0.036)               (0.192)
       Self-Reported Health
       Health is Very Good or Excellent                  0.514              -0.058               -0.363
                                                                           (0.041)               (0.276)
       Smoking and Drinking Behavior
       Currently Smoke Cigarettes                        0.084             0.045*                 0.208
                                                                           (0.027)               (0.130)
       Currently Smoke Cigars                            0.018              -0.006               -0.028
                                                                           (0.009)               (0.040)
       Currently Use Smokeless Tobacco                   0.014              -0.003               -0.022
                                                                           (0.005)               (0.044)
       Number of Alcoholic Drinks Weekly                 1.358              0.022                 0.091
                                                                           (0.181)               (0.758)
  Notes: Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth calculation from
  Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009).



                                                          57
Table A3: RD Estimates of Effects of Diabetes Diagnosis in First 12 Months Following A1c
Test, Controlling for Medicare Advantage Enrollment and Baseline Spending

                                  Control Mean (Std Dev)    Reduced Form        IV Estimate of
                                                              Estimate        Effect of Diagnosis

  Diabetes Diagnosis                       0.183                0.109***
                                                                 (0.019)

  Spending on ADA                      362.03 (718.09)         196.928***        1,025.114***
  Recommended Care                                              (22.797)           (108.940)

  Spending on Office-Based             26.17 (122.28)          79.876***          505.539***
  Care Related to Diabetes                                      (6.910)            (42.050)

  Spending on Diabetes-Related         89.10 (353.69)          79.354***          502.903***
  Labs                                                          (13.914)           (79.820)

  Spending on Diabetes-Related          2.26 (27.92)            4.595***           27.031***
  Vision Services                                               (1.469)             (8.559)

  Endocrinology Specialist Care        19.95 (313.62)            37.613            133.221
  Spending                                                      (22.987)           (81.415)

  Number of Diabetes-Related            0.177 (0.775)           0.456***           3.160***
  Office Visits                                                 (0.045)             (0.294)

  Number of A1c/Glucose Labs             1.46 (1.01)            0.064**             0.397**
                                                                (0.032)             (0.192)

  Spending on                           4.37 (97.04)              4.843             22.096
  Diabetes-Controlling Drugs                                     (3.503)           (15.966)

  Any Spending on                          0.005                0.009***           0.041***
  Diabetes-Controlling Drugs                                     (0.003)            (0.014)

  Spending on Statins                  151.21 (436.84)           -7.354            -31.242
                                                                 (9.649)           (41.094)

  Spending on ACE Inhibitors           96.00 (299.36)             7.996             31.717
                                                                 (6.966)           (27.601)

  Notes: Control means calculated using observations with A1c test values below 6.5 and greater
  than or equal to 6. Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth cal-
  culation from Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009).




                                                58
Table A4: RD Estimates of Effects of Diabetes Diagnosis in First 12 Months Following A1c
Test, Controlling for Medicare Advantage Enrollment And Baseline Spending

                                  Control Mean (Std Dev)     Reduced Form        IV Estimate of
                                                               Estimate        Effect of Diagnosis

   Diabetic Retinopathy                    0.002                 0.005**             0.023**
                                                                 (0.002)             (0.010)

   Ketoacidosis                            0.007                  0.001               0.009
                                                                 (0.001)             (0.006)

   Diabetic Coma                           0.006                  0.001               0.006
                                                                 (0.001)             (0.005)

   Diabetic Neuropathy                     0.0006                0.011**            0.075***
                                                                 (0.004)             (0.029)

   Kidney Disease                          0.0006                0.019***           0.118***
                                                                 (0.004)             (0.026)

   Change in A1c                       -0.056 (0.460)            -0.054**            -0.293**
   from Previous Year                                             (0.025)             (0.141)

   Change in Total Cholesterol         -6.429 (32.62)             -0.928             -3.169
   from Previous Year                                            (1.208)             (4.123)

   Change in Creatinine                 0.014 (0.113)             0.004                0.02
   from Previous Year                                            (0.005)             (0.025)

   Mortality                               0.005                  0.001               0.004
                                                                 (0.001)             (0.007)

  Notes: Control means calculated using observations with A1c test values below 6.5 and greater
  than or equal to 6. Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth cal-
  culation from Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009). ^Note that mortality is measured 2 years
  after the initial test as we require individuals to be present in the data and alive for the first 12
  months after the initial test.




                                                   59
Table A5: Spending on Elements of Recommended Care Not Identified with a Diabetes Di-
agnosis Code

                                                                       IV Estimate of
                                                                     Effect of Diagnosis

         Spending on All Office Care                                        22.23
                                                                           (84.39)

         Number of Evaluation and Management Visits                         -0.339
                                                                           (0.479)

         Spending on Statins, ACE inhibitors, diabetes-controlling        254.07**
         drugs, glucose labs and endocrinology specialty care             (102.30)

  Notes: Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth calculation from
  Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009).




                                               60
Table A6: RD Estimates of Effects of Diabetes Diagnosis on Utilization in First 12 Months
(UCLA EHR Results)

                                         Control Mean (Std Dev)    Reduced Form       IV Estimate of
                                                                     Estimate       Effect of Diagnosis

 Diabetes Diagnosis                               0.08                0.292***             N/A
                                                                       (0.041)

 Diabetes Diagnosis on Problem List               0.03                0.126***           0.309***
                                                                       (0.032)            (0.072)

 Number of Ambulatory Encounters               0.27 (1.58)            2.035***           4.452***
 Related to Diabetes                                                   (0.204)            (0.354)

 Number of A1c Labs                            0.73 (0.98)             0.152*             0.397*
                                                                       (0.085)            (0.209)

 Prescription for Diabetes-Controlling            0.019               0.058***           0.136***
 Drug                                                                  (0.017)            (0.039)


   Notes: Control means calculated using observations with A1c test values below 6.5 and greater
   than or equal to 6. Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth cal-
   culation from Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009).




                                                 61
   Table A7: Alternative models and bandwidths: Spending and Utilization Outcomes

                                 Main model         Global            Optimal            Optimal
                                                quadratic model     Bandwidth x 2     Bandwidth x 0.5

Diabetes Diagnosis                 0.108***            0.292***         0.161***          0.178***
                                    (0.019)             (0.011)          (0.013)           (0.016)

Spending on ADA                   207.609***          270.396***      268.938***         137.849***
Recommended Care                   (22.912)            (18.260)        (18.671)           (32.218)

Spending on Office-Based           79.112***          140.478***      115.549***          52.189***
Care Related to Diabetes            (6.912)             (5.615)         (5.566)            (10.033)

Spending on Diabetes-Related       78.650***          139.370***      114.484***          34.774*
Labs                                (13.891)            (9.964)        (10.831)           (20.660)

Spending on Diabetes-Related       4.245***            9.249***         9.060***            3.214
Vision Services                     (1.489)             (1.279)          (1.196)           (2.157)

Endocrinology Specialist           38.741*             30.525*          33.576*             44.18
Care Spending                      (23.024)            (16.665)         (19.218)          (27.185)

Number of Diabetes-Related         0.442***            0.899***         0.260***          0.673***
Office Visits                       (0.046)             (0.034)          (0.075)           (0.035)

Number of A1c/Glucose Labs          0.063**            0.102***         0.109***            0.06
                                    (0.032)             (0.024)          (0.024)           (0.048)

Spending on                          5.264              -1.01           8.232**             -1.157
Diabetes-Controlling Drugs          (3.497)            (5.168)          (3.422)            (4.627)

Any Spending on                    0.010***            0.010***         0.013***            0.005
Diabetes-Controlling Drugs         (0.003)              (0.003)          (0.003)           (0.004)

Spending on Statins                  2.073             -13.013           -0.991            9.522
                                    (9.799)            (7.967)          (8.209)           (13.486)

Spending on ACE Inhibitors         13.767**             5.975          16.678***           13.999
                                    (7.020)            (5.825)          (5.949)            (9.447)

  Notes: Baseline means calculated using observations with A1c test values below 6.5 and greater
  than or equal to 6. Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth cal-
  culation from Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009). ^Note that mortality is measured 2 years
  after the initial test as we require individuals to be present in the data and alive for the first 12
  months after the initial test.




                                                 62
Table A8: Alternative model and bandwidths: Preventable Conditions and Optum Health
Outcomes

                               Main model        Global           Optimal           Optimal
                                             quadratic model    Bandwidth x 2    Bandwidth x 0.5

 Diabetic Retinopathy            0.004**         0.006***           0.006***           0.004
                                 (0.002)          (0.002)            (0.002)          (0.003)

 Ketoacidosis                     0.002               0.001         0.001*             0.001
                                 (0.001)             (0.001)        (0.001)           (0.001)

 Diabetic Coma                    0.001               0.001          0.001             0.001
                                 (0.001)             (0.001)        (0.001)           (0.001)

 Diabetic Neuropathy             0.010**         0.018***           0.017***           0.004
                                 (0.004)          (0.003)            (0.003)          (0.007)

 Kidney Disease                  0.018***        0.024***           0.023***          0.017***
                                  (0.004)         (0.003)            (0.003)           (0.006)

 Change in A1c                   -0.062**         0.061**            -0.014          -0.105***
 from Previous Year               (0.028)         (0.024)           (0.019)           (0.039)

 Change in Total Cholesterol       -5.26          -2.006*            3.686             -5.212
 from Previous Year               (4.03)          (1.172)           (2.757)           (8.796)

 Change in Creatinine             0.018              -0.004          -0.002              0
 from Previous Year              (0.025)             (0.004)        (0.012)           (0.061)

 Mortality^                       0.000            0.000             0.000             0.000
                                 (0.001)         (0.0004)           (0.001)           (0.001)

  Notes: Baseline means calculated using observations with A1c test values below 6.5 and greater
  than or equal to 6. Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth cal-
  culation from Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009).




                                                63
        Table A9: Alternative model and bandwidths: Clinical Health Measures

                           Main model        Global           Optimal           Optimal
                                         quadratic model    Bandwidth x 2    Bandwidth x 0.5

Diabetes Diagnosis           0.292***         0.300***          0.421***          0.210***
                              (0.041)          (0.041)           (0.032)           (0.061)

BMI                           0.137            0.242             0.068             0.23
                             (0.245)          (0.271)           (0.196)           (0.302)

Normal BMI                    0.001            -0.002            0.011             0.006
                             (0.025)          (0.030)           (0.021)           (0.032)

Overweight                    0.004            0.025             -0.019            0.015
                             (0.030)          (0.037)           (0.026)           (0.041)

Obese                         -0.003           -0.006            0.005             -0.027
                             (0.026)          (0.028)           (0.020)           (0.043)

Diastolic blood pressure      -1.041           -0.807            -0.628            -1.302
                             (0.710)          (0.737)           (0.541)           (1.004)

Systolic blood pressure       -0.148           -0.653            -0.089            -0.807
                             (0.910)          (1.213)           (0.794)           (1.173)

High blood pressure           -0.009           -0.019              0               -0.013
                             (0.032)          (0.045)           (0.029)           (0.041)

Notes: Control means calculated using observations with A1c test values below 6.5 and greater
than or equal to 6. Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth cal-
culation from Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009). Models for all outcomes, with the exception
of diabetes diagnosis, control for the baseline (pre-test) level of the outcome variable.




                                              64
 Table A10: Alternative model and bandwidths: Health Risk Assessment outcomes

                          Main model         Global          Optimal           Optimal
                                         quadratic model   Bandwidth x 2    Bandwidth x 0.5

Diet and Exercise             -0.003          -0.014            0.002             0.07
                             (0.053)         (0.059)           (0.044)           (0.075)

Physical and Emotional        -0.077         -0.023            -0.097*            -0.044
Well-Being                   (0.058)         (0.067)           (0.050)           (0.073)

Self Reported Health          -0.116         -0.048            -0.115*           -0.242**
Very Good or Excellent       (0.083)         (0.090)           (0.067)            (0.121)

Healthy Smoking and           -0.054           -0.1             -0.026            -0.03
Drinking Choices             (0.060)         (0.067)           (0.050)           (0.084)

Notes: Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth calculation from
Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009).




                                             65
Table A11: RD Estimates of Effects of Diabetes Diagnosis in First 12 Months Following A1c
Test Including Only Those Enrolled for at least 2 Years Prior to Initial Test

                                     Baseline Mean (Std Dev)    Reduced Form        IV Estimate of
                                                                  Estimate        Effect of Diagnosis

 Diabetes Diagnosis                            0.172                0.108***
                                                                    (0.022)

 Spending on ADA Recommended              351.46 (706.71)          211.666***        1,050.503***
 Care                                                               (26.851)           (124.805)

 Spending on Office-Based                  25.13 (120.05)          70.649***          499.217***
 Care Related to Diabetes                                           (9.316)            (63.702)

 Spending on Diabetes-Related              80.22 (341.30)          80.121***          449.530***
 Labs                                                               (14.223)           (71.981)

 Spending on Diabetes-Related               2.17 (28.01)            3.953**            16.988**
 Vision Services                                                    (1.550)             (6.599)

 Endocrinology Specialist Care             19.65 (207.01)            33.653            111.773
 Spending                                                           (28.627)           (95.055)

 Number of Diabetes-Related                0.170 (0.770)            0.427***           3.223***
 Office Visits                                                      (0.062)             (0.444)

 Number of A1c/Glucose Labs                 1.48 (0.996)             0.054                0.28
                                                                    (0.036)             (0.179)

 Spending on                                4.51 (99.59)             2.644              11.177
 Diabetes-Controlling Drugs                                         (4.371)            (18.462)

 Any Spending on                           0.005 (0.072)             0.006               0.027
 Diabetes-Controlling Drugs                                         (0.004)             (0.018)

 Spending on Statins                       151.7 (436.06)             21.72            117.688
                                                                    (14.213)           (77.162)

 Spending on ACE Inhibitors                94.79 (296.56)           15.313*            54.366*
                                                                    (8.003)            (28.455)

   Notes: Baseline means calculated using observations with A1c test values below 6.5 and greater
   than or equal to 6. Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth cal-
   culation from Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009).




                                                 66
Table A12: RD Estimates of Effects of Diabetes Diagnosis in First 12 Months Following A1c
Test Including Only Those Enrolled for at least 2 Years Prior to Initial Test

                                 Baseline Mean (Std Dev)    Reduced Form       IV Estimate of
                                                              Estimate       Effect of Diagnosis

   Diabetic Retinopathy                   0.002                  0.004              0.021
                                                                (0.003)            (0.013)

   Ketoacidosis                           6e-04                  0.001              0.008
                                                                (0.001)            (0.007)

   Diabetic Coma                          7e-04                 -5e-04             -0.003
                                                                (0.001)            (0.006)

   Diabetic Neuropathy                    0.006                0.016***           0.097***
                                                               (0.005)             (0.030)

   Kidney Disease                         0.007                0.022***           0.121***
                                                               (0.005)             (0.029)

   Change in A1c                       -0.08 (0.441)           -0.085**           -0.374**
   from Previous Year                                           (0.040)            (0.186)

   Change in Total Cholesterol        -6.691 (32.47)             -1.915            -5.663
   from Previous Year                                           (1.478)            (4.378)

   Change in Creatinine                0.015 (0.113)             0.005              0.019
   from Previous Year                                           (0.005)            (0.020)

   Mortality^                             0.001                  0.001              0.005
                                                                (0.001)            (0.007)

  Notes: Baseline means calculated using observations with A1c test values below 6.5 and greater
  than or equal to 6. Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth cal-
  culation from Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009).




                                                  67
Table A13: RD Estimates of Effects of Diabetes Diagnosis in First 12 Months Following A1c
Test Including Only Those Enrolled for at least 2 Years Prior to Initial Test

                                Control Mean (Std Dev)   Reduced Form        IV Estimate of
                                                           Estimate        Effect of Diagnosis

     Diabetes Diagnosis                 0.031                0.410***               ­
                                                              (0.044)

     BMI                             28.49 (5.54)              0.321              0.872
                                                              (0.329)            (0.891)

     Normal BMI                         0.262                  -0.001            -0.003
                                                              (0.029)            (0.070)

     Overweight                         0.337                   0.02              0.049
                                                              (0.035)            (0.088)

     Obese                              0.363                  -0.006            -0.017
                                                              (0.028)            (0.080)

     Diastolic blood pressure        76.19 (8.43)              -0.677            -1.969
                                                              (0.762)            (2.189)

     Systolic blood pressure        129.67 (14.10)              0.51              1.248
                                                              (1.117)            (2.745)

     High blood pressure                 0.23                  0.009              0.021
                                                              (0.041)            (0.100)

  Notes: Baseline means calculated using observations with A1c test values below 6.5 and greater
  than or equal to 6. Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth cal-
  culation from Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009).




                                                68
Table A14: Coding All Individuals with A1c of 6.5% or Higher As Receiving a Diagnosis

                                                                     IV Estimate of
                                                                   Effect of Diagnosis

            Spending on ADA Recommended Care                           242.314***
                                                                        (30.471)

            Spending on Office-Based Care Related to Diabetes          134.602***
                                                                         (9.796)

            Spending on Diabetes-Related Labs                          126.778***
                                                                        (21.583)

            Spending on Diabetes-Related Vision Services                5.437***
                                                                         (1.906)

            Spending on Diabetes-Controlling Drugs                       7.574*
                                                                         (4.352)

            Spending on Statins                                          0.826
                                                                        (11.404)

            Spending on ACE Inhibitors                                   19.058*
                                                                         (9.950)

            Endocrinology Specialist Care Spending                      54.409*
                                                                        (31.843)

            Change in A1c from Previous Year                            -0.135**
                                                                         (0.067)

            Mortality^                                                    0.001
                                                                         (0.002)

 Notes: Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth calculation from
 Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009). ^Note that mortality is measured 2 years after the initial
 test as we require individuals to be present in the data and alive for the first 12 months after the
 initial test.




                                                69
     Table A15: Diagnosis and Procedure Codes used in Sample Selection

Description           ICD 9 Codes   ICD 10 Codes     CPT Codes        LOINC Codes

Diabetes Related DX   249, 250      E08, E09, E10,   N/A                  N/A
                                    E11, E13

Pregnancy Related     630-672,      O00-O99          N/A                  N/A
Diagnosis             V22-V23

Diabetes Lab Tests    N/A           N/A              82947, 83036,    1558-6, 20435-2,
                                                     82947, 82952    20437-0, 20438-8,
                                                                      2345-7, 74774-1,
                                                                      4548-4, 27353-2,
                                                                     17856-6, 17855-8




                                       70
Table A16: Drugs used to Determine Diabetic Drug Spending and for Sample Selection

                       Diabetes Related Drugs by Generic Name

                       acarbose
                       albiglutide
                       alogliptin
                       alogliptin-metFORMIN
                       alogliptin-pioglitazone
                       canagliflozin
                       canagliflozin-metFORMIN
                       chlorproPAMIDE
                       dapagliflozin
                       empagliflozin
                       exenatide
                       glimepiride
                       glimepiride-pioglitazone
                       glimepiride-rosiglitazone
                       glipiZIDE
                       glipiZIDE-metFORMIN
                       glyBURIDE
                       glyBURIDE micronized
                       glyBURIDE-metFORMIN
                       insulin aspart
                       insulin aspart-insulin
                       insulin detemir
                       insulin glargine
                       insulin glulisine
                       insulin isophane
                       insulin lispro
                       insulin lispro-insulin lispro protamine
                       insulin regular
                       linagliptin
                       linagliptin-metFORMIN
                       liraglutide
                       metFORMIN-pioglitazone
                       metFORMIN-repaglinide
                       metFORMIN-rosiglitazone
                       metFORMIN-saxagliptin
                       metFORMIN-sitaGLIPtin
                       miglitol
                       nateglinide
                       pioglitazone
                       pramlintide
                       repaglinide
                       rosiglitazone
                       saxagliptin
                       simvastatin-sitaGLIPtin
                       sitaGLIPtin
                       TOLAZamide
                       TOLBUTamide

                                           71
      Table A17: RD Estimates of Effects of Diabetes Diagnosis in First 12 Months

                                 Control Mean (Std Dev)    Reduced Form       IV Estimate of
                                                             Estimate       Effect of Diagnosis

Number of A1c Tests at                    0.436                0.046**            0.205**
Optum-Affiliated Lab                                           (0.019)            (0.081)


Any A1c Test at                           0.326                 0.004              0.018
Optum-Affiliated Lab                                           (0.011)            (0.054)


Number of Cholesterol Tests at            0.509                 0.024              0.120
Optum-Affiliated Lab                                           (0.020)            (0.099)


Any Cholesterol Test at                   0.369                 0.003              0.019
Optum-Affiliated Lab                                           (0.011)            (0.070)
Notes: Control means calculated using observations with A1c test values below 6.5 and greater
than or equal to 6. Coefficient estimates from local linear regression with optimal bandwidth cal-
culation from Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman (2009).




                                              72
