                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   RULE OF LAW AND FEMALE ENTREPRENEURSHIP

                                         Nava Ashraf
                                        Alexia Delfino
                                       Edward L. Glaeser

                                      Working Paper 26366
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26366


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 2019, Revised December 2020




We thank IGC, IDRC, and PEDL for financial support. We thank comments by Andrei Shleifer,
Christopher Woodruff, Paul Gertler, Alvin Roth, Stefano Caria, Nicola Lacetera and seminar
participants at Stanford, the HEC Workshop on Entrepreneurship & Economics Development, the
2018 PEDL/IGC Conference, the LSE Entrepreneurship Conference, and the workshop on
Experimental Economics and Entrepreneurship. We thank inputs and policy engagement by
Miljan Sladoje, Twivwe Siwale, Herryman Moono and Anand Rajaram. We thank IPA Zambia
for field activities and Calvin Chiu for excellent support throughout the project in the field. We
thank Nick Swanson, Kate Laffan, Kim Sarnoff, Pascale Bourquin, Stefan Faridani, Miguel
Fajardo and Edward Davenport for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Nava Ashraf, Alexia Delfino, and Edward L. Glaeser. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Rule of Law and Female Entrepreneurship
Nava Ashraf, Alexia Delfino, and Edward L. Glaeser
NBER Working Paper No. 26366
October 2019, Revised December 2020
JEL No. J16,K40,O15,R12

                                          ABSTRACT

Commerce requires trust, but trust is difficult when one group consistently fears expropriation by
another. If men have a comparative advantage at violence and there is little rule-of-law, then
unequal bargaining power can lead women to segregate into low-return industries and avoid
entrepreneurship altogether. In this paper, we present a model of female entrepreneurship and rule
of law that predicts that women will only start businesses when they have both formal legal
protection and informal bargaining power. The model's predictions are supported both in cross-
national data and with a new census of Zambian manufacturers. In Zambia, female entrepreneurs
collaborate less, learn less from fellow entrepreneurs, earn less and segregate into industries with
more women, but gender differences are ameliorated when women have access to adjudicating
institutions, such as Lusaka's "Market Chiefs" who are empowered to adjudicate small
commercial disputes. We experimentally induce variation in local institutional quality in an
adapted trust game, and find that this also reduces the gender gap in trust and economic activity.


Nava Ashraf                                      Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
London School of Economics                       315A Littauer Center
Houghton Street                                  Harvard University
London WC2A 2AE                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
United Kingdom                                   and NBER
n.ashraf1@lse.ac.uk                              eglaeser@harvard.edu

Alexia Delfino
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
A.Delfino2@lse.ac.uk
1 Introduction
When rule of law is weak, asymmetries of social power and physical strength stymie the
trust and trade that make cities productive. The shadow of violence looms behind aggres-
sive bargaining in many negotiations, and violence is disproportionately male (Wilson
and Herrnstein, 1985). Consequently, women may avoid transacting with men unless
they have the protection of courts and civil society. Around the world, women report
trusting others significantly less than men do, particularly in developing countries with
weaker legal institutions.1
    In this paper, we ask whether limitations on the rule of law can explain why en-
trepreneurship remains a male-dominated activity in many countries and why female
entrepreneurs often cluster in industries filled with other women (OECD, 2012; Fairlie
et al., 2017; Singer et al., 2018; Campos et al., 2019).2 Clustering in industries, such as
apparel and food production, that contain female collaborators and customers, allows
female entrepreneurs to avoid interactions with men who may have a power advantage
in both legal and illegal conflict. This segregation may explain why women appear to
receive lower benefits from loans (de Mel et al., 2008, 2009) and business training (de
Mel et al, 2014; Bergeet al., 2015).
    In Section 2 of this paper, we present a model that extends Behrer, Glaeser, Ponzetto
and Shleifer's (2019) result that when courts can be subverted, the strong trade only
with the strong and the weak trade only with the weak. In our model, women choose
whether to become entrepreneurs and whether to partner with men. The model embeds
two aspects of inter-gender trading relationships. When courts are weak and facts are
unclear, then adjudicators favor the powerful and men are more likely to have power.
Even when courts are strong, if social norms favor male aggression, then men can extract
a greater share of the rents from bilateral commercial transactions.
    For some parameter values, men actually prefer weak institutions that reduce overall
social surplus, because those institutions increase the male share of profits. For other
parameter values, male bargaining power and legal strength becomes a liability for men
as well as women, because women refuse to partner with men. Rule of law increases
the returns to female entrepreneurship, because anarchy privileges male aggression and
violence. The model predicts that female entrepreneurs will earn less and segregate into
predominantly female industries, unless there are both strong institutions and social
norms that favor gender equity.
    We test the implications of this model both with cross-national data and by focusing
on female entrepreneurs in Zambia. In Section 3, we used the World Bank Enterprise
Survey, the World Justice Project, and the World Values Survey to test the predictions

    1
      A large literature documents a strong association between trust and economic growth (Knack and
Keefer 1997; Guiso et al., 2006; Algan and Cahuc, 2010). Trust is lower in developing countries, where
rule of law is weak. Trust is particularly low among women in weak rule-of-law countries, including
Zambia. For example, in Africa and South America, typically between ten and fifteen percent of responds
say that most people can be trusted, but that number falls on average by 6 percent among women (WVS).
    2
      Worldwide the proportion of female ownership is below 50 percent and in half of the countries the
female proportion is below 20 percent (see Section 3).


                                                  2
of our model. We document that female entrepreneurship is rare in most countries, and
especially in those places where rule of law is weak. The World Justice Project data
indicates that courts particularly discriminate against women in many countries and
that rule of law is more strongly correlated with female entrepreneurship when courts
are deemed, by the World Justice Project, to be less discriminatory towards women.
    We measure gender norms against women with long-standing discriminatory prac-
tices within families and limited protection of female physical integrity. Female en-
trepreneurship is rarer when these measures are high. As the model predicts, there
appears to be a strong complementarity between rule of law and gender norms that
favor women.
    In countries with weak rule of law and non-equitable gender norms, only sixteen
percent of entrepreneurs are women according to the World Bank Enterprise Survey. The
share of female entrepreneurs only increases to eighteen percent in countries that have
strong rule of law and non-equitable gender norms. The share rises to twenty-four percent
when rule of law is weak and gender norms are equitable, but in countries that combine
strong rule of law and equitable gender norms, thirty-six percent of entrepreneurs are
women. Neither rule of law nor equitable gender norms on their own have the same
impact on female entrepreneurship as the combination of the two.
    We also document that female entrepreneurs segregate into industries, such as hos-
pitality, food and apparel, where they cooperate primarily with other women. The
self-selection of female entrepreneurs into less profitable activities is pervasive in de-
veloping world cities (Klapper and Parker, 2011; Campos et al., 2019). Again, as the
model predicts, we find that there is more female entry into male dominated industries
in countries with better rule of law, less discrimination against women and especially in
countries that have both.
    In Section 4, we turn to our Census of Entrepreneurs in Lusaka, Zambia. Zambia is
a country with both weak rule of law and discriminatory gender norms.3
    We collect geocoded data on more than 2000 firms, which represents sixty percent
of all the manufacturers in Lusaka. Interviews and focus groups suggest that economies
of scale can generate large returns to collaboration for these entrepreneurs. In our
sample, twenty-seven percent of the entrepreneurs in manufacturing are women, and
women earn slightly more than one-half of male earnings. In Lusaka, three-fourths of
female entrepreneurs make apparel and eighteen percent make food. Between one-half
and three-fourths of the gender earnings gap for Lusaka entrepreneurs can be explained,
in an accounting sense, by the massing of female entrepreneurs into two industries that
are neither capital nor trust intensive. While many factors contribute to the segregation
of women in these industries, in our qualitative work, Lusaka's female entrepreneurs
themselves emphasized the difficulties of trusting men.4
   3
       According to the World Justice Project (http://data.worldjusticeproject.org/), Zambian rule of law
lies is neither particularly good nor particularly bad for sub-Saharan Africa. The country's score on the
World Justice Project's Rule of Law Index in below Ghana and South Africa, but above Zimbabwe and
Nigeria, and is about the same as Russia and Mexico.
     4
       Zambia's female entrepreneurs both say that they trust others less, and indeed are less trusting in
standard laboratory measures.


                                                    3
    In Section 5, we present our survey measures of trusting behavior, such as working
collaboratively to fill an order or jointly buying inputs or even giving advice. As the
model predicts, women are less likely to take actions that require trust. Perhaps most
strikingly, we find that women are much less likely to learn their trade from incumbent
workers. Instead, they turn more often to formal educational institutions. Alfred Mar-
shall (1890) emphasized that in dense clusters, "the mysteries of the trade become no
mystery but are, as it were, in the air," but it seems as if female entrepreneurs cannot
access these human capital spillovers in Lusaka, partially because they cannot trust the
men that surround them.
    We then test whether Lusaka's female entrepreneurs trust more when rule of law is
stronger. We focus on the two major local institutions that adjudicate commercial dis-
putes: Market Chiefs and Small Claims Courts (SCC). The Small Claims Court is a new
institution that enables individuals with small lawsuits to bypass Zambia's overloaded
and cumbersome court system. We measure institutional strength by proximity to the
Small Claims Court and location within a market that is adjudicated by a chief.
    Female-led businesses located inside a formal market or closer to the Small Claims
Court (SCC) cooperate more, even controlling for business density, industry and other
area and business characteristics. Locating within a market is also correlated with higher
sales for female-led businesses. While locating within a market is an endogenous decision,
the Small Claims Court was established more recently and proximity to a court is less
salient than membership in a market.
    To address this endogeneity issue, in Section 6 we present our population of en-
trepreneurs with an adapted version of the trust game (Berg et al, 1995), framed as
an opportunity to invest in another person's business. We randomize pairs of players
into three groups: a control group that received no access to institutions, a treatment
group that had access to the Small Claims Court, and a second treatment group that
had access to the market chief. As the overwhelming majority of our respondent had
either not heard of the small claims court or thought that it was not useful for people
like them, we focus on the results with the market chiefs.
    In the control group, the game replicates our survey results and echoes the model.
We find a significant gender gap in both trust and trustworthiness: women send fewer
tokens and return fewer token than men in our game. Sending money in the trust
game is significantly positively correlated with our actual measures of cooperation by
the participants in their real lives.
    In the game, we test whether rule of law has a disproportionate impact on women by
introducing a form of adjudication modelled on actual Zambian institutions. We allow
some subjects to access a market chief, ensuring an anonymous, and therefore unbiased
judgement. Randomizing access to this unbiased known institution significantly increases
women's trusting behavior, increasing the surplus for both parties and earnings for both
women and men.
    Section 2 presents our model. Section 3 uses international data to test the implica-
tions of our model and particularly the complementarity between rule of law and female
bargaining power. Section 4 describes our Zambian empirical setting and data. Section 5


                                            4
presents correlational evidence on the relationship between institutions, trusting behav-
ior and the gender gap in entrepreneurship among small- scale entrepreneurs. Section 6
presents the lab-in-the- field evidence on the impact of rule of law on trust and business
outcomes. Section 7 concludes.


2 Gender Bias, Contract Enforcement and Female Entrepreneurship
We now present a model where female entrepreneurs first choose whether or not to enter
into an industry, and then potentially to partner with men and produce. As in Behrer et
al. (2019), weak legal institutions intrinsically favor the socially powerful who are able
to pressure courts and judges when facts are unclear. The weak anticipate the courts
behavior and consequently avoid dealing with the strong. If men have a comparative
advantage in coercing weak institutions, then women will not contract with men in weak
institutional environments, and they may avoid male-dominated industries altogether.
Stronger rule of law does enable women to better enforce contracts against men, but
even when rule of law is perfect, male bargaining power may still limit the returns to
female entrepreneurship.
    In stage 0, a potential female entrepreneur "E" has the option to pay a fixed cost
and enter industry i, where the share of male incumbents equals mi . This fixed cost is
paid at time 0 and is immaterial to subsequent bargaining.
    In stage 1, E is offered a business opportunity to make and sell a product of value  .
E is also matched with a randomly chosen potential partner "P". Neither E nor P can
make the product on their own at a cost less than  . If the parties do not partner, the
opportunity disappears and there are no further payoffs to either player. If the parties do
partner, they create a contract that specifies a share of  , denoted "s" that will be given
to P if the contract is not breached. By assumption, courts will only enforce contracts
in which s lies between zero and one, because the court's power is limited to splitting
the profits.
    In stage 2, P chooses to work or shirk. P can fulfill the contract and pay a cost of
q < .5 for effort and materials. He can breach the contract and pay only q - b, and
we assume that .5 > b - q . This breach might take the form of P doing shoddy work
that must be fixed by E, or not working at all (in which case b = q ), or of P stealing
E's inputs (in which case b may be greater than q ). E also pays a cost of q and works
during this period.5
    In stage 3, E learns whether P breached or fulfilled the contract. If P fulfilled the
contract then no further work is needed. If P breached the contract, then E must pay
a remediation cost of b + . The value of b and  are both known at the time of the
contract and  > 0. If E remediates the harm, then she receives a payment of  , and
chooses how much to pay P out of that sum. We assume that 2q +  >  > b + ,
so that E will remediate if work has begun, but that a partnership will not generate a
positive social surplus if shirking always occurs.

   5
       It is never optimal for E to shirk as she is the residual claimant of the product.


                                                      5
    In stage 4, either P or E can sue the other in a court. As in Behrer et al. (2019),
the rule of law depends on the relative power of the litigants and the obviousness of the
facts. Courts always enforce indisputable facts, but when facts are disputable courts
favor the more powerful. We assume that courts pay a penalty for ignoring indisputable
facts, such as external embarrassment or judicial review, but ignoring disputable facts
is costless. The share of profits specified by the contract is always indisputable, but P's
shirking is disputable with probability  . We interpret the variable  as capturing both
elements of this particular transaction and the institutional quality of the courts and
society. When institutions are stronger, a wider range of facts will be indisputable. We
assume that P learns whether his shirking will be disputable at the beginning of stage
2, and that E learns whether the shirking is disputable at the beginning of stage 3. We
do not allow renegotiation at any point after stage 1.
    If both litigants are women, then they are equally powerful and the contract will
be enforced fairly even if the facts are disputable. The court will force E to pay P the
stipulated share, but will subtract damages of b +  from the payment to cover the
damages if shirking has occurred. The court cannot force a payment from P to E , as we
assume that the court's power is limited to reallocating the surplus. If P is male, then
the contract will be enforced fairly if the shirking is an indisputable fact. If shirking is
disputable, then court will assign no damages and force E to pay P the contractually
stipulated payment.
    This legal bias is one source of inequality between men and women. The second bias
occurs at the point of bargaining in stage 1. If P is female, then the two agents split the
total expected surplus equally. If the partner is male, then he receives a share  of the
surplus, where  is determined by social norms about gender and male violence. Male
bargaining power can be micro-founded by assuming that men and women alternate
making offers, and when a male offer is rebuffed, the man may harm the women in some
way.
    When P is female, then a partnership occurs, there is no shirking and both agents
receive .5 - q. Since courts will enforce contracts fairly when both parties have equal
power even when facts are disputable, P knows that she will receive no payment if she
shirks. Not shirking is incentive compatible as long as s > b. If this constraint is
satisfied, then the total surplus is  - 2q . The assumption of equal bargaining power
implies that both partners receive one half of this amount, which implies that s = .5,
and since .5 > b - q , the incentive compatibility constraint holds.
    When P is male, then he will always shirk when there is an opportunity for disputable
shirking. Men will not shirk when shirking is indisputable as long as s > b, and that
generates an incentive compatibility constraint. Proposition 1 describes the returns to
partnering with men (all propositions are proven in the Appendix):

Proposition 1 Proposition 1: If (-
                                    2q )
                                         <q
                                          b - 1, then there is no contract if
                                                                                 ( -2q )
                                                                                         < .
   ( -2q )                                (2 -1)q + +b
If  >  , the contract specifies s =  -                     and provides expected welfare
of  ( - 2q -  ) to P and (1 -  )( - 2q -  ) to E . If (-          
                                                                   2q )
                                                                        > q
                                                                          b - 1, then there
                 ( -q -b)      ( -q -b)         ( -2q )+q -b)
is no contract if +b <  . If +b >  >                +b        , then the contract specifies

                                             6
s =    , providing expected welfare of (1 +  )b - q to P and  - q - (1 +  )b -   to
E . If  <  (-  2q )+q -b)
                +b        , the contract specifies s =  - (2 -1)q+
                                                                 
                                                                    +b
                                                                       , providing expected
welfare of  ( - 2q -  ) to P and(1 -  )( - 2q -  ) to E .

     The proposition describes two cases that depend on whether (-         
                                                                            2q )
                                                                                 is greater or
            q
less than b - 1. In both cases, when  is sufficiently high, either because courts are
sufficiently weak or because shirking is intrinsically disputable, then no contract will
occur. In both cases, when  is sufficiently low, then a contract splits the surplus
based on the bargaining power of men. In this region, female returns to the partnership
are rising with overall profits ( ), and falling with costs of production (q ), costs of
remediation (), male bargaining power ( ) and the weakness of the court system ( ).
Female entrepreneurship may need both a relatively egalitarian society and strong legal
institutions to thrive in male dominated industries.
     When (-   
                2q )
                     >q
                      b - 1, and either the returns to partnership or the benefits of cheating
are high, then there is also a third possibility. The female entrepreneur may effectively
pay her male partner an efficiency wage to stop him from shirking when facts are in-
disputable. This possibility occurs for intermediate values of  , and in that case, the
returns to female partnership with a male equal  - q - (1 +  )b -  , which is rising
with overall profits ( ), and falling with costs of production (q ), costs of remediation
(), and the weakness of the court system ( ).
     In this region, male returns are increasing with the weakness of the courts ( ) even
though that weakness decreases the overall surplus from the partnership. This perverse
comparative static suggests that dominant groups, like men, may actually sometimes
prefer weak institutions because that weakness ensures that they will receive a larger
share of the surplus, despite the fact that institutional weakness diminishes the overall
surplus.
     The male returns drop discontinuously from (1 +  )b - q to zero at the point where 
            -q -b)
exceeds (+     b . At that point, female returns hit zero, and women decide not to partner
with men at all. Male strength becomes a disadvantage because women shun them. This
result may help explain why African-American men struggle more than women in the
labor market, if a legacy of prejudice means that customers and co-workers are more
afraid of African-American men than women.
     Male strength may also hurt men if women do not enter the industry at all, and we
turn to that margin now. We assume that the fixed cost of entry equals  times .5 - q ,
the highest returns from entrepreneurship, where  < 1. This value of 1 -  captures the
effective "profit" margin associated with entrepreneurship.
Proposition 2 If  > M ax[ - 2q  -q -b
                           , +b ] then women do not partner with men, and
                                               2q  ( -2q )+q -b
enter if and only if 1 -  > mi . If  < M in[ -
                                              ,       +b        ], then women always enter
if 1 - 2(1- ) > -2q , but if 1 - 2(1- ) < -2q , women enter if and only if mi < m =
                                            

      ( -2q )(1-)
( -2q )(2 -1)+2(1- )  ,   where m is rising with  , falling with q, , ,  and  .
    Proposition 2 highlights that male bargaining power or weak institutions can both
lead women to avoid any male-dominated fields. If  > M ax[ - 2q  -q -b
                                                             , +b ], then if women


                                              7
enter they will not trade with men. Consequently, their effective profit margin 1 -  must
be high enough to cover the probability that they may earn nothing. If 1 -  is small
and institutions are weak, then women will only enter fields that are almost exclusively
female.
    When institutions are strong enough so that women will trade with men, then female
                                                                     2q  ( -2q )+q -b
entry can still be limited by male bargaining power. If  < M in[ -   ,       +b       ], then
women and men split the surplus. Even in this case, if  is high, women will not enter
fields with significant numbers of men, even if rule of law is perfect. If there is either a
lack of female bargaining power or weak rule of law, then women will only enter fields
where potential female partners are abundant.
    Figure 1 illustrates the proposition's implication that female entrepreneurship can
be limited by either weak rule or law or by biased gender norms. The two lines both
capture the maximum share of men in an industry that women will enter. The bottom
line shows the case where rule of law is weak and  is high enough so that women will
not partner with men. In that case, the maximum share is 1 -  which we assume to be
.1. The top line is decreasing with  and it shows the case where  is low enough so that
women will partner with men, and       
                                      -2q is assumed to be .2. The threshold for entry is
reasonably high when  and  is low, but if either  or  are high, then women will not
enter into male-dominated fields.
    The Appendix also details the entry condition when -     2q    q           -q -b
                                                             > b - 1 and +b >  >
 ( -2q )+q -b
    +b        ,
             so that women must effectively pay men efficiency wages to stop them from
breaching the contract even when breach is indisputable. The results are quite similar,
except that the threshold for female entry falls with the benefit from breach (b) since
that determines the efficiency wage, and is independent of male bargaining power.
   In the empirical work that follows, we test whether the existence and success of
female entrepreneurship depends on rule of law, less biased social norms or both.


3 Cross-National Evidence of Female Entrepreneurship and Rule of Law
In this section, we first document three stylized facts about female entrepreneurs globally:
the rate of female entrepreneurship is often shockingly low, female entrepreneurs appear
to earn less than male entrepreneurs and are strongly segregated into a small number of
industries. Second, we introduce our measures of legal weakness and social bias against
women. Third, we test our model's prediction that female entrepreneurship, and female
entrepreneurship in male dominated fields, depends on both rule of law and limited social
bias, and particularly on the co-existence of both.

3.1 Three Stylized Facts about Female Entrepreneurship Worldwide
The relative paucity of female entrepreneurs is a well-known fact in the developed world.
In the U.K., France, Germany and U.S., more than two men select into entrepreneurship
for every nascent female entrepreneur according to the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor



                                             8
(GEM) and the Kauffman Foundation (Singer et al., 2018; Fairlie et al., 2017).6 Gender
gaps in entrepreneurship as large are also found in the developing world, but things are
more heterogeneous and depend on the sector as well as geographical region. In 2016
the female-to-male ratio in entrepreneurial activity was around 0.7 in South Africa, 0.8
in Botswana and Burkina Faso and only around 0.4 in Tunisia or Egypt according to
the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (Kelley et al., 2017). The gender gap persists over
the life-cycle of the firm and is as large for long-established firms, if not larger (Kelley
et al., 2017).7
    We replicate these results using the 2006 to 2016 waves of the World Bank Enterprise
Survey. We limit our sample to businesses which are sole proprietorships or partnerships,
and define female entrepreneurship as the share of firms that have a (weak) majority of
female owners.8 Figure 2 shows that Romania and Moldova are the only two countries
in the sample with a clear majority of firms in the sample led by women (with a sample
size of only 14 and 42 firms respectively). In the more than one-half of the countries,
fewer than one-in-five enterprises have a majority female ownership.9 Not only is the
global level of female entrepreneurship low, the rates of female entrepreneurship appear
to differ significantly across countries.
    The gender gap in entrepreneurship can be associated with either decreased returns to
female entrepreneurship or higher opportunity costs of women's time, perhaps because
of productivity in home production. If the gender gap reflected opportunity cost of
time, then the returns to entrepreneurship should be higher for women, but that does
not appear to be the case. The World Bank Enterprise Survey provides more reliable
measures of revenues than profits, so we focus on the revenue differences between female
and male led firms. Across the entire sample, male firms average 0.6 log points higher
sales than female led firms (a reduction in the geometric mean of sales by 55 percent).
    Female entrepreneurs may earn less because they specialize in industries with lower

   6
      The GEM survey is collected across countries and, for each country, at least 2000 adult en-
trepreneurs/business managers are surveyed. The total number of surveyed people depends on "the
population and the economic diversity of each country" and is supposed to be conducted on a represen-
tative national sample of adults. It interviews nascent and established entrepreneurs in urban/rural areas
and excludes people who are considered to be out of the labor market (e.g., retirees). The method by
which they identify participants is dictated by the percentage coverage of the landline telephone network.
Where landline coverage is greater than 85 percent of all households, then the National Teams use a
landline-based survey outreach to generate a suitable list of participants to contact. For those countries
where landline telephone coverage is not as wide-spread, face-to-face interview techniques and/or mobile
phones are used. Specific information can be found here https://www.gemconsortium.org/wiki/1157.
    7
      The Global Entrepreneurship Monitor classifies entrepreneurs in two broad categories: nascent
entrepreneurs and owner-managers. A nascent entrepreneurs is someone who is involved in setting up
a business. This means that the entrepreneur has been active in the past 12 months and has not paid
wages in the last three month. Owner-managers are those entrepreneurs who have been working for
longer and are also divided into two subcategories: owner-manager of a new firm, and owner-manager
of an established firm. The former has started paying wages at most 3.5 years ago, whereas the latter
has been paying wages for more than 3.5 years.
    8
      We exclude 5 percent of countries with less than 10 observations in this sample.
    9
      The distribution looks very similar considering female-led businesses as firms with at least a female
owner.


                                                    9
returns or because there are more female entrepreneurs in poorer countries. In Figure
3, we show the distribution of earnings controlling for both industry (ISIC 3.1 code)
and country.10 The overall sales gender gap is 0.3 log points controlling for industry
and nation (a reduction in the geometric mean of sales by 36 percent). A Kolmogorov-
Smirnov test rejects the equality of these two distributions at the 99 percent level, and
as the figure shows, the distributions differ especially in their right-tail. Women seem to
hit a cash ceiling to their earnings.
     Perhaps the most surprising fact about female entrepreneurship is that it is so concen-
trated in a small number of industries. The three industries with the greatest proportion
of female managers across countries are retail trade (ISIC 3.1 code 52), manufacturers of
food products and beverages (ISIC code 3.1 code 15) and hotels and restaurants (ISIC
code 3.1 code 55). While female owners only own thirteen percent of all manufacturing
firms in our global sample, they own twenty percent of enterprises in food and apparel
production. The cross-country average of the Herfindahl industrial concentration index
is 0.19 for female-led businesses, which is significantly greater than the 0.11 average HH
for male-led businesses (p=0).11
     The industries chosen by women not only have a greater proportion of peers of the
same gender, but they also have more female customers and employees. For instance,
female-led firms employ more women in both production and non-production roles than
male-led firms. On average, forty-eight percent of the fulltime workforce in female-led
firms is made of women. This percentage is halved in male-led firms. Similarly, sixty
percent of female-owned firms have a female top-manager, as opposed to only six percent
of firms with a majority of male owners.

3.2 Measuring Rule of Law and Gender Norms
We now turn to our measures of gender norms and rule of law. We use two measures of
biased gender norms: the Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI) and the Global
Gender Gap Index (GGGI). The SIGI Index is created by the OECD Development
Centre and covers 180 countries. The World Economic Forum is responsible for the 144
country Global Gender Gap Index.
    The SIGI index constructs variables on four gender-related topics (discrimination
in the family, restricted physical integrity, restricted access to productive and financial
resources, and restricted civil liberties) based on qualitative and quantitative data on
discriminatory social institutions. SIGI relies on legal experts, government representa-
tives, and SIGI National focal points, but not individual-level surveys. We focus on the
SIGI index of discrimination in the family, which is based on laws on child marriage,
household responsibilities, inheritance, and divorce. We also look at the SIGI Physical
Integrity Index, which includes laws on violence against women and reproductive auton-
  10
      The industry fixed effects are based on the ISIC Code 3.1. This is based on the question "In the
last complete fiscal year, what were this establishment's two main products (represented by the largest
proportion of annual sales)?".
   11
      For each country, the HHI is computed as the sum over industries of squared shares of women (or
men) entrepreneurs.


                                                  10
omy, attitudes towards and prevalence of female genital mutilation (FGM) and domestic
violence, missing women, and access to family planning.12
    These measures should not directly relate to commercial contracts signed by women,
but they should capture social norms towards women and the social acceptability of male
violence against women, which are conceptually closest to our male bargaining power
variable:  . These measures are particularly removed from the commercial and public
spheres, and strongly correlated with long-standing cultural practices. We supplement
these measures with the proportion of respondents in a country in the World Values
Survey who agree with the statement "it is justifiable for a man to beat his wife" as an
added measure of gender norms about violence.
    The GGGI index measures the progress of countries towards gender parity across
four themes: Economic Participation and Opportunity, Educational Attainment, Health
and Survival, and Political Empowerment. We focus on the Educational Attainment
index, which is the weighted average of four variables (all in ratios): female/male lit-
erary, female/male net primary enrolment, female/male net secondary enrolment, and
female/male gross tertiary enrolment. Again, our hope is that these variables capture
gender norms, but do not directly relate to the enforcement of contracts signed female
entrepreneurs. The four variables come from the UNESCO Institute for Statistics.13
    For rule of law, we use data from the World Justice Project (WJP) and the World
Bank's Governance Indicators.14 We use the World Bank's rule of law index, which
captures "perceptions of the extent to which agents have confidence in and abide by the
rules of society, and in particular the quality of contract enforcement, property rights,
the police, and the courts, as well as the likelihood of crime and violence" (Kaufmann
et al., 2010). We use the rank decile for each country. This measure should capture the
extent to which courts will enforce binding contracts signed by men and women, which
is captured by our variable  .
    To measure legal bias against women, we use the World Justice Project's survey of
qualified respondents. This survey asks legal experts throughout the world to assess the
quality of the judicial system. One question asks "In your opinion, how likely are the
following criteria to put a person at a disadvantage before a civil or commercial trial
court?" where one of the "criteria" is being female. The World Justice Project produces
this measure as a score on a zero to one scale, where one represents less bias in the
judicial system. We also use the overall score of the World Justice Project's survey of
qualified respondents on equal treatment of the genders by all legal institutions.15 The
   12
      More information on the SIGI can be found here: https://www.genderindex.org/.
   13
      The weights are calculated by dividing 0.01 by the standard deviation for each indicator. More
information on the GGGI can be found here: https://www.weforum.org/reports/the-global-gender-gap-
report-2017.
   14
      The Worldwide Governance Indicators report on six measures of governance (voice and account-
ability, political stability and absence of violence, government effectiveness, regulatory quality, rule of
law, and control of corruption) for over 200 countries since 1996. The six indicators are created by
summarizing data from 30 different sources, that report views of citizens, experts, and private and NGO
sectors. The questions from each data source used to construct the rule of law index can be found here:
http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/index.aspx#doc.
   15
      This overall score is an average of the scores on equality of genders in courts, hospitals, government


                                                    11
correlation between this measure of bias against women and the World Bank's measure
of contract enforcement is .73, suggesting that when overall rule of law is weaker, courts
show more bias against women, just as the model suggests.

3.3 Female Entrepreneurship, Gender Norms and Rule of Law
We now turn to the relationship between gender norms, rule of law and female en-
trepreneurship. Figure 4 shows the cross-country relationship between female owner-
ship, on the vertical axis, and the SIGI family discrimination measure. The correlation
coefficient is -0.62, which is significant at the one-percent level. The fitted line suggests
that as a country improves from the 90th percentile in this variable (0.81) to the 10th
percentile (0.22), the predicted level of female entrepreneurship increases from 7 to 25
percent. Social attitudes towards women are at least strongly correlated with low levels
of female entrepreneurship.
    Female entrepreneurship is also correlated with variables that measure modern, com-
mercial institutions. The World Bank's Worldwide Governance Indicators measure the
quality of contract enforcement at the national level for most of the countries in the
World Bank Enterprise Survey. This measure should capture the extent to which men
and women are able to sign binding agreements that enable them to work together.
    Figure 5 shows the correlation between the World Bank index of quality of contract
enforcement and the rate of female entrepreneurship across countries. The correlation
coefficient is 0.32, and the relationship is statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
The fitted values suggest that as a country moves from the 10th percentile rank in the
quality of contract enforcement to the 90th percentile, the share of female entrepreneur-
ship increases from 13 to 30 percent.
    Appendix Table C.1 shows that the univariate relationships between female en-
trepreneurship and our other measures of gender norms and rule of law. The violence
related SIGI Index (termed the "physical integrity index") has a -.5 correlation with
female entrepreneurship and a t-statistic of 3.8 in a bivariate regression with country
level income.
    The World Bank Global Indicators measure has a correlation of .32 and a t-statistic
of 1.94 in a bivariate regression. The World Justice Project measure of court bias
against women in a commercial or civil court has a correlation coefficient of .35 with the
entrepreneurship measure and a t-statistic of 1.9 in the bivariate regression.
    We now look at the complementarity between female bargaining power and fair and
effective political institutions that was predicted by our model. Our hypothesis is that
women will only enter into economic interactions with men, and most entrepreneurship
requires such interactions, when they are safe both from expropriation through male
bargaining power and from expropriation through the courts.
    We continue to use the SIGI index of discrimination in the household, based on laws
on child marriage, household responsibilities and divorce. We also use the proportion of


hiring and police.


                                             12
respondents in a country in the World Values Survey who agree with the statement "it
is justifiable for a man to beat his wife".
    For our measures of overall legal quality ( ), we return to the World Bank's Gov-
ernance Indicators measure of the quality of the rule of law at the national level years
of the World Bank Enterprise Survey. We also use the World Bank's Doing Business
Report measure of the ease of contract enforcement, as an alternative measure of the
accessibility of the court system for contract disputes.
    The first interaction that we examine is between rule of law and discrimination
against women in the family. Table 1a and 1b show the basic interaction. Table 1a
shows that there is plenty of variation across countries in the patterns of rule of law and
family discrimination. There are 47 countries in our sample with high rule of law and
low discrimination in the family, and 54 countries in our sample with low rule of law and
high discrimination. There are also 58 countries which are off the diagonal, with either
high rule of law and high discrimination or low rule of law and low discrimination. Table
1b shows the female entrepreneurship patterns across the table. The entrepreneurship
rate is 16 percent in the box with low rule of law and high discrimination, but moving
to either off-diagonal square increases the female entrepreneurship rate only modestly
to 18 or 24 percent. Moving to the high rule of law, low discrimination panel effectively
more than doubles the female entrepreneurship rate to 36 percentage points.
    Table 2 confirms this interaction in a regression setting. In regressions (1) and (2),
we look at the SIGI family discrimination figure. In regression (4) and (5), we use the
measure of violence against women. Regressions (2) and (5) add controls for per capita
income.
    Regression (1)-(2) and (4)-(5) all show that Rule of law has little impact on female
entrepreneurship in countries where families discriminate against girls or where male
violence is acceptable. Regressions (1) and (2) show that where family discrimination is
low, female entrepreneurship is more common even when rule of law is low. We do not
find a similar independent effect of violence against women.
    Our primary focus is on the interaction effects, which are positive in all four speci-
fication, and significant in three of those specifications. When rule of law is combined
with low levels of family discrimination or violence against women, then the impact on
female entrepreneurship is extremely large. Good legal institutions seem to increase
female entrepreneurship only when they are merged with a culture that allows women
to extract rents from relationships with men.
    Regressions (7) and (8) examine our second interaction that looks at the link between
rule of law and gender bias in the courts. In regression (7) of Table 2, we show the impact
of gender equality before the law in the World Justice Project, the World Bank Rule
of Law figure and the interaction. Once again, the interaction is more powerful than
either variable on its own. Rule of law is actually negatively correlated with female
entrepreneurship, unless commercial courts are seen as being unbiased against women.
Regression (8) duplicates this result controlling for GDP.
    Our model focused on the entry of women into male-dominated industries, and pre-
dicted that women would be willing to join female-dominated industries even when


                                            13
gender norms are discriminatory or rule of law is weak. While we believe that this pre-
diction is supported by the segregation of women into a small number of industries, even
these industries are typically predominantly male. Consequently, our results on overall
female entrepreneurship can be interpreted as examining whether women enter into male
dominated fields.
    Nonetheless, we now also ask whether these rule-of-law and gender bias variables
also predict whether women enter into the industries that are much less likely to include
women worldwide. To do this, we recalculate female entrepreneurship rates only in
manufacturing, whose female proportion in the World Bank dataset is 13% against 17%
across industries. Regressions (3), (6) and (9) of Table 2 use the female entrepreneurship
rates in manufacturing as dependent variable. In regression (3), we look at the SIGI
family discrimination figure, the World Bank Rule of Law Figure and the interaction. In
regression (6), we use the measure of violence against women, the World Bank Rule of
Law Figure and the interaction. Regressions (9), we show the impact of gender equality
before the law in the World Justice Project, the World Bank Rule of Law Figure and
the interaction. Results are very similar between the aggregate and the manufacturing
sample, a fact consistent with our main hypothesis.


4 The Zambian Context and the Census of Manufacturers
In this section, we discuss the Zambian context and the Census of Manufacturers that is
the starting point for our work on female entrepreneurship in Lusaka. Zambia is a natural
setting to study weak institutions, gender discrimination and female entrepreneurship.
Zambia ranks 80th out of 136 countries in the SIGI index of discrimination within the
family and of 85th out of 109 countries in the SIGI index of physical integrity restrictions.
Sixty-eight percent World Values Survey respondents in Zambia say that it is justifiable
for men to beat their wives in some circumstances, which is the highest share in sub-
Saharan Africa.16 Just as in many Sub-Saharan African countries, entrepreneurship is
a particularly important activity for many households in urban Zambia. Despite weak
rule of law and gender discrimination, our Census still documents a sizable number of
female entrepreneurs.17

4.1 The Lusaka Census of Manufacturers
Between May and September 2016, we collected the Lusaka Census of Urban En-
trepreneurs ("Census" from now on), which is a spatial mapping of all the firms in
Lusaka. For each establishment operating from a fixed location, across all industrial
sectors, the Census includes geocoded location, industrial classification at the North-
American Industry Classification System (NAICS) 4-digit level, number of employees

  16
    South Africa, Nigeria and Zimbabwe follow with 63, 54 and 51 percent respectively.
  17
    In 2012, 40 percent of adults in Zambia were starting a new business according to the Global
Entrepreneurship Monitor (Xavier et al., 2012). Zambia has 1.02 million informal Micro, Small, and
Medium Enterprises (MSMEs)-one for every five members of Zambia's total labor force (Shah, 2012).


                                               14
and structural description (e.g., standalone building, inside markets).18
    These data describe the distribution, size and characteristics of economic activities
in a fast-urbanizing environment and supplements the Central Statistical Office's 2012
Economic Census of the whole country. Our Lusaka Census includes a total of 48,163
establishments. As there were 16,063 businesses listed in Lusaka District in the 2012
Economic Census, our data suggests either 200 percent growth rate over 4 years or
differences in methodology or comprehensiveness. Our data includes far more small
firms than the 2012 Economic Census. Ninety percent of the firms in our Census have
fewer than 5 employees, six percent have been between 5 and 10 employees, and fewer
than one percent having 50 or more employees.19
    Figure 6 shows the spatial distribution of businesses in the Census, which enables us
to construct measures of business density at a granular level.
    Table 3 presents the distribution of businesses across industries at the NAICS 2-digit
level and the main characteristics associated with the businesses. The largest sectors
(by number of businesses) are retailing, accommodation and food industry, and other
services (the vast majority being hair dressers). Retailing firms also typically have fewer
employees.
    We complemented the Census with a short survey of business owners with less than 20
employees belonging to manufacturing, mining, and construction, which we refer to as the
"Manufacturers Survey". This survey had a total of 2,216 respondents, which accounts
for 58.3 percent of the total population in these sectors. The survey includes questions
on business practices, sales and history, levels of trust, collaborative behavior with other
businesses, and demographics.20 We focus on manufacturing because it is traditionally
male, offers the possibility of exploiting economies of scale through partnerships and has
been a priority for the Zambian industrial and development strategy for decades.21
    The manufacturers survey shows that Zambian manufacturing enterprises are smaller
than those in both neighboring and developed countries (Hsieh and Klenow, 2010).
Women-led businesses represent twenty-six percent of the businesses in manufacturing,
construction and mining (N=3,723), which is unsurprising given that manufacturing is
  18
       A business was considered to operate from a fixed location if 1) the business operated from a
permanent structure with concrete foundations, 2) the business maintained either stock or machinery
on site overnight, and 3) the permanent structure in question was not exclusively used for storage. Our
analysis split Lusaka into sub-regions called Census Supervisory Areas (CSAs), and our census covered
all the businesses in 90 percent of all CSAs in Lusaka district. For security reasons, we excluded the 8
census statistical areas (CSA) in the region surrounding Chibolya compound (Harry Mwaanga Nkumbula
ward). We also excluded areas of low population density in the following wards: Kabulonga, Lubwa,
Lilayi, Munkolo, Mwebeshi, Kamulanga, Munali, Roma and Mpulungu.
    19
       Data on the number of employees is not available for 17 percent of the firms, so these percentages
are about the 40,517 respondents to this question. In the 2012 Economic Census, the percentages were
respectively 71, 11 and 3 percent. Some larger businesses were unwilling to share their employee numbers
with our census takers. In total 84 percent of businesses disclosed their employment figures.
    20
       If the owner was not available, the interview was conducted with the main manager.
    21
       Recent research in Uganda and Ethiopia (Campos et al., 2014; Alibhai et al., 2016) show that
women could potentially have high returns in manufacturing, but both social norms and fixed set-up
costs might be barriers to female entry. We focus on a different source of gender gaps in our paper, in
interaction with these traditional explanations.


                                                   15
often a male-dominated activity (GPFI and IFC, 2011; Campos et al., 2014).22 Women's
firms have 0.38 fewer full time employees and 0.7 fewer part time employees than male-led
firms.
    Women earn less than men. On average, women's sales value in good weeks is 2,356
Kwacha (KW), as compared to 4,085KW for men, or 180 and 311 dollars in the current
exchange rates for women and men respectively (1 KW = 0.076 USD). In bad weeks,
women earn on average 599.9KW as compared to 1,313KW for men, or 45 and 100
dollars respectively. Figure 7 shows the kernel densities of logged-sales in good and
bad weeks by gender.23 The distributions are significantly different between men and
women and women earn less most of the times (p=0.00, Kolmogorov-Smirnov equality-
of-distributions test). Moreover, men have a higher variance in sales in good weeks than
women's (p=0.00, variance ratio test), which is driven primarily by a thicker right-tail.
While the variance in sales during bad weeks is not different between genders (p=0.40,
variance ratio test), both the minimum and maximum value of sales are lower for women
than for men.

4.2 Gender, Segregation and the Earnings Gap
Figure 8 shows that Lusakan women make different sectoral choices than men. Ninety-
three percent of women operate in apparel and food manufacturing, while women rep-
resent a minority in wood, metal manufacturing and printing. Women appear to select
into non-complex industries, despite having on average the same qualifications as men.24
    In our survey of manufacturers, industry choice, not observable human capital, ex-
plains much of the gender gap in earnings. Male and female entrepreneurs have similar
levels of education, as shown in table 4. Women are more likely to have participated
in management or entrepreneurship training than men, as we discuss later, and the two
groups do not differ in terms of record keeping. The first two regressions in Table 5 show
the raw gender gap and Columns (3) and (4) show that controlling for education does
not reduce the gender gap in sales. These results are unchanged when using or including
alternative proxies for skills, such as literacy, numeracy, social skills.25
   22
      But all in all, gender segregation is also apparent in highly developed economies, as shown in the
introduction. According to the Kauffman Index of Start-up Activity 59.4 percent of new entrepreneurs
in the U.S. were male in 2015 (Morelix et al., 2016).
   23
      During piloting, we found that recalling exact sales digits or for periods longer than a week was
challenging for most of the respondents. We thus asked the sales in the previous working day, the sales
in a good week and the sales in a bad week. If the person could not provide an exact number, we also
asked for an upper and lower bound. We then imputed the average of the bounds to the sales variables.
   24
      We define non-complex industries as industries that have less than the mean number of skilled
occupations associated with the corresponding NAICS 3 code, whereby the mean of number of skilled
occupations by NAICS code is computed using the Census data (following Minondo and Requena-
Silvente, 2013). Our index of complexity is correlated with owner's education in the data.
   25
      The definitions of these alternative proxies are as follows. For literacy, subjects were asked whether
the sentences "The light balloon floated in the bright sky" and "A comfortable pillow is soft and rocky"
make logical sense. For numeracy, subjects were presented with the following question: "Suppose you
have K1,000 in a bank account with no bank fees. The bank pays interest of 10 percent each year. How
much money will you have after 2 years?" Subjects were then presented with a choice of either "Less


                                                    16
    Regressions (5) and (6) of Table 5 add controls for industry and regressions (7) and
(8) add household constraints, including marital status and work time. Selection into
different industries explains between one-half and three-fourths of the gender gap in
sales and employment. The average level of sales and employees is the lowest in apparel
manufacturing - where most women operate - and the highest in food manufacturing.
The other sectors lie between these two. Controlling for sector, education, working
time and marital status makes the coefficient on the female dummy insignificant for the
sales gap in good weeks. This evidence is compatible with previous studies also finding
that women enjoy less profitability and lower sales growth even controlling for extensive
observable characteristics (Klapper and Parker, 2011; Campos et al., 2014; Hardy and
Kagy, 2018). Recent evidence by the World Bank similarly finds that one-quarter of the
gender gap in profits in the Democratic Republic of Congo can be explained by industry
(Campos et al., 2019). As we have emphasized throughout this paper, one explanation
for female industrial segregation is when gender bias is large and institutions are weak,
women cannot trust men.

4.3 Rule of Law and Legal Institutions in Lusaka
Zambian rule of law is neither particularly good nor particularly bad for sub-Saharan
Africa, but it is in the bottom half of countries worldwide. The country's score on the
World Justice Project's Rule of Law Index is below Ghana and South Africa, but above
Zimbabwe and Nigeria, and about the same as Russia and Mexico. Zambia's overall
index of gender equality and gender equality in courts from the World Justice Project
are among the lowest in Africa.
    Few entrepreneurs in our sample made any use of Zambia's formal court system,
which are notoriously slow and cumbersome. Instead, many of them rely on local adju-
dicators, known as "Market Chiefs," who exercise authority over transactions that occur
within their own local market areas. There are approximately 80 formal markets in
Lusaka. These fall under two broad categories: council and cooperative.
    Cooperation appears to be easier within the market, and somewhat surprisingly,
rents also appear to be lower, at least relative to space in well-travelled commercial
thoroughfares. The offsetting downside of markets is that they are sometimes harder for
customers to access and have shorter opening times.
    The 30 council markets are regulated by Lusaka City Council and are led by a market
officer (henceforth referred to as a chief) who is appointed by the Council. The appointed
chief's functions are guided by legislation and market unit guidelines. Many markets
also have a democratically elected chief, whose involvement in market affairs varies.
The cooperative markets usually have a market committee of 6-10 members, including
a democratically elected chair.


than K1,200", "K1,200 exactly", or "More than K1,200". For social skills, subjects stated how much
they agreed, on a scale of 1-5, with the statement "I know what other people are feeling just by looking
at them", as well as "Gaining happiness requires taking it away from others" and questions on how often
the subject talks with others about social topics (e.g., sports) or personal topics (e.g., health).


                                                  17
    Figure 9 shows the spatial location of markets with squares. Markets generally have
their own system of rules. They set fines for prohibited behavior, such as drinking or
insulting other marketeers on site, and rules of suspension for behavior such as theft
or disobedience of the market committee. Most importantly, the market chiefs resolve
disputes among marketeers and market customers.
    One typical dispute was that a marketeer sold his plot within the market to two
different people, taking money from both. The marketeer did not have assets to seize,
beyond the plot, but the chief knew a lender had agreed to loan the marketeer some
money. To solve the dispute, the chief ensured this loan money was given to one of the
buyers.
    In another dispute, a customer complained that a marketeer had failed to fulfill his
promise to fix a television. The chief gave the marketeer a deadline of two days to meet
the customer's request or pay a fine. As one chief said, "we want to handle disputes
internally and peacefully first," and "only if this does not work do we go to the police."
    Markets are an essential part of Lusaka's business environment: 30 percent of firms
across all industries in our Census and 59 percent (1324) of manufacturers are located
in formal markets.
    To address the weaknesses of the formal court system, a Small Claims Court was
founded in 2008 by an act of Parliament and opened in 2009. No legal representation
is required, as the court is intended to hear minor cases, for example, relating to em-
ployment, borrowing and lending, insurance and fraud. The court only permits cases
involving amounts up to 20,000KW (around 1,962 USD), which represents 150 percent
of average sales in a good month.
    To file a case with the Small Claims Court, a plaintiff must first produce a letter of
demand which opens the case and serves notice to the defendant. This letter of demand
brings with it a seal of the court and often by itself can be sufficient to recoup any
contested amount (at a cost of 5Kw, around 50 cents in USD). Many cases get settled
between the two parties at this initial stage. However, if the defendant refuses to pay the
amount stated in the letter of demand, a court hearing is scheduled where the defendant
has an opportunity to submit a written defense. Within a month of being served, the
case is heard and, depending on the outcome, the losing party has to pay according to
a certain schedule. If the plaintiff wins, the defendant has to pay back the money and
also cover the legal costs.
    If the Small Claims Court makes a decision on a case and the defendant does not
settle the claim, a writ of execution is issued by the courts and bailiffs are engaged.
The writ of execution is put on the file together with a report from the bailiffs about
the property they seized, how much they realized at auction and whether the amount
recovered covered the full claim. The bailiffs are not allowed to seize personal items such
as clothing and the tools of trade of the individual. In practice, the plaintiff has to know
the residence of the defendant in order to give detailed directions to the bailiffs (a sketch
map is usually on file for these cases).26
   26
     In cases where the amount realized from the seized property is not enough to cover the claim the
court will tell the plaintiff to keep a look out if the defendant buys new property and contact the bailiffs


                                                    18
    The time frame to settle the claim is usually outlined in the judgement by the com-
missioner. Defendants can be asked to pay in installments over a period of time or to
pay in 14 days; if they fail, bailiffs are engaged. In extreme cases where an individual
is not able to pay, the person can be imprisoned. This outcome is rare because the
amounts the court deals with are small and the defendant's relatives usually pitch in to
help prevent the person being incarcerated.
    The Small Claims Court currently has excess capacity, due to lack of awareness. In
our data, only 21% of respondents had heard of it, and of those, 56% did not believe they
had access. Market Chiefs are a far more common mechanism for resolving disputes.
Anecdotally, Senior Clerks at the Small Claims Court note that women sue mostly men,
especially their (former) employers. Figure 9 shows where the Small Claims Court is
located in our zoom-in of the Census Map.


5 Trust, Gender and Institutions in Zambia: Observational Evidence
Partnerships in Lusaka resemble the world of incomplete contracts described by our
theory. Written contracts are used only in one out of five partnerships. Collaborations
are mostly triggered by time constraints (e.g., in fulfilling big orders), which limits
entrepreneurs' ability to search for partners. In seventy-five percent of cases, partnerships
form between entrepreneurs that are located close to each other. In this section, we first
examine whether female entrepreneurs are less trusting and form fewer partnerships
than their male counterparts. We then look at whether this gender gap is ameliorated
by physical proximity to the two local institutions: Market Chiefs and the Small Claims
Court.

5.1 Gender and Trust
To examine whether women have a disadvantage in bargaining, we look at their trust
levels and interactions with other businesses. Throughout the paper, we use the following
survey measures of trust asked in the Manufacturers Survey and taken from the World
Values Survey (WVS) and General Social Survey (GSS):27

    · Trust GSS: Do you think that most people can be trusted or you cannot be too
      careful? (one-zero indicator variable)

    · Trust Strangers: How much do you trust people you meet for the first time? (from
      1 (not at all) to 4 (completely))

    · Trust Neighbors: How much do you trust your neighbors? (from 1 (not at all) to
      4 (completely))


so that they can seize the new property.
   27
      See tables D.1 and D.2 for validity checks of the survey measures of trust and trustworthiness using
our experimental data.


                                                   19
    · Trust in business: I am comfortable leaving my shop unattended during the day if
      I need to do something for 30 minutes (5-points Likert scale) 28

These measures of trust can be interpreted in different, but related, ways. They can
be seen as the internal psychic cost of betrayal, or as the individual belief in others'
trustworthiness. That belief might reflect the reality that some people have a greater
ability to enforce trustworthy behavior relaying on either low-cost tools such as social
sanctions, or high-cost tools, such as violence or courts. In the model, trustworthy
behavior reflects the existence of a high-cost enforcement tool (the court), but in reality,
many forces may shape individual's answers to these questions. 29
    We couple these general trust questions with questions about business behavior that
involves trust, including the formation of business partnerships. We conducted extensive
piloting to identify the most common cooperative activities that small-scale manufactur-
ers engage in, across all industries. We then adapted the language used by our piloting
participants to create the following four questions:

    · Sometimes two or more businesses participate in a common order from a client,
      or one business subcontracts to other businesses part of an order. Have you ever
      done this with another business like yours? (share order)

    · Sometimes businesses make joint orders of materials from suppliers. Have you ever
      done this with another business like yours? (joint buy)

    · Sometimes businesses ask for advice (or give advice) to other firms doing their
      same activity, for instance on topics like: the production process, the market
      conditions, new technologies, business practices, suppliers. Have you ever done
      this with another business like yours? (advice)

    · Sometimes businesses borrow (or lend) machines, materials or other assets from
      firms doing their same activity. Sometimes they hire (subcontract) employees who
      come from other firms doing their same activity for a short period of time. Have
      you ever done this with another business like yours? (lending)

In our analyses, we use both indicator variables that take on a value of one if an indi-
vidual ever engaged in a particular activity and also an index of cooperative behavior
from their responses (averages of the four indicator variables).30 We end this section by
also discussing our limited information on the transfer of knowledge across Lusakan
entrepreneurs.

   28
      The Trust Neighbors and Trust Strangers variables were converted into dummy variables by com-
bining low scores (1 and 2) and high scores (3 and 4). Low scores were given a value of 0, and high
scores a value of 1.
   29
      This flexibility allows us to interpret individual trust as a proxy of individual investment in social
capital. As for any other form of capital, investing in social capital requires forming expectations on its
returns, which can be affected by several determinants such as other's trustworthiness, risk aversion and
the ability to punish cheating (Glaeser et al, 2000; Ashraf et al, 2009; Butler et al, 2010).
   30
      Results are robust to alternative aggregations of these variables, such as a z-score.


                                                    20
    Panel A of Table 6 shows the mean differences in trust between men and women.
Women are less trusting across all three direct survey measures. Women are more
likely to disagree with the statement that they would be comfortable leaving their shop
unattended. Panel B of Table 6 shows that women are also less likely to engage in any
of the four cooperative behaviors that we measure.
    Table C.2 shows that low levels of trust are associated with lower frequency of co-
operation among entrepreneurs. These results support the view that the trust questions
are capturing something real about the trustworthiness of the environment. Table C.3
shows that cooperative behavior is also correlated with our three measures of sales.
While these correlations do not imply any causal relationship, they are compatible with
the view that entrepreneurial activity benefits from the ability to form partnerships with
others.
    In the previous section, we documented that female entrepreneurs selected into less
profitable industries. Our model suggests that this self-selection occurs because women
choose industries with other women, because they are able to trust and partner with
those women, either as customers or collaborators.31 Figure 12 shows that women gen-
erally have fewer social interactions with other entrepreneurs in their industry, but that
tendency disappears in industries that are not male dominated. Women who work in
the disproportionately female industries have social interactions that are as frequent as
men in those industries.
    Perhaps the most important form of cooperation occurs when one urbanite shares
knowledge with another. In these informal industries, many skills are often passed along
from one worker to another. Yet chains of knowledge also can require trust. In many
cases, a skilled worker who teaches a newcomer expects that student to serve as an
apprentice. For centuries, the relationship between mentor and apprentice has been
open to abuse. Apprentices, including Benjamin Franklin, run away to avoid promised
service. Mentors typically gain the power to punish their students either physically
or by harming their reputations, and that power also creates the potential for misuse,
especially between a man and a woman.
    Figure 11 shows that male entrepreneurs are far more likely to have been taught their
trade by another entrepreneur or a family member. Female entrepreneurs are usually
formally trained. Female entrepreneurs are also less likely to have taught others their
trade, but this result is not robust to other controls.
    Table 7 shows these results using a linear probability model with controls for business
density and owner characteristics. Regression (1) shows that women are 19.1 percent
less likely to learn their trade from another owner. Regression (2) shows that they are
13.9 percent less likely to learn from another owner in the same industry. Regression (3)
shows that they are 15 percent less likely to learn from family and friends, which seems
more plausibly related to gender discrimination within the household than trust.
    The last three regressions in the table show the relationship between the source of
the owner's knowledge, sales and earnings. Regression (4) shows that in a good week,
  31
     This latter explanation is in line with the results by Campos et al. (2014), who identify role model
as one of the most important reasons for women to select into industries.


                                                   21
women have sales that are .6 log points lower than men, but this difference is largely
reduced if women have learned from another owner or family member. Regression (5)
repeats this regression for sales in a bad week and finds quite similar results. Regression
(6) repeats the regression using employment as the dependent variable. The pattern for
employment is similar but the interaction between owner gender and source of skill is not
significant. If human capital externalities rely on trust, then women may be unable to
access those externalities and benefit fully from working in a dense urban environment.

5.2 Institutions and Female Trust
In this section, we ask whether institutions can mitigate the gender gap in collabo-
ration and earnings among Lusaka manufacturers. The model predicted that female
entrepreneurship requires both female bargaining power and rule of law, and gender
norms appear to be quite biased in Zambia. Yet conditional upon entry, the model
predicts that women will be unequivocally more likely to partner with men when rule of
law is higher, independent of gender discrimination.
                                                                  -q -b           -2q
    The two conditions for partnership in Proposition 1 are +        b >  and      > ,
depending on parameter values. Both conditions depend on the returns to partnership
and the returns and costs of cheating, but as long as these parameters are held constant,
the model strongly predicts that improvements in the quality of legal institutions will
make partnership between men and women more likely.
    We use two measures of institutional strength: physical proximity to the Small Claims
Court and access to the justice offered by the chief of a formal market. We then compare
the outcomes of female and male entrepreneurs who are located within a market, or
close to the Small Claims Court, with their counterparts who are located either outside
a market or further away from the Small Claims Court.
    A primary question is whether these measures of access actually capture  . If market
chiefs or the Small Claims Court are thoroughly biased, then physical proximity to them
will not engender cooperation by women. The closest mapping between these measures
and our model occurs when women have no ability to enforce contracts against men
without these institutions ( = 1), but that with these institutions  rises to some higher
number.
    Tables 8 and 9 show the following regression where cooperative behavior is regressed
on access to legal institutions and the interaction between these institutions and gender.
We run regressions of the form:

 coopis = 1 F emalei + 2 instP roximityi + 3 F emalei  instP roximityi + Xi i +        is

    where coopis is the outcome variable for business i in sector s.
    The dependent variables in columns 1-4 are the indicator variables that capture
cooperative behavior: whether the respondent said that they had lent/borrowed capital,
given/received advice, participated in a common order from a client, or placed a joint
order of materials with another business like their own. The dependent variable in
column 5 is their mean. The set of controls Xi includes the following characteristics


                                            22
about the area around the business: the logarithm of the total number of businesses
within 100 meters of business i, the logarithm of the total number of businesses in the
same industry (NAICS3) within 100 meters around business i, and a dummy for whether
the business is within 100 meters of a market ("business density controls"). Our empirical
strategy compares the effect of institutional proximity for businesses of different genders
that are exposed to similar demand conditions and agglomeration effects.
    Table 8 shows that being in a market disproportionately increases the probability of
sharing an order or giving advice for women. It also increases women's average coopera-
tion.32 This is consistent with the hypothesis that strong market leaders might provide
support to women's interactions with other businesses, overcoming their disadvantage
in bargaining power. Figure 10 shows that the increase in women's average cooperation
in markets is not driven by markets where women's manufacturers are the majority, but
also happens in markets where men's manufacturers are the majoritarian group.
    Table 9 shows the relationship between cooperation and the distance to the Small
Claims Court. Distance from the Small Claims Court disproportionately reduces cooper-
ation for women.33 Figure 13 shows the proportion of people of each gender cooperating
with other businesses based on distance from the Small Claims Court. Cooperation is
stable for men, with the exception of the more distant areas. If women's business loca-
tion is farther from the Small Claims Court, then cooperation diminishes. Both tables
tell a consistent story in which access to legal institutions disproportionately enables
cooperation by female entrepreneurs.
    Tables 10 and 11 turn to sales, which is our primary measure of economic success.
Table 10 regresses three measures of sales on a dummy indicating the business-owner's
gender, a dummy on whether the business is located within a market, and their interac-
tion. All regressions include industry fixed-effects, business density controls and business
owner controls.34 Women sell less than men in all three specifications and in two of the
specifications the difference is significant.
    The interaction term is significant, suggesting that female businesses particularly
benefit from locating within a market and having access to a market chief. Given the
central role of the Chief in dispute resolution, this result may reflect women's increased
ability to trust when there is a strong enforcing institution such as the markets chief.
    In Table 11, we perform exactly the same analysis as in Table 10, but now focusing


   32
       This relationship remains the same even when including business owner controls (such as whether
the owner keeps written records of purchases made, age of the business owner, owner's marital status,
among others). It is also qualitatively the same when controlling for industry fixed effects, but the direct
effect of gender is attenuated. See table C.4 of the appendix.
    33
       This relationship remains the same even when including business owner controls (such as whether
the owner keeps written records of purchases made, age of the business owner, owner's marital status,
among others). It is also qualitatively the same when controlling for industry fixed effects, but the direct
effect of gender is attenuated. See table C.5 of the appendix.
    34
       Owner controls include whether the business owner keeps written business records of every purchase
and sale made, whether her/his business is registered individually, whether the business owners trust
their neighbors, how old the business is, how many days the business owner spends working in the
business, age of business owner and whether business owner is married or not.


                                                    23
on the Small Claims Court.35 There seems to be no strong evidence on the Small
Claims Court significantly affecting businesses' sales, neither for the female nor for the
male-owned businesses. Indicator variables for the distance to the Small Claims Court,
and their interaction with the gender indicator, are largely insignificant. One natural
interpretation of these results is that the Market Chief is a far better known and more
effective remediation mechanism than the Small Claims Court, which is largely unknown
in our sample.
    Despite the robustness of these trends to different controls, unobservable character-
istics of entrepreneurs located into markets might be driving our results. A particular
worry is that the higher density of businesses in markets might mechanically increase
the opportunities - and thus the incentives - for cooperation. We address this issue in
the next section, where we present results from a lab-in-the-field experiment that shows
the causal effect of institutions on trust and business cooperation.


6 Trust, Gender and Institutions in Zambia: Experimental Evidence
To provide causal evidence of the impact of institutions on trust and business coopera-
tion, we perform an embedded experiment with a sample of Lusaka entrepreneurs. These
experiments, an adapted version of the trust/investment game pioneered by Berg et al.
(1995), examine whether institutional support particularly impacts female players. We
run the games with actual entrepreneurs located inside or around formal markets and
involve actual local institutions: Market Chiefs and the Small Claims Court judges.

6.1 Experimental design
Using data from the Census, we randomly selected participants for the experiment,
stratifying by gender and whether the business is located within a market. In order
to avoid imposing on marketeers' time and to increase control, we conducted the game
within people's shops. Surveyors communicated with each other electronically to convey
to a player the choice of their partner in real time.
    Using the Lusaka Census of Urban Entrepreneurs, we constructed lists of all en-
trepreneurs within each market as well as all entrepreneurs within 500 meters of the
market border. The sample selection procedure for the 2017 survey was designed to
oversample manufacturers and women in a selection of Lusaka's 80 dense urban mar-
ketplaces. We chose sixteen markets for study that contained the largest numbers of
manufacturers. For each market, we used the 2016 Census data to assemble a list of
entrepreneurs located inside the market and a list of entrepreneurs outside the market,
but within 500 meters of its borders.
    We oversampled the manufacturing sector by placing all of the manufacturers at
the top of the list in random order and all other businesses at the bottom of the list
in random order. If a marketeer could not be located or refused to participate, we
  35
     This relationship remains nearly the same when including industry fixed-effects and business owner
controls. See Table 11 of the appendix.


                                                  24
replaced the marketeer with the next female on the list. As soon as all women had been
exhausted, the recruiters simply moved to the next marketeer on the list. The survey
team visited businesses on the lists in this way until they had valid responses for 24
businesses inside each market and 6 businesses outside each market. We recruited a
total of 480 participants across the 16 marketplaces.36
    The experiment consists of a modified version of the trust game (Berg et al, 1995),
framed as an opportunity to invest in another person's business opportunity. Player A
(the Investor) was given 10 tokens that could either be kept or invested in the business of
Player B (the Trustee). The Trustee received three times the number of invested tokens
and must decide how many to return to the Investor. The Trustee used the strategy
method: before receiving the Investor's tokens, he or she completed a matrix indicating
how many tokens they would like to return for a given amount sent. The decision in
their matrix was followed even if they wanted to change it after the Investor's offer.
    Participants played the game for two rounds in total, but they switched roles between
the first and the second round. Players who started playing as an Investor (Trustee)
would play as a Trustee (Investor) in the second round. After the game was complete,
players could exchange tokens for real money. The sessions were on average 90 minutes
long. Investors earned on average 11.4KW (1 dollar at the time) and Trustees earned
6.6KW (0.60 dollars) per round. These amount to 3.6 percent and 2.1 percent of average
daily earnings.37 In addition, all players received a participation fee of 35KW (3.5
dollars) as a token of appreciation for their time.
    We cross-randomized two experimental conditions (Table 12). The first condition
tests the effect of institutions on trust. We randomly assigned pairs of players to three
groups: a control group that receives no access to institutions, a first treatment group
that has access to the Small Claims Court and a second treatment group that has access
to the market chief. If the Investor is dissatisfied with the number of tokens received,
then the Investor may ask the experimenters to go on their behalf to the court or chief
to adjudicate. The invitation follows:

           If you think that the number of tokens sent back by Player B is not fair,
       you can ask us to call the chief (senior clerk at the Small Claims Court) on
       your behalf, to decide how many tokens each of you should get. The chief
       (senior clerk) will then decide how many tokens each of you should get. The
       chief's (senior clerk's) ruling is based only on your choices and the choices
       of player B, and we will tell you their decision accordingly. The chief (senior
       clerk) does not know anything about you and the other player, only your
       choices. Player B will know that you can complain to the chief (senior clerk).
       In the case that you complain, the final division of tokens will be determined
       by the ruling of the chief (Small Claims Court).

  36
     475 of the games responses were usable in the data analysis.
  37
     In 7 percent of chief-treated games and 9 percent of court-treated games, the Investor asked for
arbitration. Average earnings for all games before arbitration were 11.3 tokens for the Investor and 6.7
for the Trustee.


                                                  25
         Player A can ask us to consult the chief (senior legal clerk at the Small
      Claims Court) on his/her behalf, to decide how many tokens each of you
      should get. The chief's (senior clerk's) ruling is based only on your choices
      and the choices of player A, and we will tell you their decision accordingly.
      The chief (senior clerk) does not know anything about you and the other
      player, only your choices. In the case that player A complains, the final
      division of tokens will be determined by the ruling of the chief (Small Claims
      Court).

The implementation of the complaint required us to ensure that participants trusted
that the experimenters would call the institution to complain, and that the Chief and
the Small Claims Court Senior Clerk would understand the game and act as if it were a
real-life dispute. We provide details on our solutions to these challenges in Appendix B.
    In previous sections, we showed that cooperation levels are higher for businesses
located inside formal markets than outside formal markets. The second experimental
condition allows us to explore whether this result is driven by in-group vs out-group
dynamics which could increase cooperation within markets independently of contract
enforcement (Kranton et al., 2018). Pairs of players were randomly assigned to two
groups. For the first treatment group, both players were drawn from within the same
market. For the second treatment group, one participant was drawn from the market,
while the other from outside the market. For all groups, the players are told whether they
are playing with a person from the same market or an outsider. The two experimental
conditions were cross-randomized, yielding five distinct experimental groups.
    In order to assure understanding of the game, everyone had to correctly answer
understanding checks about the rules of the games with the surveyors before proceeding.
    We also implemented a Pre-Games Survey with questions about access to institutions
and exposure to crime. We asked entrepreneurs whether they had had disputes with
other business owners, how disputes had been resolved, and whether respondents had
heard of the Small Claims Court. We also presented business owners with a hypothetical
scenario in which one marketeer failed to pay back a loan to another. Business owners
were asked whether they thought that the market chief, Small Claims Court, and police
would be fair and/or slow in arbitrating the dispute.38
    Table C.6 shows mean differences by gender of these variables. Even though men
and women are equally likely to have had work-related disputes and to know about
institutions such as the Small Claims Court, men are significantly more likely to seek
out another person, group or institution for help in resolving the dispute. This suggests
women believe that institutions will not be effective for them. The fact that both women
and men are similarly prone to be victims of theft, but the thief is rarely caught when
the case involves female entrepreneurs, suggests why women may hold such a belief. Men
and women are equally pessimistic about the fairness of police or the chief on average,
but women are more likely than men to think that either the market chief or the police
   38
      The pre-game survey might have primed participants to think about their past experiences with
institutions before the play. This should not be an issue for the interpretation of the results as long as
this effect is the same across experimental conditions.


                                                   26
are slow in dispute resolution. Women reported being in general less trusting, feeling
less comfortable when leaving their shops unattended. Overall, Table C.6 indicates that
institutions may be more effective for men, which leads women to rely less on these
institutions and to have lower trust levels. Yet even biased institutions may be better
for women than a complete absence of rule of law.
    The pre-games survey showed a significant difference between market chiefs and the
Small Claims Court. Market chiefs are a well-known institution to both men and women.
For instance, one participant said that, in his market, the marketeers "have resolved to
take all disputes to the market chairman". Half of the games participants think that the
chief is "usually or always" fair in solving disputes.
    The participants also note the flaws of Market Chiefs. One-fifth of men and one-
quarter of women think that the chief is "usually or always" slow in solving disputes.
Moreover, across markets, the chief's perceived fairness decreases as the proportion
of female manufacturers increases. In the games, we improve upon this well-known
institution by ensuring anonymity, which should eliminate any possibility of gender bias,
and by bringing claims to the Chief on the participants behalf.
    The subjects' awareness of the Small Claims Court's existence was far more limited.
Eighty percent of our sample had not heard of the Small Claims Court before. Among
the 20 percent who had heard of the Small Claims Court, half gave a negative answer
to the question "whether they thought that business owners like them had access to
the SCC". Five women out of 25 (and 7 men out of 76) mention that the SCC has
high costs and "terribly" long procedures.39 This limited and faulty knowledge, which
we discovered only after setting the experiment in motion, led us to conclude that the
Small Claims Court was not understood as an institution and we therefore present our
results on the Small Claims Court only in Appendix tables.
    We will interpret having access to the market chief - as compared to the control - as
an improvement to the local institutional quality.

6.2 Results on Trust and Trustworthiness
Table 13 shows our primary results. Regression (1) uses the amount sent in the trust
game as our experimental measure of trust. In this regression, we find that women
without access to the Market Chief trust much less than men. This trust gap is com-
patible with all of the previous results in this paper showing the female entrepreneurs
collaborate less then man.
    This trust difference is almost completely eliminated when we introduce the market.
As Figure 14 shows, men and women have a sizable gap in trust without the Market
Chief. With the market chief, this gap disappears. This result suggests that experi-
mentally generated differences in access to rule of law appears to encourage cooperation
disproportionately for women in a developing world setting.

   39
      For instance, one female participant felt like the SCC "is a waste of time due to complicated
procedures and costs. Also most people are illiterate and don't understand the services provided as well
as what it's for".


                                                  27
     Regression (2) examines trustworthiness using the average return ratio, as in Glaeser
et al., (2000). We divide the number of tokens the Trustee would return by the number
of tokens available (return ratio) for each possible amount of tokens received, and then
average over all return ratios. Somewhat surprisingly, women actually return less than
men. The mean level of trustworthiness does not increase when we introduce the Market
Chief, although Figure 14 shows that there is a mild reduction in the share of very low
return ratios with the Market Chief.
     Why did the Market Chief increase trust, especially for women, but not trustworthi-
ness? This apparent puzzle reflects one major difference between our experiment and
reality. The Market Chief in the experiment has no ability to punish, just to change the
return ratio. Consequently, there was no real reason for Trustees to alter their behavior,
since it was unclear what the Market Chief would do. However, the Investors could
still feel more protected, because even if the Trustee behaved badly, the Market Chief
could still protect their investment. Regressions (3) and (4) shows the final earnings.
Regression (3) shows that female and male Investors in the control group tend to receive
the same number of tokens at the end of the game. The chief raises the Investors' total
earnings, with the effect being statistically the same for entrepreneurs of both genders.
Regression (4) shows that the chief has little impact on the earnings of the Trustees.40


7 Conclusion
The developing world's rapid urbanization generates economic opportunities because
urban density allows for collaboration and trade that is just not possible on far-flung
farms. Yet the ability to interact positively is limited if one partner consistently fears
expropriation by the other. Consequently, rule of law complements urbanization, not
just because effective public order reduces activities that generate negative externalities,
like water pollution, but also because rule of law enables a wider range of positive
interactions.
    The advantages of rule of law are particularly high when one set of actors has more
power in a state of anarchy than the other. If men are more prone to use violence than
women, then this will reduce women's bargaining power without legal support, and may
cause inter-gender partnerships to break down or fail to form. In Lusaka, we believe
that that industrial segregation of female entrepreneurs partially reflects the advantages
of being able to trade within genders.
    A central theme of this paper, and an implication of our cross-sectional and exper-
imental work, is that even gender-neutral applications of rule of law can have benefits
that accrue disproportionately to women. When rule of law is absent, the threat of
violence looms over even seemingly innocuous market transactions. Men have displayed
a disproportionate propensity towards violence across almost every known human soci-
ety (Wilson and Herrnstein, 1985).Consequently, enforcing basic rule of law can make it
easier for women to transact with men.
  40
     See the Appendix for results of the game splitting the sample by all the different institutional
treatments.


                                                 28
    A second theme is that female entrepreneurship can be blocked both by weak legal
institutions and by social norms that favor men and male bargaining power. Women
can either lose in ex ante bargaining or ex post expropriation. Women will only enter
entrepreneurial fields where much of the benefits require dealing with men, when they
are protected from both types of loss.




                                         29
8 References
Algan, Y., & Cahuc, P. (2010). Inherited Trust and Growth. American Economic Re-
   view, 100(5), 2060-92.

Alibhai, S., Buehren, N., Papineni, S., & Pierotti, R. (2017). Crossovers: female en-
   trepreneurs who enter male sectors - evidence from Ethiopia. Policy Research working
   paper WPS 8065. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.

Behrer, A.P., Glaeser, E.L., Ponzetto, G.A.M., & Shleifer, A. (2019). Securing Property
  Rights, CREI Working Papers.

Berg, J., Dickhaut, F., & McCabe, K. (1995). Trust, Reciprocity, and Social History.
   Games and Economic Behavior, 10(1), 122-142.

Berge, L., Bjorvatn, K., & Tungodden, B. (2015).Human and Financial Capital for
   Microenterprise Development: Evidence from a Field and Lab Experiment. Manage-
   ment Science, 61(4), 707-722.

Calderon, G., Iacovone, L., & Juarez, L. (2017). Opportunity versus Necessity: Under-
   standing the Heterogeneity of Female Micro-Entrepreneurs, World Bank Economic
   Review, 30, 86-96.

Campos, F., Coleman, R., Conconi, A., Donald, A., Gassier, M., Goldstein, M., Chavez,
  Z., Mikulski, J., Milazzo, A., Paryavi, M., Pierotti, R., O'Sullivan, M., & Vaillant,
  J. (2019). Profiting from Parity: Unlocking the Potential of Women's Businesses in
  Africa. Main Report (English). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.

Campos, F., Goldstein, M., McGorman, L., Munoz Boudet, A.M., & Pimhidzai, O.
  (2014). Breaking the metal ceiling: female entrepreneurs who succeed in male-
  dominated sectors in Uganda. Africa region gender practice policy brief 9. Wash-
  ington, DC: World Bank Group.

De Mel, S., McKenzie, D. & Woodruff, C. (2014). Business training and female enterprise
   start-up, growth, and dynamics: Experimental evidence from Sri Lanka. Journal of
   Development Economics, 106, 199-210.

De Mel, S., McKenzie, D., & Woodruff, C. (2008). Returns to Capital in Microenter-
  prises: Evidence from a Field Experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  123(4), 1329-1372.

De Mel, S., McKenzie, D., & Woodruff, C. (2009). Are Women More Credit Constrained?
   Experimental Evidence on Gender and Microenterprise Returns. American Economic


                                          30
   Journal: Applied Economics, 1(3), 1-32.

Fairlie, R. W., Morelix, A., & Tareque, I. (2017). 2017 Kauffman Index of Startup Ac-
   tivity: National Trends. Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation.

Glaeser, E., Laibson, D., Scheinkman, J., & Soutter, C. (2000). Measuring trust. Quar-
   terly Journal of Economics, 115(3), 811-846.

Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion & International Finance Corporation. (2011).
   Strengthening Access to Finance for Women-owned SMEs in Developing Countries.
   Washington, DC: Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion and International Fi-
   nance Corporation.

Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., & Zingales, L. (2006). Does culture affect economic outcomes?
  Journal of Economic perspectives, 20(2), 23-48.

Hardy, M., & Kagy, G. (2018). Mind the (Profit) Gap: Why Are Female Enterprise
  Owners Earning Less than Men? AEA Papers and Proceedings, 108, 252­255.

Hsieh, C., & Klenow, P. (2010). Development Accounting. American Economic Journal:
   Macroeconomics, 2(1), 207-223.

Kelley, D.J., Baumer, B.S., Brush, C., Greene, P.G., Mahdavi, M., Majbouri, M., Cole,
   M., Dean, M. & Heavlow, R. (2017). Women's Entrepreneurship 2016/2017 Report.
   Global Entrepreneurship Research Association, London Business School.

Klapper, L. F., & Parker, S. C. (2011). Gender and the Business Environment for New
   Firm Creation. World Bank Research Observer, 26(2), 237-257.

Knack, S., & Keefer, P. (1997). Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoff? A
  Cross-Country Investigation. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(4), 1251-1288.

Kranton, R., Pease, M., Sanders, S., & Huettel, S. (2018). Groupy and non-groupy be-
  havior: Deconstructing bias in social preferences. Working Paper, Duke University,
  Durham NC.

Marshall, A. (1890). Principles of Economics. London: Macmillan.

Minondo, A., & Requena-Silvente, F. (2013). Does complexity explain the structure of
  trade?. Canadian Journal of Economics, 46(3), 928-955.

Morelix, A., Fairlie, R. W., Reedy, E. J., & Russell-Fritch, J. (2016). Kauffman Index
  of Startup Activity: State Trends 2016. Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation.


                                          31
OECD (2012). Gender Equality in Entrepreneurship. In Closing the gender gap: Act
  now, (part IV, 273-343). OECD Publishing.

Shah, M. (2012). The Informal Sector in Zambia: Can it Disappear? Should it Disap-
   pear? International Growth Centre Working Paper.

Singer S., Herrington, M., & Menipaz E. (2018). Global Entrepreneurship Monitor
   2017/18. Global Entrepreneurship Research Association, London Business School.

Wilson, R.J.Q., & Herrnstein, R. (1985). Crime and Human Nature: The Definitive
  Study of the Causes of Crime. New York: Simon & Schuster.

Xavier, S. R., Kelley, J. K., Herrington, M. & and Vorderw¨
                                                          ulbecke A. (2012). Global
  Entrepreneurship Monitor 2012. Global Entrepreneurship Research Association, Lon-
  don Business School.




                                        32
Tables

         Table 1: Countries by Rule of Law and Discrimination in the Family
                         (a) Number of Countries by Rule of Law and Dis-
                         crimination against Women

                                     Number of countries
                                        Discrimination in family
                                                 Low      High
                                        High      47        26
                            Rule of law         29.56% 16.35%
                                        Low       32        54
                                                20.13% 33.96%

    This table shows the categorization of countries in our data using "discrimination of the family"
    from the SIGI above or below median (on the columns) and the WB rule of law rank decile (on
    the rows) above or below median.

                         (b) Female Entrepreneurship by Rule of Law and
                         Discrimination against Women

                                     Female ownership
                                        Discrimination in family
                                                Low      High
                                        High 36%          18%
                                         sd    [0.13]    [0.12]
                           Rule of Law   N       13        11
                                        Low     24%       16%
                                         sd    [0.13]    [0.10]
                                         N       13        36

    This table shows the proportion of firms with female ownership in each combination of countries,
    categorized using "discrimination of the family" from the SIGI above or below median (on the
    columns) and the WB rule of law rank decile (on the rows) above or below median.




                                                   33
                          Table 2: Interaction between Rule of Law and Female Bargaining Power across Countries

                                                                                                                Female ownership
                                                                           (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)      (5)    (6)             (7)          (8)           (9)

     Rule of law > med                                                   0.017     0.033      0.027 0.020 0.017              -0.002 -0.146*** -0.152*** -0.183***
                                                                        (0.039)   (0.042)    (0.042) (0.066) (0.067)        (0.065) (0.025) (0.030) (0.033)
     Discr in family < med                                              0.071*    0.086**    0.114**
                                                                        (0.039)   (0.040)    (0.045)
     Discr in family < med x Rule of law > med                          0.113*    0.117*     0.115*
                                                                        (0.063)   (0.063)    (0.064)
     Violence on Wives < med                                                                          -0.050 -0.051          -0.047
                                                                                                     (0.053) (0.057)        (0.073)
     Violence on Wives < med x Rule of law > med                                                     0.176* 0.165             0.161
                                                                                                     (0.100) (0.109)        (0.115)




34
     WJP Gender Equality > med                                                                                                         0.115**      0.106**       0.115**
                                                                                                                                       (0.051)      (0.053)       (0.050)
     WJP Gender Equality > med x Rule of law > med                                                                                      0.122*      0.110*        0.125**
                                                                                                                                       (0.062)      (0.060)       (0.055)
     Log gdp pp (2011)                                                              -0.015 -0.017                  0.011 0.015                       0.017         0.020
                                                                                   (0.013) (0.014)                (0.019) (0.022)                   (0.017)       (0.019)

     Observations                                                  73     73       73     36      36      36      52                                    52          52
     R-squared                                                   0.313 0.323 0.345 0.160 0.165 0.149            0.203                                 0.218       0.221
     Sector                                                       All     All    Manuf All       All Manuf       All                                   All        Manuf
                                          Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
     The regressions in this table test the theoretical prediction of complementarity between female bargaining power and fair and effective political institutions. Columns
     (1), (2) and (3) test the interaction between family discrimination (proxied by the SIGI index) and the World Bank rule of law rank percentile. In regression (4), (5)
     and (6), we use the measure of violence against women from the WVS. Regressions (2), (3) and (5), (6) and (8), (9) add controls for log of per capita income in 2011.
     Columns (7), (8) and (9) test whether rule of law is more important when combined with less bias against women, which we proxy using the overall WJP score on equal
     treatment of the genders by legal institutions. Columns (3), (6) and (9) limit the sample of entrepreneurs in the WBES to manufacturing.
                Table 3: Descriptive Statistics for Entire Census

                                                                 Mean      Observations
   Number of Employees                                           2.27        40,517
   Industry (Naics2)
     Retailing industry                                          0.51          48,163
     Manufacturing industry                                      0.08          48,163
     Accomodation/food services industry                         0.14          48,163
     Other Services                                              0.13          48,163
     All Other Industries                                        0.13          48,163
   Number of Employees by Industry
     Number Emp. Retail ind.                                     1.12          20,472
     Number Emp. Manufacturing industry                          3.86           3,625
     Number Emp. accom/food services ind                         2.34           5,854
     Number Emp. other services ind                              1.20           5,541
     Number Emp. other ind                                       7.05           4,873
   Business is part of a chain                                   0.04          48,670
   Business has standalone structure (bricks)                    0.11          48,670
   Business in building with multiple businesses                 0.71          48,670
   Business has standalone structure (cardboard)                 0.03          48,670
   Business is in residential house                              0.15          48,670

This table presents industry composition for the 2016 Lusaka Census of Urban Entrepreneurs. All
entries have been rounded to two decimal places. Observations may be dropped because of missing
values.




                                              35
                          Table 4: Education and Firm Size by Gender

                                     Male Mean         Fem Mean            Diff       Male N       Fem N
 Panel A: Firm Size
 No. full-time emp.                      1.05              0.68         -0.38***       1579          635
                                        (0.06)            (0.07)         (0.10)
 No. part-time emp.                      0.99              0.29         -0.69***       1571          633
                                        (0.08)            (0.04)         (0.13)
 No. apprentices/unpaid                  0.68              0.35           -0.33        1575          634
                                        (0.13)            (0.04)         (0.21)
 No. family members                      0.49              0.30         -0.19***       1546          602
                                        (0.03)            (0.03)         (0.04)
 Panel B: Education
 Training (mgmt/Entrep)                  0.21              0.28         0.06***        1570          631
                                        (0.01)            (0.02)         (0.02)
 University                              0.04              0.03           -0.01        1566          629
                                        (0.00)            (0.01)         (0.01)
 Diploma                                 0.16              0.19          0.03*         1566          629
                                        (0.01)            (0.02)         (0.02)
 Completed Secondary                     0.23              0.20           -0.03        1566          629
                                        (0.01)            (0.02)         (0.02)
 No Formal Education                     0.02              0.01          -0.01*        1566          629
                                        (0.00)            (0.00)         (0.01)
Panel A compares firm size by gender for completed intervews in the Manufacturers Survey. Panel B compares
employment and education by gender for completed interviews in the Manufacturers Survey. All entries have
been rounded to two decimal places. Sales variables contain outliers. Stars denote statistical significance of the
two-sided t-test by gender. *** denotes p<0.01, ** denotes p<0.05, and * denotes p<0.1.




                                                       36
                                                    Table 5: Gender Sales Gap for All Manufacturers

                                                                                             Logged Sales
                                            (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)                                    (6)       (7)                   (8)
                                       Good Week Bad Week Good Week Bad Week Good Week                                 Bad Week Good Week             Bad Week
      Female                            -0.587*** -0.669*** -0.596*** -0.673*** -0.135**                               -0.294***   -0.0832            -0.230***
                                         (0.0584)  (0.0709)  (0.0577)  (0.0712)  (0.0569)                               (0.0698)  (0.0631)             (0.0765)
      Apparel                                                                   -1.037***                              -0.899*** -0.952***            -0.833***
                                                                                 (0.0610)                               (0.0742)  (0.0594)             (0.0746)
      Food                                                                       0.304***                               0.765***   0.195**             0.632***
                                                                                 (0.0832)                               (0.0928)  (0.0852)             (0.0956)
      Hours Worked                                                                                                               0.0495***            0.0671***
                                                                                                                                  (0.0166)             (0.0198)
      Days Worked                                                                                                                 0.0599*              0.0827**
                                                                                                                                  (0.0312)             (0.0374)




37
      Married                                                                                                                     0.157***              0.135**
                                                                                                                                  (0.0568)             (0.0675)
      Observations                         2068            1848            2054           1836            2068            1848      2047                  1830
      Adjusted R2                          0.043           0.045           0.109          0.085           0.217           0.232     0.257                0.252
      Mean Dep Var                           7.1            5.89            7.09           5.89             7.1            5.89       7.1                 5.88
      Education dummies                       N              N               Y              Y                N              N          Y                    Y
      SD Dep Var                            1.28            1.44            1.28           1.43            1.28            1.44      1.27                 1.43
      F-test Education = 0                                                    0              0                                         0                    0
      P-value Food = Apparel                                                                                 0               0         0                    0
                                                        Robust SE in parentheses.* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***
     This table shows drivers of logged sales in a good or bad week for entrepreneurs of all industries in the 2016 Manufacturers Survey. The dependent variables are
     the log of the answers given when asked the sales in a good week and the sales in a bad week. If the person could not provide an exact number, we also asked
     for an upper and lower bound. We then imputed the average of the bounds to the sales variables. We regress on indicator variables indicating different levels
     of educational achievement: the omitted category is "illiterate or literate, no formal education", the other categories are "Primary Incomplete", "Primary",
     "Secondary Incomplete", "Secondary", "Diploma", "University". For industry, the omitted category is "other".
                      Table 6: Trust and Cooperation in Zambia by Gender

                                              Male Mean         Fem Mean            Diff        Male N       Fem N
 Panel A: Trust
 Trust Strangers                                  0.29              0.20         -0.09***        1590          644
                                                 (0.45)            (0.40)          (0.02)
 Trust Neighbors                                  0.54              0.43         -0.11***        1589          640
                                                 (0.50)            (0.50)          (0.02)
 Trust GSS                                        1.10              1.04         -0.07***        1585          645
                                                 (0.31)            (0.19)          (0.01)
 Feel safe with shop unattended                   2.81              2.49          -0.32**         692          253
                                                 (1.71)            (1.59)          (0.12)
 Panel B: Cooperation
 Joint Buy                                        0.35              0.27         -0.08***        1579          637
                                                 (0.48)            (0.44)          (0.02)
 Lent                                             0.55              0.44         -0.11***        1579          637
                                                 (0.50)            (0.50)          (0.02)
 Advice                                           0.76              0.71          -0.05**        1579          637
                                                 (0.43)            (0.45)          (0.02)
 Share Order                                      0.58              0.54           -0.04*        1579          637
                                                 (0.49)            (0.50)          (0.02)
 Coop Average                                     0.56              0.49         -0.07***        1579          637
                                                 (0.33)            (0.34)          (0.02)
Panel A shows mean differences in trust between women and men, and Panel B shows mean differences in
cooperation between women and men. The variables "Trust Strangers" and "Trust Neighbors" are measured on a
scale from 1-4, and have been converted into dummy variables by combining low scores (1 and 2) and high scores
(3 and 4). Low scores were given a value of 0, and high scores a value of 1. The "Feel safe leaving shop unattented"
variable is measured in a scale from 1-5. Higher scores indicate that people disagree with the statement, and
do not feel safe leaving their shop unattended. The variable "Trust GSS" is a dummy measuring whether most
people can be trusted or not: a value of 1 indicates that "most people can be trusted", and a value of 0 indicates
that "you cannot be too careful in dealing with people". The variables "Joint Buy", "Lent", "Advice" and "Share
Order" are dummies that indicate whether a person ever engaged in the relevant activity. The variable "Coop
Average" is an index of cooperative behavior, calculated as a simple average of the four dummies "Joint Buy",
"Lent", "Advice" and "Share Order". The sample for both panels stems from our Manufacturers Survey in Lusaka
(N=2,216).




                                                        38
                                                            Table 7: Learning History and Sales

                                                                     Learnt from                                        Logged Sales               Employment
                                              (1)                 (2)                          (3)                    (4)              (5)               (6)
                                            Owner         Owner in same sector          Family or friends        Good Week         Bad Week          Full time
      Female                              -0.192***           -0.139***                    -0.152***              -0.638***        -0.736***         -0.507***
                                           (0.0215)            (0.0192)                     (0.0232)               (0.0943)          (0.114)          (0.166)
      Informal learning                                                                                             0.0601           0.0860           -0.0988
                                                                                                                   (0.0788)         (0.0943)          (0.151)
      Female×Informal learning                                                                                     0.364***         0.343**            0.325
                                                                                                                    (0.124)          (0.157)          (0.202)
      Observations                           2080                   2080                        2080                 1961             1751              2078
      Adjusted R2                            0.047                  0.031                       0.073                0.160            0.131            0.170
      Mean Dep Var                             .3                    .22                         .36                  7.08             5.86              .91
      SD Dep Var                              .46                    .41                         .48                  1.27             1.43             2.23




39
      Business Density Controls                Y                      Y                           Y                    Y                Y                 Y
      Owner Controls                           Y                      Y                           Y                    Y                Y                 Y
      Industry Fixed Effects                   N                      N                           N                    N                N                 N
                                                     Robust SE in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01


     The variables "Owner", "Owner in same sector", "Family or Friends" are dummies that indicate whether an entrepreneur learnt the job from each category.
     "Informal learning" is a dummy for whether the owner learnt the business from any of the previous three categories. Business Density Controls include a dummy
     variable for whether the business is located within 100 meters of a market, the total number of businesses within 100 meters, and the number of business from
     the same sector within 100 meters. Business Owner Controls includes owner's age, business age, how many days the business owner spends working in the
     business, educational dummies and whether business owner is married or not. In columns (4) and (5), the dependent variables are the log of the answers given
     when asked the sales in a good week and the sales in a bad week. If the person could not provide an exact number, we also asked for an upper and lower bound.
     We then imputed the average of the bounds to the sales variables. In Column (6), the dependent variable is the number of full-time employees. The sample
     comes from our Manufacturers Survey in Lusaka (N=2,216).
                                                Table 8: The Market Effect on Cooperation

                                                                   (1)               (2)             (3)            (4)               (5)
                                                              Share Order           Lent          Advice        Joint Buy       Coop Average
      Female                                                   -0.0956**         -0.156***      -0.0918**       -0.111***         -0.114***
                                                                (0.0378)          (0.0379)       (0.0397)        (0.0381)          (0.0283)
      In market                                                 0.102***         0.131***        0.0437*         0.0563*         0.0832***
                                                                (0.0269)          (0.0484)       (0.0252)        (0.0327)          (0.0283)
      Female × In market                                        0.0922*            0.0750        0.0696*          0.0492           0.0715*
                                                                (0.0507)          (0.0504)       (0.0377)        (0.0680)          (0.0401)
      Observations                                                2216              2216           2216            2216              2216
      Adjusted R2                                                 0.018             0.032          0.008          0.011              0.034
      Business Density Controls                                     Y                 Y               Y              Y                 Y
      Business Owner Controls                                       N                 N               N              N                 N
      Industry FE                                                   N                 N               N              N                 N




40
      P-value (In + Fem.×In = 0)                                    0                 0             .002            .05                0
      P-value (Fem. + Fem. × In market = 0)                       .923              .036           .313            .164              .146
                                   Clustered standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01
     The variables "Joint Buy", "Lent", "Advice" and "Share" are dummies that indicate whether a person ever engaged in the relevant activity. The
     variable "Coop Average" is an index of cooperative behavior, calculated as a simple average of the four dummies "Joint Buy", "Lent", "Advice"
     and "Share". Business Density Controls include a dummy variable for whether the business is located within 100 meters of a market, the total
     number of businesses within 100 meters, and the number of business from the same sector within 100 meters. Business Owner Controls includes
     whether the business owner keeps written business records of every purchase and sale made, whether her/his business is registered individually,
     whether the business owners trust their neighbors, how old the business is, how many days the business owner spends working in the business,
     age of business owner and whether business owner is married or not. Standard errors are clustered at the 1 squared-km area level. The sample
     comes from our Manufacturers Survey in Lusaka (N=2,216).
                                           Table 9: Effect of Distance to SCC on Cooperation

                                                                  (1)               (2)            (3)             (4)              (5)
                                                            Share Order           Lent        Joint Buy         Advice       Coop Average
         Female                                                 0.104           -0.0574          0.0204        0.139***          0.0514
                                                              (0.0635)         (0.0407)        (0.0714)        (0.0319)         (0.0348)
         2-4 miles from SCC                                    -0.0115         -0.00324         -0.0115         -0.0354          -0.0154
                                                              (0.0415)         (0.0344)        (0.0621)        (0.0342)         (0.0289)
         Female × 2-4 miles from SCC                           -0.0852           0.0227         -0.0532       -0.137***          -0.0633
                                                              (0.0761)         (0.0488)        (0.0766)        (0.0386)         (0.0414)
         >4 miles from SCC                                     -0.0236         0.0987**        0.000515          0.0298           0.0263
                                                              (0.0356)         (0.0385)        (0.0630)        (0.0325)         (0.0285)
         Female × >4 miles from SCC                          -0.208***          -0.0896         -0.148*       -0.241***        -0.172***
                                                              (0.0704)         (0.0586)        (0.0789)        (0.0414)         (0.0431)
         Observations                                           2216              2216            2216            2216             2216




41
         Adjusted R2                                            0.007             0.014          0.007           0.009            0.015
         Business Density Controls                                 Y                 Y              Y               Y                Y
         Business Owner Controls                                   N                 N              N               N                N
         Industry FE                                               N                 N              N               N                N
         P-value (2-4mi + Fem. × 2-4mi = 0)                      .132             .582            .124              0              .004
         P-value (>4mi + Fem. × >4mi = 0)                          0              .856              0               0                0
         P-value (Fem. + Fem. × 2-4mi = 0)                       .612              .409           .148            .969             .664
         P-value (Fem. + Fem. × >4mi = 0)                        .001             .001              0               0                0
                                   Clustered standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01
     The variables "Joint Buy", "Lent", "Advice" and "Share" are dummies that indicate whether a person ever engaged in the relevant activity. The
     variable "Coop Average" is an index of cooperative behavior, calculated as a simple average of the four dummies "Joint Buy", "Lent", "Advice"
     and "Share". Business Density Controls include a dummy variable for whether the business is located within 100 meters of a market, the total
     number of businesses within 100 meters, and the number of business from the same sector within 100 meters. Business Owner Controls includes
     whether the business owner keeps written business records of every purchase and sale made, whether her/his business is registered individually,
     whether the business owners trust their neighbors, how old the business is, how many days the business owner spends working in the business,
     age of business owner and whether business owner is married or not. Standard errors are clustered at the 1 squared-km area level. The sample
     comes from our Manufacturers Survey in Lusaka (N=2,216).
                           Table 10: Effect of Being in Market on Sales

                                                                  (1)         (2)                   (3)
                                                                        Log Sales
                                                             Good Week Bad Week                Yesterday
    Female                                                    -0.282***  -0.542***                -0.161
                                                               (0.0943)    (0.115)               (0.111)
    In market                                                   -0.114      -0.113             -0.235***
                                                               (0.0707)   (0.0721)              (0.0874)
    Female × In market                                         0.200**    0.335***               0.245*
                                                               (0.0917)    (0.117)               (0.134)
    Observations                                                 1911        1691                  1364
    Adjusted R2                                                 0.335       0.297                  0.326
    Business Density Controls                                     Y            Y                     Y
    Business Owner Controls                                       Y            Y                     Y
    Industry FE                                                   Y            Y                     Y
    P-value (In + Fem.×In = 0)                                   .271        .062                  .925
    P-value (Fem. + Fem. × In market = 0)                        .233        .013                  .345
               Clustered standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01
The dependent variables are the log of the answers given when asked the sales in the previous working day, the
sales in a good week and the sales in a bad week. If the person could not provide an exact number, we also
asked for an upper and lower bound. We then imputed the average of the bounds to the sales variables. Business
Density Controls include a dummy variable for whether the business is located within 100 meters of a market,
the total number of businesses within 100 meters, and the number of business from the same sector within 100
meters. Business Owner Controls includes whether the business owner keeps written business records of every
purchase and sale made, whether her/his business is registered individually, whether the business owners trust
their neighbors, how old the business is, how many days the business owner spends working in the business, age of
business owner and whether business owner is married or not. The regressions also include industry fixed-effects,
a dummy on the owner's gender, a dummy on whether the business is located inside a market, and the interaction
between the two of them. Standard errors are clustered at the 1 squared-km area level. The sample comes from
our Manufacturers Survey in Lusaka (N=2,216).




                                                       42
                    Table 11: Effect of Distance to SCC on Sales

                                                         (1)          (2)                  (3)
                                                                Log Sales
                                                     Good Week Bad Week               Yesterday
Female                                                -0.288***  -0.480***               0.102
                                                       (0.0550)   (0.0914)              (0.186)
2-4 miles from SCC                                      -0.0558    -0.0420             -0.00167
                                                        (0.157)    (0.156)             (0.0936)
Female × 2-4 miles from SCC                              0.179*   0.286**               -0.0380
                                                       (0.0942)    (0.117)              (0.198)
>4 miles from SCC                                        -0.253     -0.141             -0.196**
                                                        (0.161)    (0.164)             (0.0892)
Female × >4 miles from SCC                                0.125     0.0876               -0.141
                                                       (0.0864)    (0.113)              (0.197)
Observations                                              1911       1691                 1364
Adjusted R2                                               0.338     0.297                0.327
Business Density Controls                                    Y         Y                    Y
Business Owner Controls                                      Y         Y                    Y
Industry FE                                                  Y         Y                    Y
P-value (2-4mi + Fem. × 2-4mi = 0)                          .37      .269                   .8
P-value (>4mi + Fem. × >4mi = 0)                          .314       .817                 .037
P-value (Fem. + Fem. × 2-4mi = 0)                         .252       .017                  .52
P-value (Fem. + Fem. × >4mi = 0)                           .025        0                  .698
        Clustered standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01
The dependent variables are the log of the answers given when asked the sales in the previous
working day, the sales in a good week and the sales in a bad week. If the person could not provide
an exact number, we also asked for an upper and lower bound. We then imputed the average of
the bounds to the sales variables. Business Density Controls include a dummy variable for whether
the business is located within 100 meters of a market, the total number of businesses within 100
meters, and the number of business from the same sector within 100 meters. Business Owner
Controls includes whether the business owner keeps written business records of every purchase and
sale made, whether her/his business is registered individually, whether the business owners trust
their neighbors, how old the business is, how many days the business owner spends working in the
business, age of business owner and whether business owner is married or not. The regressions also
include industry fixed-effects, a dummy on the owner's gender, dummies on the business' distance
to the Small Claims Court, and their interaction. Standard errors are clustered at the 1 squared-km
area level. The sample comes from our Manufacturers Survey in Lusaka (N=2,216).




                                                43
                        Table 12: Experimental Treatments

                                       Institutional Access Treatment
                                       Control Chief         SCC

                   Inside/Inside           95         96            96


                  Outside/Inside           94         0             96



Numbers indicate the number of rounds in each treatment cell. Each player played two rounds
(once as Investor and once as Trustee), with two distinct entrepreneurs. Three out of the 480
rounds that occurred were not used for data quality reasons.




                                             44
                            Table 13: Games' Behavior and Earnings: Control vs Chief Treatment

                                     (1)                             (2)                           (3)                        (4)
                            Tokens Investor Sent           Average Return Ratio           Investor's Earnings         Trustee's Earnings
     Female                      -1.243***                         0.000                         -0.210                     0.355
                                  (0.430)                         (0.026)                       (0.400)                    (1.202)
     Chief                        -0.0851                          0.025                          0.505                     -0.373
                                  (0.382)                         (0.020)                       (0.317)                    (0.668)
     Female × Chief               1.610**                          -0.052                         0.743                     1.055




45
                                  (0.682)                         (0.042)                       (0.694)                    (1.552)
     Observations                   189                              190                           189                        190
     Adjusted R2                   0.020                           0.000                          0.029                     -0.000
     Mean                           4.09                             .42                          10.86                      6.76
     SD                            2.412                            .135                          2.244                      4.519
                                  Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***p<0.01


     The dependent variable in Column (1) is the number of tokens sent by the Investor and in Column (2) is the average return ratio by the
     Trustee. The dependent variables in Columns (3) and (4) are the Investor's and Trustee's earnings, respectively. All regressions include a
     dummy for the round played and exclude the control group in the "outsider" condition and the Small Claims Court treatment. The sample
     comes from our lab-in-the-field games conducted in Lusaka in 2017.
Figures

                                  Figure 1: Theoretical Predictions

       The two lines both capture the maximum share of men in an industry that women will enter. The
       bottom line shows the case where rule of law is weak and  is high enough so that women will not
       partner with men. In that case, the maximum share is 1 -  which we assume to be .1. The top
       line is decreasing with  and it shows the case where  is low enough so that women will partner
       with men, and      
                         -2q
                              is assumed to be .2. The threshold for entry is reasonably high when  and
        is low, but if either  or  are high, then women will not enter into male-dominated fields.



                          Figure 2: Female-owned firms across countries


This Figure shows the proportion of female-led businesses across countries. Female-led firms are defined as firms
with a weak majority of female owners. We consider the most recent year of the World Bank Enterprise Survey
for each country (years from 2009 to 2016). We limit the sample to businesses which are sole proprietorship or
partnerships. The final sample excludes countries with less than 10 observations in those categories (5%). The
number of countries in this figure is 84.



                         Figure 3: Business Earnings by Owner's Gender


This Figure shows the gender-specific distributions of logsales in 2010 USD after controlling for country and
industry fixed effect.We consider the most recent year of the World Bank Enterprise Survey for each country
(years from 2009 to 2016). We limit the sample to businesses which are sole proprietorship or partnerships. The
final sample excludes countries with less than 10 observations in those categories (5%). Female-led businesses are
defined as firms with a weak majority of female owners. The number of countries in this figure is 82.



             Figure 4: Female Business Ownership and Family Discrimination


This figure shows the correlation between a country's percentage of female-owned businesses and the SIGI measure
of family discrimination. Female-led firms are defined as firms with a weak majority of female owners. We consider
the most recent year of the World Bank Enterprise Survey for each country (years from 2009 to 2016). We limit
the sample to businesses which are sole proprietorship or partnerships. The final sample excludes countries with
less than 10 observations in those categories (5%). The variable for family discrimination is constructed as the
weighted average of the following subcomponents: laws on child marriage, household responsibilities, inheritance
laws and divorce laws. We use the SIGI 2019. The number of countries with both variables available is 75.


                    Figure 5: Female Business Ownership and Rule of Law


This Figure shows the correlation between a country's quality of contract enforcement as measured by the World
Bank Worldwide Governance Indicators (Rule of Law Rank Percentile) and its percentage of female-owned business
from the WBES. Female-owned firms are defined as firms with a weak majority of female owners. We consider
the most recent year of the World Bank Enterprise Survey for each country (years from 2009 to 2016). We limit
the sample to businesses which are sole proprietorship or partnerships. The final sample excludes countries with
less than 10 observations in those categories (5%). We use the 2017 Rule of Law Rank Percentile from the World
Bank Worldwide Governance Indicators. The number of countries with both variables available is 82.


                                                       46
                                Figure 6: Census Coverage


This figure shows the spacial distribution of businesses in the Lusaka Census of Urban Entrepreneurs.
It covers 48,163 establishments in Lusaka. The blue squares show where markets exist.




                                                 47
                      Figure 7: Sales in Good and Bad Weeks by Gender




                This figure shows the kernel density of logged sales in good and bad weeks by
                gender. The p-value of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov equality of distributions test is
                0.00. The p-value of the variance test ratio is 0.001 for sales in good weeks and
                0.40 for sales in bad weeks. The sample comes from our Manufacturers Survey
                in Lusaka (N=2,216).


                      Figure 8: Distribution across Industries by Gender


This figure shows the industries in which manufacturers from the Lusaka Census of Urban Entrepreneurs operate,
by gender.




                                                      48
                              Figure 9: Small Claims Court Location

This figure shows a zoom-in of the spacial distribution of businesses in the Lusaka Census of Urban Entrepreneurs.
The blue squares show where markets exist and the arrow the Small Claims Court.




                                                       49
                   Figure 10: Cooperation by Gender and Market Location


This figure shows the average cooperation of female and male-led businesses in markets with a large or a small
share of female businesses, or outside of markets. The sample comes from our Manufacturers Survey in Lusaka
(N=2,216).




                                                     50
        Figure 11: Where did Entrepreneurs Learn their Trade?



This figure shows the different ways in which entrepreneurs learnt their job, by gender.
Formal training was mainly interpreted as classroom training, usually delivered by govern-
mental associations or NGOs. The sample comes from our Manufacturers Survey in Lusaka
(N=2,216).




                                           51
             Figure 12: Talking about the Business with Other Entrepreneurs

This figure shows the proportion of men and women talking several times a week with other entrepreneurs about
the business. We asked "Consider other business owners in your sector in this neighborhood. How many times
do you talk about topics related to the business?". The sample comes from our Manufacturers Survey in Lusaka
(N=2,216).




                                                     52
             Figure 13: Cooperative Activities by Distance to SCC

This figure shows the fraction of entrepreneurs who said they cooperated with a similar business
in the given activity by gender and distance from the SCC in 1-mile buckets. The sample comes
from our Manufacturers Survey in Lusaka (N=2,216).




                                              53
    Figure 14: Number of Tokens Sent and Average Return Ratio: Control vs Chief


This figure shows the number of tokens sent (left) and the average return ratio (right) by gender and treatment
group. The control group includes online businesses located inside markets. Data are from the experimental
games.




            Figure 15: Final Investor's and Trustee's Earnings: Control vs Chief


This figure shows the final earnings of the Investor (left) and Trustee (right) by gender and institutional treatment
group. The control group includes online businesses located inside markets. Data are from the experimental games.




                                                        54
Appendix A - Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1:
    A male P will always shirk when shirking is disputable. When shirking is indis-
putable, he will not shirk as long as s > b. We refer to this as the IC contract and it
must be satisfied for a contract to occur, since the woman will never partner when there
is always shirking.
    If the IC constraint is satisfied, then in any contract between a female E and a male
P, the man will in expectation receive in expectation s - q +  b, and so s must also
satisfy s > q- b
               . The woman will receive (1 - s) - q -  (b + ), and so her participation
requires that s < 1 - q+(     b+)
                                   .
                                                                                      -q
    The total expected surplus is  - 2q -  , and that must be positive (or  <             ) for
a partnership to occur. We refer to this as the individual rationality of IR constraint.
    If the IC constraint is slack, then men and women share the surplus according to the
bargaining rule so that men receive  ( - 2q -  ) and women receive (1 -  )( - 2q -  ),
which implies that s =  - (2 -1)q+      
                                          +b
                                               , which satisfies 1 - q+( b+)
                                                                               > s > q-   b
                                                                                          as
               -q
long as  <        .
    This value of s will satisfy the IC constraint if and only if  - (2 - 1) q -   -
 b > b or  (-       2q )+q -b
                   +b         >  . If that condition fails to hold, then E must effectively
pay P efficiency wages to eliminate shirking in the indisputable case. In that case,
      b
s=      , and the male receives (1 +  )b - q >  ( - 2q -  ) and the woman receives
                                                                                   -q -b
 - b - q -  (b + ) < (1 -  )( - 2q -  ). When  < q + (1 +  ) b +   or +               b < ,
then the woman earns zero profits and the partnership will not occur.
    If  - 2q <  q-         b
                         b then
                                   -2q
                                       < -(2    -1)q -b
                                              +b        and if the contract satisfies the IR
constraint it automatically satisfies the IC constraint as well. Consequently, if -    2q
                                                                                       >
the contract specifies s =  - (2 -1)q+   
                                           +b
                                                 , giving expected welfare of  ( - 2q -  )
to P and (1 -  )( - 2q -  ) to E. If -        2q
                                              <  then there is no contract.
    If  - 2q >  b , which will always hold when q < b, then we have -
                     q -b                                                      2q
                                                                               > +b >
                                                                                      -q -b

 ( -2q )+q -b
    +b        If  (-
              .       2q )+q -b
                     +b          >  , then the contract specifies s =  - (2 -1)q+
                                                                                
                                                                                   +b
                                                                                       ,
giving expected welfare of  ( - 2q -  ) to P and (1 -  )( - 2q -  ) to E. If
 -q -b           ( -2q )+q -b
 +b >  >            +b        , then the contract specifies s =  b and the expected male
payout is (1 +  ) b - q and the expected female payout is  - b(1 +  ) - q -   . If
 -q -b
 +b <  , then there is no contract.

   Proof of Proposition 2:
   Women enter if and only if expected returns, denoted R, are greater than (.5 - q ).
There are three cases to consider. If -
                                        2q
                                           < qb - 1, and
                                                           -2q
                                                                <  , or - 
                                                                           2q
                                                                              > q
                                                                                b -1
     -q -b                                                 -q -b     -2q
and +b <  then women do not partner with men. As +b >  if and only if
 -2q                                                                 -2q  -q -b
      > q
        b - 1, these conditions are satisfied whenever  > M ax        , +b . In that
case, women enter if and only if 1 -  > mi .
                                                        ( -2q )+q -b
   If - 2q   q           -2q           -2q
        < b - 1, and  >  , or  > b - 1 and
                                              q
                                                           +b        >  , then women re-


                                              55
                                                                ( -2q )+q -b
ceive (1 -  ) ( - 2q -  ) when they partner with a men. As         +b        < -  2q
                                                                                  if and
                                                                          2q  ( -2q )+q -b
only if - 2q   q
          > b - 1, these conditions are satisfied whenever    < M in -   ,       +b        .
In that case female returns from entry equal (0.5 - q ) (1 - mi )+ mi (1 -  )( - 2q -  ).
If 1- 2(1                                                               
         - ) >  -2q , then women enter for all values of mi . If 1 - 2(1- ) ( - 2q ) <  ,
                                                        ( -2q )(1-)
then women enter if and only if mi < m = (-2q)(2                                        
                                                            -1)+2(1- )  . The value of m is
rising with  , falling with q , ,  ,  and  .
                                             ( -2q )+q -b
    If -
         2q
            > q              -q -b
                b - 1 and +b >  >               +b        , then the expected female payout
from partnering with a man is  - b(1 +  ) - q -  , and women enter if and only if
(0.5 - q ) (1 - mi ) + mi ( - b (1 +  ) - q -  ) > (0.5 - q ). In that case, women
always enter if 1 - 0.5 > b(1+   )+ 
                                -2q  . If (1 - 0.5) ( - 2q ) < b (1 +  ) +  , then women
                                   ( -2q )(1-)
enter if and only if mi < m <    2b(1+ )+2 - .   The value of m is rising with  , falling
with q , b, ,  , and .




                                            56
Appendix B - Games Procedures
Six surveyors and two recruiters were hired to conduct the games and were managed by
a research assistant. Typically two days were spent in each market. We created two lists
of randomly-ordered businesses for each market; one list for businesses located inside
the market and one for businesses located outside the market. Manufacturers, being
of primary interest, were placed at the top of each list. The two recruiters met early
and were given the randomized list of entrepreneurs; they then set up appointments
with potential participants, following the order of the list. If a marketeer could not
be located or refused to participate, the following skip pattern was implemented: the
marketeer was replaced by the next female on the list and as soon as all women had been
exhausted, the recruiters simply moved to the next marketeer on the list. In markets
where the response rate was low, or we failed to find many businesses or an above average
amount of businesses were closed, we thus also surveyed and played the games with non-
manufacturers. It is also important to note that all entrepreneurs on the outside list
were screened extensively to ensure that they truly did not belong to the market.
    In general, the first day at a market, the games were played with inside-inside pairs,
wherein both players worked within the market. The corresponding three treatments
arms for these pairs were control, SCC and chief. Generally, the second day at a market,
the games were played with inside-outside pairs, wherein one player was a marketeer
and the other an entrepreneur located outside of the market. The corresponding two
treatment arms for these pairs were control and SCC. Surveys were conducted first, and
then the games. However, if there were delays in reaching a participant or if a player
refused to play the games after having completed the survey, the order was switched.
The order in which each treatment arm was conducted was randomized each market to
limit selection bias due to logistical factors (E.g. Time of day, eagerness of participants,
etc.).
    We ran the games on groups of six entrepreneurs at time, with one surveyor as-
signed to one entrepreneur. For each market, a switch matrix was constructed to inform
surveyors whether their assigned entrepreneur was to be Player A (Investor) or Player
B (Trustee) first, and who the entrepreneur was to play in each round. For logistical
reasons, surveyors whose respondents were located outside of the market always started
the games with the respondent being the Trustee, therefore all outsiders played the
games in the same order, first as Trustees then as Investors. Once finishing a survey
with a respondent, a surveyor sent a text to their corresponding surveyor to inform
that they were about to start the instructions for the games in the following format:
"surveyornum-initials-CensusID-AB/BA-start (e.g. 4-D-6230-AB-start)". The instruc-
tions for the games were given to the respondent in written as well as oral form in the
respondent's preferred language, and surveyors asked the respondent check questions to
ensure that they fully understood the pay-out rules, who they were playing against, and
the possibilities for complaint when relevant. Once both surveyors in a pair had received
the "ready" text message from their partner surveyor for that round and had ensured
that the participant understood the rules, they started with the game.


                                            57
    The surveyor of the Investor sent the surveyor of the corresponding Trustee the
number of tokens his player had chosen to send in the following format "SurveyorNum-
Surname-Game-Player-TokensSent (e.g. 4-AD-R1-A3)". The surveyor of the Trustee
then responded with the number of tokens the Trustee had decided to send back in the
following format "SurveyorNum-Surname-Game-Player-TokensReturned (e.g. 2-PB-R1-
B2)". The surveyors were instructed to always use neutral language to inform the
respondents of the amount that had been sent (or sent back) to them.
    In the case of the SCC and chief treatments, the Investor, upon being told how many
tokens the Trustee had sent back, was asked whether they wanted to complain to the
SCC (chief) or not. The surveyor then messaged the corresponding surveyor whether
or not the Investor intended to complain (format: A-Comp OR A-NoComp). If the
Investor complained, the surveyor also messaged the recruiter in the following format:
"SurveyorNum-Surname-ANumGiven-BNumReturned-TotNum-Co E.g. 4-AD-A3-B2-
Tot9-Comp". In the case of the SCC treatment, the recruitment officer already had a
completed matrix of decisions from the SCC (obtained from the SCC before the start of
the games field work). The recruitment officer examined the matrix and sent the SCC's
decision to the surveyor of the Investor in the following format: "ANumTokensReceived-
BNumTokensReceived. E.g. A6-B3". In the case of the chief treatment, the recruiter
would ask the market's chief in real-time how s/he wanted to settle the complaint
and sent their response in the same format to the surveyor of the Investor. The chief
her/himself was given information (both oral and written) prior to the games commenc-
ing, which explained the game and made clear her/his role as an arbitrator during the
games. Similar to the respondents, they were asked questions to check whether they had
fully understood the games and their role in the games. If/ when a complaint reached the
chief, the recruiter who was assigned to her/him would announce the complaint and ask
for her/his decision in the following way: "There has been a complaint from a player. In
this game, player A (the Investor) sent XX number of tokens to B (the Trustee), which
means B received XX number of tokens. B sent back XX tokens. A has complained to
you. Do you wish to redistribute the tokens? If so, how?"
    It is important to note, that the players were never told who they were playing
against, however, they knew whether the player was located inside or outside the mar-
ket. Furthermore, after playing the first round as Investor or Trustee, they played the
second round as Trustee (Investor respectively) against a new player, so that no two
players played each other twice. It was explicitly made clear to them that they would
be randomly assigned to a new partner after the first round and they were reminded
whether this player was inside or outside the market and if they (or the opposing player)
could complain to the chief or SCC or neither.
    As some of the markets were quite small, and six surveyors, two recruiters and one
research assistant naturally stuck out, it is possible that participants had heard of the
games we were conducting before we reached them. Thus, we cannot fully exclude the
possibility that some players may have played with more information to begin with i.e.
on how the SCC or chief had decided in other cases in the market, though, this is more
likely to be true for the second day in a specific market as the games conducted in a


                                           58
specific day followed back-to-back, thus there was not much time for entrepreneurs to
gossip in-between. Furthermore, the field team sought to minimize the attention drawn
to themselves by merely sending the two recruiters into the depths of the markets to
find participants, whilst the surveyors would generally just directly be taken from one
entrepreneur to the other.
    Data consistency checks were conducted at the end of each field day.




                                          59
Appendix C - Additional Tables and Robustness Checks

                Table C.1: Cross-country Correlations with Female Ownership

                                                                  Correlation T-stat      T-stat N
Variables
                                                                  coefficient univar reg bivar reg
Panel A - discrimination, norms and rule of law
Discrimination in the family (SIGI-19)                                -0.62            -7.7         -8.01      75
Restricted physical integrity (SIGI-19)                                -0.5           -4.41         -3.87      64
Men better in business than women (WVS04-14)                          -0.64           -5.16         -3.98      36
Justifiable for men to beat wives (WVS04-14)                          -0.29           -1.69         -1.22      36
Health and safety rank (GGG-16)                                       -0.48           -4.74         -4.37      69
Rule of law percentile rank (WB WGI-17)                                0.32           3.28          1.94       82
Rule of Law Score (WJP-17)                                             0.27           2.21          0.67       50
Female disadvantage with police (GPP-17)                              -0.31           -2.05         -1.26      53
Gender equality in courts (WJP experts)                                0.35           2.93           1.9       52
Gender equality score (WJP experts)                                     0.3           2.29          1.19       52

Panel B - democracy, religion and education
Average Polity and Democracy Index (1960-2000)                         0.26           2.59          0.86       83
Democracy Index (EIU-18)                                               0.35           3.67          2.31       76
Female school enrollment, tertiary (UN-15)                             0.25           2.16          0.79       56
Female school enrollment, secondary (UN-15)                            0.52           5.94          4.02       56
Educational Attainment rank (GGG16)                                    -0.5           -5.86         -5.09      69
Percentage of muslim citizens (UN-00)                                 -0.69          -10.68        -10.39      84

Panel C - ease of doing business
Ease of doing business score global (DB10-14)                          0.29            2.96           1.2      56
Score-Enforcing contracts (DB04-15)                                    0.38            3.44          2.74      61
Score-Registering property (DB05-15)                                   0.33            2.89          2.18      61

This Table shows the correlation between empirical measures of the model parameters and female ownership across
countries. Column 1 reports the raw correlation coefficient. Column 2 reports the t-stat of a univariate regression
of female entrepreneurship on the given row variable. Column 3 reports the t-stat of a bivariate regression of
female entrepreneurship on the given row variable and log gdp per capita in 2011. The last column reports the
number of observations, which may vary depending on the surveys' coverage and years. Acronym in brackets
show the source of the variable and the years of collection used.




                                                       60
                                               Table C.2: Correlations between Trust and Cooperation

                              Trust ST        Trust NB       Trust GSS       Joint Buy          Lent        Advice       Share Order        Coop Average
       Trust Stranger              1
       Trust Neighbor         0.313***            1
       Trust GSS              0.129***        0.119***             1
       Joint Buy               0.0516*        0.0577**         0.00748            1
       Lent                   0.0773***       0.123***          0.0151        0.259***           1
       Advice                  0.0596**      0.0978***         -0.0123        0.258***       0.356***          1
       Share Order            0.0618**       0.0819***         -0.0394        0.349***       0.328***      0.347***            1
       Coop Average           0.0901***      0.129***          -0.0104        0.665***       0.708***      0.683***        0.734***                1
       Complexity               0.0214        -0.00476         0.0435*        0.103***       0.0685**       0.0209          -0.0330            0.0569**
       N                         2216
                                                              * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001
     This table shows correlations between the trust variables and cooperation variables. The variables "Trust Strangers" and "Trust Neighbors" are measured on a




61
     scale from 1-4, and have been converted into dummy variables by combining low scores (1 and 2) and high scores (3 and 4). Low scores were given a value of
     0, and high scores a value of 1. The variable "Trust GSS" is a dummy measuring whether most people can be trusted or not: a value of 1 indicates that "most
     people can be trusted", and a value of 0 indicates that "you cannot be too careful in dealing with people". The variables "Joint Buy", "Lent", "Advice" and
     "Share" are dummies that indicate whether a person ever engaged in the relevant activity. The variable "Coop Average" is an index of cooperative behavior,
     calculated as a simple average of the four dummies "Joint Buy", "Lent", "Advice" and "Share". The sample comes from our Manufacturers Survey in Lusaka
     (N=2,216).
Table C.3: Correlations between Sales and Trust or Cooperative behavior

                                       Logged sales
                                   Good Week Bad Week                 Yesterday
              Complexity           .3927***      .3806***             .4030***
              Trust NB             .0128         -.0027               -.0201
              Trust ST             .0415*        .0376                .0459*
              Trust GSS            .0405         .0439*               .0140
              Coop Average         .0840***      .0189                .0755***
              Lent                 .0286         -.0275               .0224
              Advice               .0508**       .0110                .0441*
              Share Order          .0587***      -.0007               .0315
              Joint Buy            .0973***      .0734***             .1178***
                            * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001
This table shows correlations between sales and trust or cooperative behavior. The dependent
variables are the log of the answers given when asked the sales in the previous working day, the
sales in a good week and the sales in a bad week. If the person could not provide an exact number,
we also asked for an upper and lower bound. We then imputed the average of the bounds to the
sales variables. The variables "Trust Strangers" and "Trust Neighbors" are measured on a scale
from 1-4, and have been converted into dummy variables by combining low scores (1 and 2) and
high scores (3 and 4). Low scores were given a value of 0, and high scores a value of 1. The
variable "Trust GSS" is a dummy measuring whether most people can be trusted or not: a value
of 1 indicates that "most people can be trusted", and a value of 0 indicates that "you cannot be
too careful in dealing with people". The variables "Joint Buy", "Lent", "Advice" and "Share"
are dummies that indicate whether a person ever engaged in the relevant activity. The variable
"Coop Average" is an index of cooperative behavior, calculated as a simple average of the four
dummies "Joint Buy", "Lent", "Advice" and "Share". The sample comes from our Manufacturers
Survey in Lusaka (N=2,216).




                                               62
               Table C.4: The Market Effect on Cooperation with Industry Fixed-Effects and Owner Controls

                                                                      (1)              (2)           (3)             (4)              (5)
                                                                Share Order          Lent         Advice        Joint Buy       Coop Average
       Female                                                      -0.0453          -0.0314       -0.0488         -0.0367          -0.0406
                                                                  (0.0494)         (0.0426)      (0.0481)        (0.0463)         (0.0369)
       In market                                                  0.0569*          0.104***        0.0351        0.0820**        0.0694***
                                                                  (0.0311)         (0.0363)      (0.0281)        (0.0311)         (0.0250)
       Female×In market                                             0.0877         0.0905*       0.0895**         0.0538          0.0804*
                                                                  (0.0569)         (0.0456)      (0.0401)        (0.0659)         (0.0421)
       Observations                                                  2077            2077           2077           2077             2077
       Adjusted R2                                                  0.059            0.090         0.028           0.037            0.088
       Business Density Controls                                       Y                Y             Y               Y                Y
       Business Owner Controls                                         Y                Y             Y               Y                Y
       Industry FE                                                     Y                Y             Y               Y                Y




63
       P-value(In+Fem.× In=0)                                        .007               0           .001            .034               0
       P-value (Fem. + Fem. × In market = 0)                         .232             .055          .122            .612             .082
                                    Clustered standard errors in parentheses. p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
     The dependent variables are our measures of cooperation. The variables "Joint Buy", "Lent", "Advice" and "Share" are dummies that indicate
     whether a person in our Manufacturers Survey sample ever engaged in the relevant activity. The variable "Coop Average" is an index of
     cooperative behavior, calculated as a simple average of the four dummies "Joint Buy", "Lent", "Advice" and "Share". Business Density
     Controls include a dummy variable for whether the business is located within 100 meters of a market, the total number of businesses within
     100 meters, and the number of business from the same sector within 100 meters. Business Owner Controls includes whether the business owner
     keeps written business records of every purchase and sale made, whether her/his business is registered individually, whether the business owners
     trust their neighbors, how old the business is, how many days the business owner spends working in the business, age of business owner and
     whether business owner is married or not. The regressions also include industry fixed-effects, a dummy on the owner's gender, a dummy on
     whether the business is located inside a market, and the interaction between the two of them. Standard errors are clustered at the 1 squared-km
     area level. The sample comes from our Manufacturers Survey in Lusaka (N=2,216).
           Table C.5: Effect of Distance to SCC on Cooperation with Industry Fixed-Effects and Owner Controls

                                                                    (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)               (5)
                                                              Share Order          Lent        Joint Buy         Advice        Coop Average
          Female                                               0.188***           0.0218        0.120***        0.186***          0.129***
                                                                (0.0485)         (0.0471)       (0.0433)        (0.0258)          (0.0287)
          2-4 miles from SCC                                      0.0298          0.0172         0.0136          -0.0311          0.00739
                                                                (0.0396)         (0.0383)       (0.0510)        (0.0399)          (0.0351)
          Female × 2-4 miles from SCC                           -0.144**         0.000277       -0.0938*       -0.146***         -0.0960**
                                                                (0.0583)         (0.0621)       (0.0512)        (0.0419)          (0.0381)
          >4 miles from SCC                                      0.00991          0.0515         -0.0372          0.0333           0.0144
                                                                (0.0335)         (0.0343)       (0.0423)        (0.0363)          (0.0292)
          Female × >4 miles from SCC                           -0.230***         -0.00737      -0.165***       -0.233***         -0.159***
                                                                (0.0521)         (0.0644)       (0.0546)        (0.0338)          (0.0356)
          Observations                                             2077            2077           2077             2077             2077




64
          Adjusted R2                                             0.057            0.076          0.035           0.028             0.074
          Business Density Controls                                  Y                Y              Y               Y                 Y
          Business Owner Controls                                    Y                Y              Y               Y                 Y
          Industry FE                                                Y                Y              Y               Y                 Y
          P-value (2-4mi + Fem. × 2-4mi = 0)                       .014            .642            .031              0               .001
          P-value (>4mi + Fem. × >4mi = 0)                           0             .355              0               0                 0
          P-value (Fem. + Fem. × 2-4mi = 0)                        .345             .585           .231            .337              .253
          P-value (Fem. + Fem. × >4mi = 0)                         .148            .763            .196            .186              .269
                                    Clustered standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
     The dependent variables are our measures of cooperation. The variables "Joint Buy", "Lent", "Advice" and "Share" are dummies that indicate
     whether a person in our Manufacturers Survey sample ever engaged in the relevant activity. The variable "Coop Average" is an index of cooperative
     behavior, calculated as a simple average of the four dummies "Joint Buy", "Lent", "Advice" and "Share". Business Density Controls include a
     dummy variable for whether the business is located within 100 meters of a market, the total number of businesses within 100 meters, and the
     number of business from the same sector within 100 meters. Business Owner Controls includes whether the business owner keeps written business
     records of every purchase and sale made, whether her/his business is registered individually, whether the business owners trust their neighbors,
     how old the business is, how many days the business owner spends working in the business, age of business owner and whether business owner is
     married or not. The regressions also include industry fixed-effects, a dummy on the owner's gender, dummies on the business' distance to the Small
     Claims Court, and their interaction. Standard errors are clustered at the 1 squared-km area level. The sample comes from our Manufacturers
     Survey in Lusaka (N=2,216).
                     Table C.6: Women and Help from Institutions

                     Male Mean Fem Mean          Diff                         Male N       Fem N
 Panel A: Knowledges and Opinions
 Heard of SCC             0.22        0.20      -0.02                            347         128
                         (0.41)      (0.40)    (0.04)
 Would Leave Shop         0.44        0.32    -0.12**                            347         127
                         (0.50)      (0.47)    (0.05)
 Opposition Abused        0.37        0.41       0.04                            339         125
                         (0.48)      (0.49)    (0.05)
 Panel B: Work Disputes
 Any Dispute              0.67        0.60      -0.07                            348         129
                         (0.47)      (0.49)    (0.05)
 Disp. Workplace          0.19        0.12     -0.08*                            348         129
                         (0.39)      (0.32)    (0.04)
 Disp. Bus. Agree         0.32        0.26      -0.06                            348         128
                         (0.47)      (0.44)    (0.05)
 Disp. Over Debt          0.52        0.40    -0.12**                            347         129
                         (0.50)      (0.49)    (0.05)
 Disp. Over Goods         0.34        0.25     -0.09*                            347         129
                         (0.47)      (0.43)    (0.05)
 Panel C: Theft, Assault, Harassment
 Victim of Theft          0.40        0.37      -0.03                            348         129
                         (0.49)      (0.49)    (0.05)
 Thief Caught             0.22        0.06    -0.16**                            140          48
                         (0.42)      (0.24)    (0.06)
 Victim of Assault        0.05        0.03      -0.02                            348         129
                         (0.22)      (0.17)    (0.02)
 Assailant Caught         0.22        0.00      -0.22                            18            3
                         (0.43)      (0.00)    (0.25)
 Police Harass            0.05        0.00    -0.05**                            348         129
                         (0.22)      (0.00)    (0.02)
                    * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
This table shows mean differences in the access and use of institutions between women and men. All
the variables are dummy variables. The variable "Heard of SCC" is 1 if the person has heard of the
SCC, and 0 otherwise. The variable "Would Leave Shop" is 1 if the person would feel comfortable
leaving the shop unattended for 30 minutes, and 0 otherwise. The variable "Opposition Abused" is 1 if
the person feels that members of the (political) opposition frequently receive verbal or physical abuse,
and 0 otherwise. The work dispute variables are equal to 1 if the person has experienced the mentioned
type of work-disputed, and 0 otherwise. The variables "Victim of theft" and "Victim of assault" equal
1 if the person has been a victim of these crimes, and 0 otherwise. The variables "Thief caught"
and "Perpetrator caught" equal 1 if the crime perpetrator has been captured, and 0 otherwise. The
variable "Police Harass" is 1 if the person has suffered from police harassment in the last 12 months,
and 0 otherwise. The sample stems from the survey we conducted with business owners before the
lab-in-the-field games.




                                                  65
  Table C.7: Tokens Investor Sends by Institutional Treatment

                                         Tokens Investor sent
                               (1)            (2)             (3)
  Female                   -1.243***      -1.030***       -1.236***
                            (0.430)        (0.331)         (0.433)
  Chief                     -0.0851
                            (0.382)
  SCC                                         0.252
                                             (0.281)
  In/out                                                         -0.0527
                                                                 (0.416)
  Chief × Female            1.610**
                            (0.682)
  SCC × Female                                0.281
                                             (0.452)
  In/out × Female                                                 0.462
                                                                 (0.662)
  Constant                 4.198***       4.101***              4.267***
                            (0.361)        (0.238)               (0.364)
  Observations                189            379                   187
  Adjusted R2                0.020          0.030                 0.031
  Mean                       4.087          4.076                 4.087
  SD                         2.412          2.346                 2.412
  Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
The dependent variable is the number of tokens sent by the Investor. All regressions
include a dummy on the Investor's gender, and each column includes a dummy for
the different treatment arm (in/out, SCC, and Chief), together with the interaction
of that treatment arm and the Investor's gender. The sample comes from our lab-in-
the-field games conducted in Lusaka in 2017.




                                        66
  Table C.8: Average Return Ratio by Institutional Treatment

                                        Average Return Ratio
                              (1)            (2)           (3)
  Female                   0.000115      -0.0427**      0.00144
                           (0.0263)       (0.0200)      (0.0265)
  Chief                     0.0247
                           (0.0200)
  SCC                                     0.0340**
                                          (0.0163)
  In/out                                                         0.0218
                                                                (0.0222)
  Chief × Female            -0.0524
                           (0.0417)
  SCC × Female                             0.0284
                                          (0.0260)
  In/out × Female                                              -0.0787**
                                                                (0.0376)
  Constant                 0.416***       0.418***             0.403***
                           (0.0208)       (0.0143)              (0.0209)
  Observations                190            380                   188
  Adjusted R2                0.000          0.046                 0.053
  Mean                       .423           .435                  .423
  SD                         .135           .131                   .135
  Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
The dependent variable is the Trustee's average return ratio. All regressions include
a dummy on the Trustee's gender, and each column includes a dummy for the dif-
ferent treatment arm (in/out, SCC, and Chief), together with the interaction of that
treatment arm and the Trustee's gender. The sample comes from our lab-in-the-field
games conducted in Lusaka in 2017.




                                         67
                           Table C.9: Investor's Earnings

                                                   Investor's    Earnings
                                         (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)
   Constant                          10.67***      10.67***      10.73***      10.74***
                                      (0.253)       (0.254)       (0.214)       (0.243)
   Female                             -0.0680        -0.152
                                      (0.355)       (0.381)
   Chief                               0.566*       0.566*       0.620**       0.607**
                                      (0.292)       (0.292)       (0.251)       (0.271)
   SCC                               1.107***      1.108***      0.914***      0.888***
                                      (0.282)       (0.282)       (0.221)       (0.292)
   In/out                              0.208          0.208       0.0577        0.0317
                                      (0.284)       (0.284)       (0.221)       (0.301)
   Female × Chief                      0.550          0.634
                                      (0.657)       (0.668)
   Female × SCC                        -0.588        -0.412
                                      (0.429)       (0.478)
   Female × In/out                     -0.256        -0.105
                                      (0.418)       (0.578)
   Female × SCC × In/out                             -0.306
                                                    (0.612)
   SCC × In/out                                                                 0.0516
                                                                                (0.442)
   Observations                         475           475            477          477
   Adjusted R2                         0.043         0.041          0.034        0.032
   Mean                                10.855        10.855        10.863       10.863
   SD                                  2.244         2.244          2.097        2.097
       Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
The dependent variable is the Investor's final earnings. Regressors include the treatment arms
(in/out, SCC, and Chief). Columns 1 and 2 additionally include a dummy variable indicating
the Investor's gender, and the interaction terms of this variable with the treatment arms. The
sample comes from our lab-in-the-field games conducted in Lusaka in 2017.




                                             68
                           Table C.10: Trustee's Earnings

                                                    Trustee's Earnings
                                         (1)           (2)        (3)              (4)
  Constant                           6.892***      6.903*** 6.805***            7.066***
                                      (0.538)       (0.538)    (0.488)           (0.562)
  Female                               -0.119         0.517
                                      (0.976)       (1.176)
  Chief                                -0.202        -0.204     0.114             -0.147
                                      (0.596)       (0.596)    (0.536)           (0.598)
  SCC                                  -0.393        -0.394     -0.305            -0.824
                                      (0.512)       (0.512)    (0.432)           (0.582)
  In/out                               0.389          0.390     0.360             -0.164
                                      (0.512)       (0.512)    (0.432)           (0.677)
  Female × Chief                        1.400         0.771
                                      (1.390)       (1.537)
  Female × SCC                         0.239         -1.093
                                      (0.971)       (1.338)
  Female × In/out                      -0.143        -1.262
                                      (0.987)       (1.464)
  Female × SCC × In/out                               2.292
                                                    (1.657)
  SCC × In/out                                                                    1.039
                                                                                 (0.864)
  Observations                           476          476            477           477
  Adjusted R2                          -0.007        -0.005        -0.002         -0.001
  Mean                                  6.757        6.757         6.821          6.821
  SD                                    4.519        4.519          4.736         4.736
       Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
The dependent variable is the Trustee's final earnings. Regressors include the treatment arms
(in/out, SCC, and Chief). Columns 1 and 2 additionally include a dummy variable indicating
the Investor's gender, and the interaction terms of this variable with the treatment arms. The
sample comes from our lab-in-the-field games conducted in Lusaka in 2017.




                                             69
Online Appendix - Survey Measures and Games Behavior
In this appendix we show that our survey measures of trust are correlated with trust-
worthiness, as shown in previous research (Glaeser et al., 2000). Moreover, the survey
cooperation measures are correlated with the number of tokens sent by the investors.


              Table D.1: Trust Survey Measures and Behavior as Investor

                                                           Tokens Sent
                                             (1)           (2)       (3)             (4)
            Lent                            0.256        0.545**
                                           (0.232)       (0.240)

            Gave Advice                   1.124***      0.942***
                                           (0.346)       (0.356)

            Joint buys                     -0.0555       -0.0329
                                           (0.214)       (0.230)

            Shared Order                   -0.420*       -0.421*
                                           (0.241)       (0.253)

            Average Cooperation                                         0.278      0.497
                                                                      (0.339)     (0.377)
            Observations                     474           474           474        474
            Adjusted R2                     0.017         0.041        -0.001      0.023
            Mean Dep Var                    3.97          3.97          3.97       3.97
            Industry FE                       N             Y             N          Y
            Market FE                         N             Y             N          Y
             Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
        This table shows correlations between survey measures of cooperation between businesses
        and the number of tokens that investors send to their partners. The dependent variable
        is the number of tokens sent by the Investor to the Trustee. The mean of the dependent
        variable is 3.97 and its standard deviation is 2.21. The variables "Joint Buys", "Lent",
        "Gave advice" and "Shared Order" are indicator variables that indicate whether a person
        ever engaged in the relevant activity. The variable "Average Cooperation" is an index of
        cooperative behavior, calculated as a simple average of the four dummies "Joint Buy",
        "Lent", "Advice" and "Shared Order". Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                  70
      Table D.2: Trust Survey Measures and Behavior as Trustee

                                           Average Return Ratio
                                   (1)                   (2)
     Trust in stranger        0.0341**                0.0300*
                              (0.0173)                (0.0180)

     Trust in neighbor         0.0182                       0.0104
                              (0.0119)                     (0.0125)

     Trust GSS                 0.0207                       0.0248
                              (0.0142)                     (0.0171)
     Observations                476                         476
     Adjusted R2                0.014                       0.006
     Mean Dep Var                .44                          .44
     Industry FE                  N                            Y
     Market FE                    N                            Y
     Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
This table shows correlations between survey measures of trust and the ratio of tokens
sent by the Trustee to the number of tokens that the Trustee could have sent (average
return ratio). The dependent variable is the number of tokens sent by the Investor to the
Trustee. The mean of the dependent variable is 0.44 and its standard deviation is 0.14.
The variables "Trust Strangers" and "Trust Neighbors" are measured on a scale from 1-4,
and have been converted into dummy variables by combining low scores (1 and 2) and high
scores (3 and 4). Low scores were given a value of 0, and high scores a value of 1. The
variable "Trust GSS" is a dummy measuring whether most people can be trusted or not:
a value of 1 indicates that "most people can be trusted", and a value of 0 indicates that
"you cannot be too careful in dealing with people".




                                           71
