                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE BANKING VIEW OF BOND RISK PREMIA

                                        Valentin Haddad
                                         David A. Sraer

                                      Working Paper 26369
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26369


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




We gratefully acknowledge the useful comments and suggestions of Stefan Nagel, an Associate
Editor, two anonymous referees, Tobias Adrian, Mikhail Chernov, Anna Cieslak, John Cochrane,
Arvind Krishnamurthy, Augustin Landier, Giorgia Piacentino, Monika Piazzesi, David Thesmar,
Dimitri Vayanos as well as seminar participants at Kellogg, Princeton, the University of
Michigan, Stanford, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the UNC Junior Faculty
Roundtable, the NBER Summer Institute, CITE, the MFS meeting, the Adam Smith Conference,
and the SED Annual Meeting. We have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to
the research described in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Valentin Haddad and David A. Sraer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Banking View of Bond Risk Premia
Valentin Haddad and David A. Sraer
NBER Working Paper No. 26369
October 2019
JEL No. G0,G12,G21

                                            ABSTRACT

Banks' balance-sheet exposure to fluctuations in interest rates strongly forecasts excess Treasury
bond returns. This result is consistent with optimal risk management, a banking counterpart to the
household Euler equation. In equilibrium, the bond risk premium compensates banks for bearing
fluctuations in interest rates. When banks' exposure to interest rate risk increases, the price of this
risk simultaneously rises. We present a collection of empirical observations supporting this view,
but also discuss several challenges to this interpretation.


Valentin Haddad
University of California, Los Angeles
Anderson School of Management
Office C4.19
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90024
and NBER
vhaddad@ad.ucla.edu

David A. Sraer
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Building
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
sraer@berkeley.edu
   Banks are large sophisticated intermediaries in the market for interest rate risk,
but are absent from standard studies of the yield curve.1 This paper shows that
banks' balance-sheet exposure to fluctuations in interest rates strongly forecasts ex-
cess Treasury bond returns. We interpret this result through the lens of banks' risk
management decisions, which tightly connect their exposure to interest rate risk with
the price of this risk. This connection represents a banking counterpart to the clas-
sic household Euler equation. In equilibrium, an increase in future bond returns
compensates any increase in banks' exposure to interest rate risk.2 This paper estab-
lishes this relationship empirically, presents a collection of facts further supporting
this view and highlights challenges to this interpretation.
   We start by constructing a measure of the average bank exposure to interest rate
risk. At the bank-level, we follow Gomez, Landier, Sraer, and Thesmar (2017) and
use the income gap as our measure of interest rate risk exposure. The income gap of
a financial institution corresponds to the difference between the book value of all as-
sets that either reprice or mature within one year and the book value of all liabilities
that mature or reprice within a year, normalized by total assets. This measure, com-
monly used by both banks and bank regulators, is readily available at the quarterly
frequency for the 1986-2014 period through FR Y-9C filings of Bank Holding Corpo-
rations (BHC) to the Federal Reserve. The income gap provides a relevant quantifi-
cation of the net exposure of banks' income to interest rate risk. Gomez et al. (2017)
    1
      In 2014, private depository institutions (U.S.-chartered depository institutions, foreign banking
offices, banks in U.S.-affiliated areas and credit unions) held 3.2% of all outstanding Treasuries, 25%
of agency and GSE backed securities, 12.3% of municipal securities, 33.6% of mortgages and 49.5% of
all consumer credit.
    2
      Importantly, this statement describes an equilibrium relation rather than a causal relationship.
The price and quantity of interest rate risk are jointly determined in equilibrium. However, we some-
times follow the tradition of the literature on the household Euler equation, which tends to describe
equilibrium relations using a more causal language.


                                                  1
show that the sensitivity of banks' profits to interest rates increases significantly with
their income gap.3 We use the average income gap across banks with more than $1bn
of total assets as our measure of interest rate risk exposure of financial intermedi-
aries.
   We run regressions of one-year excess returns on Treasuries -- borrow at the short
rate, buy a long-term bond -- on the average income gap available at the beginning
of the period. The estimated coefficient is significant for all bond maturities. With
this single predictor, we find R2 values of 20% on average across maturities. Through
a battery of robustness checks, we show that this result does not spuriously derive
from the persistence of our forecasting variable in a small sample. Additionally, the
forecasting power of the average income gap for Treasuries' excess returns is not
affected by the inclusion of macroeconomic factors known to predict bond returns
(Ludvigson and Ng, 2009). Represented in Figure 1, the robust correlation between
bonds' excess returns and the average income gap is the main contribution of the
paper. It offers prima facie evidence of the role of financial intermediaries in asset
pricing (e.g., Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), He and Krishnamurthy (2013)).
   We interpret this finding through the lens of a simple equilibrium restriction on
the yield curve following Greenwood and Vayanos (2014). This equilibrium restriction
must hold in a large family of economies. In the model, banks trade assets of different
maturities to maximize their expected profits while managing their risk. When banks
hold more long-term assets, they must absorb additional interest rate risk. They
do so only if the market compensation for this risk increases. This compensation
   3
     Purnanandam (2007), Begenau, Piazzesi, and Schneider (2015) and English, den Heuvel, and Za-
krajsek (2012) also document that financial intermediaries do not fully hedge out their exposure to
interest rate risk. Di Tella and Kurlat (2017) build a model to explain why bank optimally expose their
balance sheets to movements in interest rates.


                                                  2
materializes itself for instance in Treasury bond returns.4 In equilibrium, banks'
income gap, i.e., the sensitivity of banks' profits to variations in the short-rate, is
negatively correlated with bond risk premia. Since long-term Treasuries are more
sensitive to the interest rate than short-term Treasuries, this correlation between
banks' income gap and risk premia is larger, in absolute value, for bonds of longer
maturities. These qualitative predictions echo our main findings. We confirm they
hold quantitatively as well. Fitting the model to the data also allows us to estimate
banks' willingness to take risk, a key input for our theory and more generally for
macroeconomic models with financial intermediation.
   Our analysis departs from the classic, frictionless view of the market for interest
rate risk. This view has received mitigated empirical success so far.5 In contrast,
several recent papers provide convincing evidence that not all investors are marginal
in Treasury markets.6 In such a setting, understanding the investment decisions of
marginal investors is key to the determination of asset prices. Banks are natural
candidates for this role. They hold a sizable share of assets exposed to interest rates.
Their modest holdings of Treasuries understates their prominence in the broader
fixed income markets (mortgages, consumer credit, agency-backed securities). Banks
are also likely sophisticated in managing their interest rate risk exposure (e.g., Drech-
sler, Savov, and Schnabl (2018)). The tight empirical relationship between banks' bal-
   4
     While a large share of the exposure of banks to interest rate risk comes from non-Treasury as-
sets, Treasuries constitute a simple and stable way to measure this price of risk. Hanson (2014) and
Malkhozov, Mueller, Vedolin, and Venter (2016) follow a similar measurement approach in the context
of MBS supply.
   5
                           ¨
      See Duffee (2018), Gurkaynak   and Wright (2012), Beeler and Campbell (2012), and Schneider
(2017) for discussions on these issues.
   6
     For example, Greenwood and Vayanos (2014) provides such evidence at low frequency, while
Gagnon, Raskin, Remache, Sack, et al. (2011) Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011), Swan-
son (2011), Hamilton and Wu (2012), and D'Amico and King (2013) document such effects around
quantitative easing interventions.


                                                 3
ance sheet exposure and bond excess returns provides supports the view that banks
are marginal investors in Treasury markets. The remainder of the paper brings ad-
ditional evidence to test this hypothesis further.
   We present a collection of evidence consistent with this "banking view" of bond risk
premia. First, we show that by itself, the average exposure of banks' assets to interest
rate risk does not forecast bond risk premia in a significant way. The same result
holds for the average exposure of banks' liabilities to interest rate risk. Only the
overall holding of interest rate risk by financial institutions, i.e., the average income
gap, significantly predicts future bond excess returns. This finding is consistent with
our interpretation, whereby bond risk premia only appear in banks' overall portfolio
holdings. Second, we document that, over our sample period, standard measures of
liquidity risk do not forecast bond risk premia, in contrast to our measure of interest
rate risk exposure. Third, we show that the average income gap responds, in the time-
series, to several measured changes in the supply and demand for interest rate risk
in the economy, such as the total amount of fixed-rate mortgages net of adjustable-
rate mortgages, the total supply of Treasuries or the amount of non-interest bearing
deposits. However, these shocks to the demand and supply of interest rate risk add no
forecasting power for bond risk premia above and beyond the income gap. This result
is again consistent with our interpretation since bond risk premia should be entirely
captured by the net position of banks, measured in our analysis by the average in-
come gap, and not by any particular components. Finally, we exploit our bank-level
data to provide evidence consistent with interest-rate risk-sharing among heteroge-
neous banks. We split our sample of banks into ten size-sorted groups and compute
the time-series of the average income gap for these ten groups. Despite their hetero-


                                           4
geneity, we show that these ten groups share a very similar evolution of their average
income gap over time. We find similar evidence of risk-sharing among banks with
different leverage or among banks located in different geographic areas. All these
results support our simple theory.
   However, we also highlight challenges to our preferred interpretation. In our
theory, banks suffer when they hold significant balance sheet exposures and inter-
est rates increase. This assumption underlies banks' risk management motive and
drives the relation between banks' average income gap and excess returns on Trea-
sury bonds. Using banks' equity returns, we fail to find empirical support for this
assumption. In the data, periods of low-income gaps are not positively related to the
correlation of banks' equity returns with bond returns. Relatedly, our mean-variance
framework implies that bond risk premia should be proportional to the expected co-
variance of banks' equity returns with bond returns. Yet, in the data, there is no
significant relationship between bond excess returns and the predicted covariance of
daily excess returns on long-term bonds and banks' stock returns. Finally, our model
predicts that banks' balance sheet exposure should command a higher risk premium
in periods of high interest-rate risk. Using the realized variance of bond returns as a
source of variation in interest-rate risk beyond changes in balance sheet composition,
we do not find support for this prediction. All these results challenge an interpre-
tation where potential valuation losses drive the reluctance of financial institutions
to bear risk, a standard feature of intermediary asset pricing models (e.g., He and
Krishnamurthy (2014a), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014)).




                                          5
Related Literature. Our paper relates to the literature trying to understand the
pricing of interest rate risk. One strand of the literature investigates how the price
of interest rate risk relates to the information contained in the yield curve7 . Another
strand of this literature has explored the role of macroeconomic variables in explain-
ing excess returns on Treasuries8 . Finally, a third strand of this literature emphasizes
the role of segmentation in Treasury markets and show that supply factors forecast
bond risk premia9 . Relative to this literature, our contribution is to shift the focus
on financial institutions, which are major participants in the market for interest rate
risk, and to use information on financial institutions' exposure to interest rate risk to
forecast future bond returns.
   In doing so, our paper also relates to the recent literature that emphasizes the cru-
cial role of intermediaries for asset prices. Several theoretical contributions empha-
size the role of intermediaries' balance sheets for equilibrium risk premia10 . Empiri-
cally, the importance of financial intermediaries on the determination of asset prices
has been mostly investigated in the context of equity markets (e.g., Adrian, Etula, and
Muir (2014), Adrian, Moench, and Shin (2013b) and He, Kelly, and Manela (2017)).
Relative to this literature, our contribution shifts the focus away from equity markets
to the market for Treasuries. Furthermore, our approach uses the actual underly-
ing risk-exposure of intermediaries as a forecasting variable, instead of the standard
   7
     See, e.g., Fama and Bliss (1987), Campbell and Shiller (1991), Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005), Duffee
(2011), Adrian, Crump, and Moench (2013a), and Cieslak and Povala (2015).
   8
     See, e.g., Piazzesi (2005), Ang and Piazzesi (2003), Ludvigson and Ng (2009), and Cooper and
Priestley (2009)
   9
     See, e.g., Greenwood and Vayanos (2014),Gagnon et al. (2011), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-
Jorgensen (2011), Swanson (2011), Hamilton and Wu (2012), D'Amico and King (2013), Baker, Green-
wood, and Wurgler (2003), Hanson (2014) and Malkhozov et al. (2016).
  10
     Prominent papers include, among others, Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), He and Krishna-
murthy (2013) or Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014)



                                                   6
focus on leverage as a proxy for this exposure. Finally, while our paper highlights
several empirical facts consistent with an intermediary asset-pricing interpretation,
we also present several challenges to this interpretation.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 describes the data we use
for our empirical study and discusses our main empirical results. Section 2 presents
the model underlying our interpretation of this evidence. Section 3 offers a structural
estimation of our model to quantify the risk management motive of banks. Section 4
provides further tests consistent with this banking view of bond risk premia. Section
5 concludes.



1     Banks' Income Gap and Bond Returns

1.1     Data

1.1.1     Income Gap

Income gap definition. The central object of our analysis is the net exposure of
banks to interest rate risk. Our main empirical counterpart to this quantity is the
income gap, a standard measure of interest rate sensitivity used by banks and regu-
lators. Our definition of the income gap follows the definition in Mishkin and Eakins
(2009):
                       Income Gap = (RSA - RSL) / Total Assets,                     (1)

where RSA is a measure of the dollar amount of assets that either reprice or ma-
ture within one year and RSL is a measure of the dollar amount of liabilities that
mature or reprice within a year. A high income gap, therefore, corresponds to a low


                                          7
exposure to long-term fixed-rate assets. Concretely, we construct the income gap us-
ing variables from schedule HC-H of form FR Y-9C, which specifically focuses on the
interest sensitivity of the balance sheet. RSA is directly provided (item bhck3197).
RSL consists of four elements: long-term debt that reprices within one year (item
bhck3298); long-term debt that matures within one year (bhck3409); variable-rate
preferred stock (bhck3408); interest-bearing deposit liabilities that reprice or mature
within one year (bhck3296), such as certificates of deposits. Empirically, the latter
is by far the most important determinant of the liability-side sensitivity to interest
rates. All these items are available quarterly from 1986 to 2014. We scale these
variables by total assets and report summary statistics in Appendix Table IA.1. On
average, RSL (interest rate-sensitive liabilities) mostly consists of variable rate de-
posits, that either mature or reprice within a year. Long term debt typically has a
fixed rate. Gomez et al. (2017) validate this measure in the cross-section of banks:
they document that when the Fed Funds rate rises, banks with a larger income gap
generate stronger earnings and contract their lending by less than other banks.
   Our primary forecasting variable for bond risk premia is the average income gap,
which we compute across all banks with more than $1bn in consolidated assets. This
variable is available quarterly from 1986 to 2014. Figure 1 shows the time-series
evolution of the average income gap over this period (thick dark line). The average
income gap exhibits pro-cyclical variations. The income gap peaks during expansions,
and banks accumulate interest rate risk -- lower values of the gap -- ahead of reces-
sions. We favor this simple variable for most of our analysis because a) it captures
the forces of our theory, b) it has a transparent construction, and c) it reflects how
market participants measure interest rate sensitivity in practice. The remainder of


                                          8
this section discusses some benefits and limitations of this measure.
       Measurement issues. A first dimension is the treatment of deposits. In the
BHC data, the item corresponding to short-term deposit liabilities (bck3296) does
not include transaction or savings deposits.11 Interest rates on these "core" deposits,
while having a zero contractual maturity, are known to adjust sluggishly to changes in
short-term market rates (Hannan and Berger (1991), Neumark and Sharpe (1992)).
Therefore, despite their short maturity, it is natural to exclude these deposits from our
measure, as they will not induce direct cash-flow changes when interest rates change.
However, if these "core" deposits adjust slightly to changes in the Fed Funds rate, the
average income gap will over-estimate the real income gap.12 To investigate the role of
deposits, we make the alternative assumption that all non-interest bearing deposits
have short maturity as in English et al. (2012). This change results in a lower mean
for the average income gap: 0% versus 12% in our baseline. However, this modified
income gap exhibits a correlation of 91% with our baseline measure.
       A second dimension is that we do not observe holdings of interest rates derivatives.
If banks hedge their interest rate risk exposure through derivatives, the income gap
may over-estimate banks exposure to interest rate risk. To assess the extent of this
issue, we exploit the fact that, since 1995, banks report on form FR Y-9C the notional
amounts of interest derivatives they contract.13 We compute the average income gap
for banks that never report any notional amounts of interest rates derivatives and
  11
     See http://www.federalreserve.gov/apps/mdrm/data-dictionary.
  12
     More recently, Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl (2016) investigate the price and quantity response of
deposits to changes in the Fed Funds rate and find a somewhat larger elasticity of deposits to interest
rates.
  13
     Banks report five types of derivative contracts: Futures (bhck8693), Forwards (bhck8697), Written
options that are exchange-traded (bhck8701), Purchased options that are exchange-traded (bhck8705),
Written options traded over the counter (bhck8709), Purchased options traded over the counter
(bhck8713), and Swaps (bhck3450).


                                                  9
report its time-series evolution on Appendix Figure IA.1 (dark dashed line). The
time-series correlation of this series with the time-series for the average income gap
computed across all banks is 93%.
   The lack of data on interest rates derivatives also explains why we do not use
the aggregate income gap as our main forecasting variable, i.e., the asset-weighted
average income gap. Indeed, since large banks hold significant positions in interest
rates derivatives, their income gap likely suffers from substantial measurement error.
Given the fat-tailed distribution of banks' assets, this bank-level measurement error
would translate into a significant aggregate measurement error. Figure IA.1 plots the
time-series evolution of the asset-weighted average income gap (orange line), as well
as the average income gap computed across the ten largest banks (blue line). These
two series are almost identical ­ the top ten banks are so large that they account for
most of the variations in the asset-weighted average gap. Any mismeasure in the gap
for some of these ten banks will significantly garble our forecasting variable.
   Despite these limitations, our income gap measure represents a significant con-
tribution to the intermediary asset pricing literature. In this literature, financial
intermediaries' risk exposures are typically summarized by their leverage (Adrian
et al. (2013b), Adrian et al. (2014), He et al. (2017)). This approach fails to account
for the differential exposure of different assets and liabilities to aggregate sources of
risk. In contrast, using banks' average income gap allows for some risk-weighting of
assets and liabilities.
   Income gap and exposure gt . In the model we develop in Section 2, we show
that the relevant measure of banks' exposure, gt , can be constructed from our basic




                                           10
income gap measure as:

                                                               At
                                  gt = 1 - Income Gapt ×          ,                               (2)
                                                               Et

where Et is equity value at date t. There are several reasons to favor the standard
income gap measure over gt in our empirical analysis. First, it lies between -1 and
1, is defined for banks with negative equity, and its distribution has fewer outliers.
Second, this measure corresponds to the one used in Gomez et al. (2017), who shows
that the income gap forecasts banks' net income reaction to changes in interest rates.
Importantly, -gt has a correlation of 94% with the baseline average income gap. Ap-
pendix Figure IA.2 reports the four versions of the income gap (including deposits or
not, scaling by assets or equity). We standardize the measures, so they have mean
zero and unit standard deviation. When considering the quantitative properties of the
model in Section 3, we define gt using equation (2) and include deposits. Thus con-
structed, gt has a mean of 1.00 and a standard deviation of 0.41. Banks typically have
positive exposure to long-term assets, on average equal to their equity and roughly
varying between 0 and twice their equity. This exposure constitutes a sizable amount
of risk, but much less than a naive approach that would assume that all their assets
are long-term, and all their liabilities are short-term.14


1.1.2   Bond Prices and other time-series variables

We are interested in relating banks' exposure to interest rate risk with the price of
this risk. A natural way to measure this price is to consider Treasury bond risk
  14
    Echoing the typical bank leverage, this would give rise to an interest risk exposure of around 10,
an order of magnitude larger than what we observe.



                                                 11
premia. Bond return data are constructed from the Gurkaynak, Sack, and Wright
(2007) dataset of interpolated yield curves. These curves are computed by fitting
Treasury transaction prices daily using the extension by Svensson (1994) of Nelson
                                                                                                                (n)
and Siegel (1987). We compute time series of bond prices of maturity n years, Pt ,
                                         (n)      1              (n)
and the yield of these bonds as: yt            = -n ln(Pt ). The log-forward rate at time t for
                                                           (n)                 (n-1)          (n)
contracts between time t + n - 1 and t + n is ft                 = ln(Pt               ) - ln(Pt ). The log holding
period return from buying an n-year bond at time t and selling it a quarter later as
                             (n)               (n-1/4)                  (n)
an n - 1/4 year bond is rtt+1 = ln(Pt+1                  ) - ln(Pt ). Quarterly bond excess returns
                       (n)         (n)            (1/4)
are then defined as rxtt+1 = rtt+1 - yt                   . Our analysis focuses on a 1-year return
                                                           (n)                 3        (n)
horizon, and maturities from 2 to 5 years, rxtt+4 =                            i=0   rxt+it+i+1 .
   We also use several macroeconomic variables known to forecast bond risk pre-
mia. The output gap consists in the difference between the real seasonally adjusted
GDP (GDPC96 from the FRED database) and the real potential GDP (GDPPOT from
FRED), normalized by the real seasonally adjusted GDP (Cooper and Priestley, 2009).
Industrial production growth is the 1-year growth rate in industrial production (IN-
DPRO in FRED). Inflation is the 1-year growth rate of the CPI, taken from the FRED
database. Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for these variables.


1.2     Income Gap and Excess Bond Returns

1.2.1   Main Results

We estimate the following linear equation using quarterly data:


              (n)                                                      (n)
            rxtt+4 = a(n) + b(n) × Income Gapt +                       t+4 ,    for n=2, 3, 4 and 5.            (3)



                                                    12
  (n)
rxtt+4 is the excess return of a zero-coupon bond of maturity n from quarter t to
quarter t + 4, defined in Section 1.1.2. Income Gapt is the average income gap avail-
able at the beginning of quarter t, which corresponds to the average income gap of
quarter t - 2. To account for the overlapping nature of our return variable, we use
the reverse regression approach of Hodrick (1992) to compute standard errors for our
coefficient estimates. Additionally, we account for potential small sample bias, such
as the Stambaugh (1999) bias, by computing p-values from a parametric bootstrap
procedure. Precisely, we first estimate a restricted VAR for quarterly excess returns
and the income gap under the null of no return predictability by the income gap.15 We
assume the joint distribution of innovations in the VAR corresponds to their empirical
distribution. Then, we draw 5,000 samples from this estimated process to obtain a
distribution of reverse regression t-statistics. We report the p-value of our estimated
t-statistic relative to this bootstrapped distribution. Both the asymptotic standard
error and the p-value are informative: the asymptotic standard error is robust to
the specifics of the data-generating process, while the p-value handles finite-sample
issues conditional on a parameterized data-generating process.16
   The estimation of Equation (3) is presented in Table 2. The average income gap
significantly predicts future bond excess returns. For bonds with a 2-year maturity,
b(2) is equal to -.23 and is statistically significant with a p-value of 2.3%. This effect
is economically significant. A one standard deviation increase in the average income
gap is associated with smaller future excess returns of 2-year maturity zero-coupon
  15
     When we add additional controls to the regression, such as in Tables 3 and 5, we allow these other
variables to predict returns in the VAR estimation.
  16
     We report in Table IA.2 estimates of Equation (3) using Newey-West standard errors allowing for
eight quarter lags. However, this procedure has been found to over-reject the null hypothesis in small
samples (see, e.g., Ang and Bekaert (2006)).



                                                  13
bonds by about 97 basis points, which represents 44% of the volatility of these bond
returns. A one standard deviation increase in the average income gap represents a
4.2 percentage point increase in the fraction of net short-term or variable rate assets,
which, given an average income gap of 12.8% corresponds to a 32% increase in the
average bank's exposure to interest rate risk.
   This correlation increases almost linearly with the maturity of the bond. For bonds
with a 5-year maturity, b(5) is equal to -.55, so that a one standard deviation increase
in the average income gap corresponds to a 231 basis points reduction in 5-year bond
excess returns. This decrease represents about 44% of the volatility of these bonds.
b(3) , b(4) and b(5) are all statistically different from 0 at the 5% confidence level. b(5)
is statistically different from b(2) at the 1% confidence level. The adjusted R2 s we
obtain from these forecasting regressions with a single forecasting variable are high:
they range from 17% using 2-year maturity bonds up to 20% for bonds with a longer
maturity.
   Figure 1 highlights the strong forecasting power of the average income gap for
future bond returns. This figure plots the value of the average income gap available
                                                                                   (n)
in quarter t and the excess bond returns from quarter t to quarter t + 4, rxtt+4 for
zero-coupon bonds of maturity n. Figure 1 displays a striking and robust negative
correlation between the income gap series and the excess return series throughout the
sample period. In summary, we find that: (1) a smaller average income gap predicts
larger bond risk premia (2) this effect is stronger for long-maturity bonds.
   In Table 3, we augment Equation (3) by including macroeconomic variables that
forecast bond risk premia: the inflation rate and growth in industrial production be-
tween t - 4 and t, and the current output gap. Table 3 shows that the effect of the


                                            14
average income gap on future bond excess returns is left unaffected by the inclusion
of these variables. The estimated b(n) and the predictive power of the regressions are
similar to those estimated in Table 2, albeit less strongly statistically significant.


1.2.2   Further Analysis

Longer maturities.          In Figure IA.3, we estimate Equation 3 for bonds of longer
maturities.17 Panel (a) of Figure IA.3 reports the coefficients b(n) , for n = 1 . . . 10, as
well as their 95% confidence intervals. The coefficients b(n ) decrease for maturities
from 2 to 10 years until reaching a level of about -.6. For the longest maturities, the
estimates become more imprecise. Panel (b) of Figure IA.3 reports the corresponding
adjusted R2 for each of these regressions. The forecasting power of the income gap
is the highest for bonds of maturity 3 to 5 years and then decreases with the bonds'
maturity.


Across horizons.         We investigate the predictive power of the income gap at various
horizons. While one year is the standard horizon considered in the literature pre-
dicting bond returns, banks might make risk management decisions at a different
horizon. We confirm that our results are robust across horizons. In Table IA.3, we
replicate our baseline regression at the 1-quarter horizon. Estimated coefficients are
about a quarter of the annual estimates, therefore of similar economic significance.
The p-values range from 2.1% to 7.6%. We also construct 1-month returns using the
Fama constant maturity portfolios obtained from CRSP. These portfolios are formed
every month from bonds of maturity ranging in a one-year interval. Table IA.4 reports
  17
    The original data covers the range of maturities regularly until 10 years, but is more sparse above
that point, making estimates less reliable.


                                                  15
these estimates, with results again consistent with our baseline.


Real-time prediction.      The predictive power found in the full sample may not be
observable to economic agents in real-time. To understand whether this is a concern
for our analysis, we construct a real-time version of our predictor. At each date t, we
estimate a regression of bond excess returns using all data available up to that point.
We use the estimated coefficients of this regression in conjunction with the gap at
date t to construct a real-time predictor of returns between t and t + 1. We start the
estimation after eight years of data are available. Table 4 reports the estimation of
regressions of bond excess returns on this real-time predictor. As the sample period
grows large, the coefficient estimate should become 1. In a finite sample, however,
the limited amount of data generates measurement error, which biases the estimate
toward 0. Despite the short sample period used in our case, we report coefficient esti-
mates that are away from 0, ranging from .69 for 4-year bonds to .81 for 2-year bonds.
The coefficients for maturities two and four years are significant at the 10% level and
for 3-year bonds at the 5% level. The adjusted R2 range from 8.3% to 11.2%. While
more moderate than the full sample estimates, these results indicate a significant
predictive power of the income gap in real-time.


1.2.3   Relation with Yield-Based Predictors

We now turn to an alternative, more indirect, approach to study how much of the vari-
ations in bond risk premia are captured by the income gap. Of course, we can never
fully characterize these expected returns because the set of potential predictors is ar-
bitrarily large. However, in a large family of models -- including the one we present


                                          16
in Section 2 -- spanning holds for most parameter combinations: yields at date t cap-
ture all the information necessary to predict bond excess returns. Predictability by
yields is, therefore, a useful benchmark to consider.
   We first ask whether the income gap captures additional information about bond
risk premia relative to the yield curve. We augment Equation (3) by including 3 and
5 principal components (PC) of yields of maturity 1 to 10 years from the Gurkaynak
et al. (2007) data. Table 5 presents the regression estimates. The average income gap
appears to have significant forecasting power for bond excess returns, even after con-
trolling for yields. However, as crucially emphasized by Bauer and Hamilton (2017),
conventional statistics are misspecified to test the spanning hypothesis. Therefore,
we use Bauer and Hamilton (2017) bootstrap procedure with three and five PCs to
test whether the average income gap is a spanned factor.18 The bottom row of Ta-
ble 5 reports p-values for this test and shows that we strongly reject the spanning
hypothesis.
   Given these results, it is natural to ask how the information captured by banks
income gap relates to the information contained in yields. We compare the predictive
power of the various forecasting variables. In our sample, the first three PC predict
bond returns with an R2 around 5%, whereas five PC achieve an R2 around 20%. This
latter value is of similar magnitude to what we obtain with the income gap. We also
examine the evidence visually to understand better the relationship between various
risk premium forecasts (Appendix Figure IA.4). We report forecasts of 5-year Trea-
sury bond excess returns using four different methods: the income gap (thick line),
Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) (dotted line), and three and five PC of yields (dashed
  18
     This procedure is similar to the bootstrap we described above in Section 1.2.1, except that the
data-generating process for the PC of yields automatically generates return dynamics.


                                                17
and solid line respectively). All four forecasts exhibit broadly similar cyclical vari-
ations. The measure based on three PC are remarkably similar in this sample (a
similarity also present in their predictive R2 ) and seem to depart significantly from
the income gap. However, going up to five PC brings yield forecasts much closer to the
average income gap. The main difference between the two measures is the smoother
pattern of the average income gap, reflecting the sticky nature of balance sheet quan-
tities relative to asset prices. Echoing our regression results, it seems difficult to
argue that one measure is much more informative than the other for forecasting bond
excess returns. These results further support both the importance of these additional
PC, advocated, for example, by Duffee (2011) and Adrian et al. (2013a), and the eco-
nomic relevance of the income gap.



2     Theoretical Framework and Predictions

We provide a simple framework to interpret the empirical results presented in Section
1.2. In particular, we consider a setting that abstracts away from many relevant
activities and risks banks engage with, such as credit risk, to focus solely on interest
rate risk.


2.1   Model and Predictions

Assets.      We assume that there are two main assets on the balance sheet of banks.
Short-term risk-free assets provide an instantaneous rate of return rt . Long-lived
assets provide a stream of payments e- dt at each date   t like a console bond.
The parameter  controls the maturity of long-lived assets: the promised coupons add


                                          18
up to 1, and their average maturity is 1/.
       These two types of assets represent the available saving and borrowing instru-
ments to the economy: productive assets, loans, corporate bonds, deposits, commer-
cial paper, etc. This separation in two categories allows us to consider heterogeneity
between short-term and long-term fixed-rate instruments. Also, and this is of empiri-
cal relevance, the model allows us to consider variable-rate assets. These instruments
are equivalent to rolling over short-term assets and, therefore, can be counted jointly
with the short-term assets in our model.
       Finally, agents can also trade zero-coupon Treasury bonds of all maturities.19
Since bonds of all maturities trade, the long-lived asset is redundant: a portfolio
consisting of e- bonds of each maturity  replicates a unit long position in the long-
                                   ( )
lived asset. We denote by Pt             the price of the zero-coupon bond with maturity  .
                                             ( )            ( )
We define the yield on this bond as yt             = - log(Pt )/ . Importantly, these Treasury
bonds need not constitute a large part of the balance sheet of banks. We include them
and use them for measurement because, as will become clear with this model, they
are a simple instrument to measure the price of interest rate risk.


Banks.        In each period, there is a continuum of banks indexed by i. Denote Ei,t
                                                          ( )
the initial net worth of bank i at date t and Xi,t its net dollar position in bonds of
                                                                  ( )
maturity  . As it will be useful later on, we write xi,t = Xi,t /Ei,t the same position
relative to the net worth of the bank. We drop the index i for aggregate quantities. A
bank's net worth evolves according to:
  19
   All quantities are real. It is straightforward to include an exogenous process for inflation in the
model.




                                                    19
                                               ( )                        
                                       ( ) dPt                                ( )
                    dEi,t =          Xi,t     ( )
                                                   d   + Ei,t -              Xi,t d   rt dt    (4)
                              0             Pt                        0

                                                ( )
   Banks select their net holdings Xt                  so as to maximize an instantaneous mean-
variance criterion:20
                                                             
                                  max E(dEi,t ) -                 var(dEi,t ),                 (5)
                                   ( )
                                  Xi,t                      2Ei,t
                                         


where  is a risk-aversion coefficient. This objective can be rationalized in a setting
where banks form overlapping generations, living for an infinitesimal interval dt, and
maximize expected utility of final wealth as in Greenwood and Vayanos (2014).21
   With this objective function, we capture the risk management decisions of banks
without taking a particular stance on their origin. One interpretation of the risk-
aversion parameter  is that it comes from the actual risk aversion of the bank's
manager, or emanates from her career concerns. Another interpretation is that  is
the Lagrange multiplier on a no-default condition for the bank or a regulatory risk
constraint like value-at-risk limits.22 Irrespective of its origin, risk-aversion by banks
is key in our theoretical framework. The fundamental underlying force for our results
to hold is that banks trade-off expected profits and risk in a stable way over time.
This assumption appears legitimate: banks and regulators often explicitly express
their concerns over interest rate risk. As an illustration, Bank of America states in
its 2016 annual report: "Our overall goal is to manage interest rate risk so that move-
ments in interest rates do not significantly adversely affect earnings and capital."
  20
     Note that given the redundancy of the long-lived asset and the zero-coupon bonds, banks simply
maximize their holdings of the bonds without loss of generality.
  21
     An alternative foundation would be to assume that banks are long-lived and their myopia comes
from log utility.
  22
     He and Krishnamurthy (2013), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), or Adrian and Shin (2013) are
examples of more complete models of the risk appetite of banks.

                                                       20
The FDIC (FDIC (2005)), in its Supervisory Insights, expresses the view that "Inter-
est rate risk is fundamental to the business of banking." The presence of such a risk
management motive is also supported by existing evidence coming from the cross-
section of banks, see e.g. Drechsler et al. (2018), Kirti (2017), Rampini, Viswanathan,
and Vuillemey (2017), or Vuillemey (2017). In Section 4.2, we investigate this risk
management motive directly in the data. In particular, our risk-management theory
implies that banks suffer when they hold significant balance sheet exposures and in-
terest rates increase. Using banks' equity returns, we do not find empirical support
for this assumption. This result constitutes a challenge to the model and interpreta-
tion we introduce in this section.


Equilibrium yield curve.       Rather than completely specifying the model, we de-
rive relations between the short rate, investment decisions of banks, and the yield
curve that must hold in the equilibrium of any economy where banks make risk-
management decisions as specified above. The relationships we derive this way are
the banking counterpart of household Euler equations for bonds of various maturities.
   First, note that, scaled by their equity, all banks solve the same problem. There-
                                                           ( )
                                                  ( )     Xi,t
fore, the optimal holdings per dollar of equity, xi,t =   Ei,t
                                                                 are constant across banks.
Define gt the net amount of long-term assets held by banks, divided by their equity.
This quantity maps into holdings of the form:


                                           ( )
                                 > 0,    xi,t = gt e- .                                 (6)


We study equilibria where the joint dynamics of the short rate and the net position



                                          21
are of the form:


                           dgt = -g (gt - g
                                          ¯) dt + g dWg,t ,                                         (7)

                           drt = -r (rt - r
                                          ¯) dt - gr (gt - g
                                                           ¯) dt + r dWr,t .


These simple processes capture some key properties of the dynamics we observe em-
pirically. We assume g , r > 0: both the exposure of banks to long-term assets and the
short-rate exhibit mean-reversion. The term in gr allows the exposure gt to predict
future changes in the short rate. However, this is not a causal statement: we simply
entertain the possibility that there is, in the data, a relationship between changes
in the short rate drt and banks exposure gt . Note additionally, that the insights we
derive hereafter hold for a larger family of specifications, for example including other
determinants of the short-rate dynamics.23
       As in Greenwood and Vayanos (2014), we guess that yields are linear in the vari-
ables we specified, the short-rate rt and the net exposure to long-lived assets gt :


                                    ( )        ( )
                           - log Pt        = yt      = Ar ( )rt + Ag ( )gt + C ( ),                 (9)


where Ar ( ) (resp. Ag ( )) is the exposure of the yields of bonds with maturity  to the
short-term rate rt (resp. to the net exposure to long-lived assets gt ). These coefficients
are an endogenous outcome of the model that we compute in equilibrium. Plugging in
  23
    Consider more state variables zt to capture the dynamics of interest rates and the income gap (e.g.,
inflation, employment, ...). As long as this joint system follows a continuous-time VAR(1), that is the
vector t = (rt , gt , zt ) follows

                                          dt = -K (t - ¯)dt +  dWt ,                                 (8)

Proposition 1 will hold.


                                                        22
the law of motions of rt and gt , we obtain an expression for the expected bond returns
               ( )
that we note µt .
   Given this form for yields, we can easily write down the first-order conditions of
banks with respect to their holdings in bonds of maturity  :


                            ( )
                        µt - rt = Ar ( )r,t + Ag ( )g,t ,                               (10)
                                             
                                 2               ( )
                     where j,t = j              xi,t Aj ( )d, for j = g, r.             (11)
                                         0



This condition is akin to a standard Euler equation. The first line tells us that for
a bond of a given maturity, the bank requires a risk premium proportional to the
exposures (Aj ( )) of the bond to the fundamental shocks of the economy. The second
line characterizes how much compensation is asked for bearing each of these risks: it
                                                                2
is proportional to the product of the risk aversion  , the risk j , and the total exposure
accumulated through positions in bonds of various maturities.
   Plugging the equilibrium portfolio positions into the first-order condition of banks,
we obtain the equilibrium risk premia. We provide the details of calculations and
proofs as well as verify the conjecture on the form of prices in Appendix A.

Proposition 1. Consider an equilibrium where the balance sheet position of banks
                                                                                ( )
and the short rate are given by Equation (7). The expected excess returns µt          on the
 -maturity bond is proportional to the net position of banks in long-term assets gt :


                      ( )
                     µt - rt = gt × (cr Ar ( ) + cg Ag ( )) = gt × ( ),                 (12)


where cr and cg are two constants determined in equilibrium and ( ) > 0.


                                                23
   Proposition 1 shows that the risk premium on a bond of maturity  is positively
correlated with banks net exposure to long-term assets gt . When banks hold more
long-term assets, they stand to lose more if interest rates increase. As a consequence,
they are less willing to hold zero-coupon bonds of various maturity as they lose value
at the same time. In an equilibrium where banks do not decide to change their po-
sitions in these bonds, the expected return must have adjusted to compensate this
lower willingness to bear risk. Thus, in equilibrium, a higher net exposure is corre-
lated with a more significant bond risk premium.
   We can further characterize the relationship between bond risk premia and banks'
net exposure across maturities.

Proposition 2. Consider an equilibrium where Equation (7) describes the relation-
ship between the balance sheet position of banks and the short rate. The expected
excess returns of bonds of longer maturity are more sensitive to the net exposure of
banks: ( ) is strictly increasing in  .

   Proposition 2 shows that a more significant exposure to long term assets predicts a
higher risk premium for bonds with longer maturities. Indeed, longer maturity bonds
are riskier: their exposure to variations in interest rates is higher than the exposure
of short maturity bonds. As a result, following an increase in the net exposure to
long-term assets, holding risk premia constant, banks are relatively less willing to
hold bonds of longer maturity. Thus, as the net exposure of banks increases, the
equilibrium risk premium on bonds of longer maturity will increase more than the
risk premium on shorter maturity bonds.
   Our model thus makes two direct testable predictions: (1) a larger average net
exposure of banks to long-term assets should predict higher bond risk premia, (2) this

                                          24
effect should be stronger for long-maturity bonds. These predictions correspond to
the empirical results established in Section 1.


2.2   Additional Considerations
                                                                                  ( )
Excess returns versus yields.      Our main predictions link bond risk premia µt - rt
and the balance sheet of banks gt . Equation (9) suggests other testable implications,
linking banks' balance sheets and yields directly. However, the sign and magnitude
of this relation between banks' net position and yields depend on the joint dynamics
of rates and positions. This result is in contrast to the relationship between banks'
net position and bond excess returns, whose sign is unambiguous in our model. The
following proposition illustrates this property.

Proposition 3. Consider an equilibrium where the balance sheet position of banks gt
and the short rate rt are given by Equation (7). Then the exposure of bond prices to the
                                                 2 1
net position gt , Ag ( ), is of the same sign as r +r
                                                      - gr . gt is an unspanned factor
                    2 1
if and only if gr = r +r
                         .

   In equilibrium, yields depend not only on current risk premia but also expecta-
tions of future rates. Additionally, risk management by banks creates a link between
risk premia and their balance sheet composition. Periods of large holdings of risk by
banks correspond to periods of large risk premia and high yields. However, risk man-
agement by banks does not constrain the relation between short rate expectations
and their balance sheet. If periods of high long-term holdings gt happen to coincide
with periods where the short rate decreases (a positive gr ), then yields should be
lower when banks net position increases to reflect expectations of future rates. Propo-


                                           25
sition 3 characterizes which of the two effects dominate. For one particular parameter
            2 1
value, gr = r +r
                 , the two effects cancel each other and yields of all maturities do
not depend on gt . The net exposure gt is then an unspanned factor. Close to this knife-
                2 1
edged case, gr  r +r
                     , the role of the income gap in explaining yield dynam-
ics remains quantitatively limited. This situation echoes our empirical finding that
while not outperforming yields, the information contained in the income gap about
bond risk premia reflects the information contained in the higher-order component of
yields (Table 5 and Figure IA.4).


Completing the model.           We outline a particular economy in which Equation 7 de-
scribes the joint dynamics of the short rate rt and banks net position gt . To do so, we
specify the supply of other assets as well as the behavior of other market participants.
       We first assume the existence of an instantaneous risk-free asset that is in per-
fectly elastic supply at rate rt , now a primitive of the model. We also assume that
long-lived assets are in finite supply, while zero-coupon bonds are in zero net supply.
We introduce a second group of agents in addition to banks: households. Households
are considered here in an extended sense: we pool them together with non-financial
firms and the government. They are endowed with the entire supply of long-lived as-
sets. Additionally, households borrow from banks at date t an exogenous amount Bt
of long-lived asset and lend to banks an exogenous amount Lt of long-term assets.24
We define the net imbalance -gt as the difference between the ratio of long-term sav-
ings to total bank equity lt = Lt /Et and long-term borrowing to total bank equity
bt = Bt /Et . Now gt is also a primitive of the model. Then, as long as the exogenous
  24
    We can easily relax the exogeneity assumptions and allow borrowing and lending by households to
be price-elastic: this does not change the qualitative predictions we derived so far.


                                                26
laws of motion for rt and gt are given by Equation (7), we obtain the equilibrium yield
curve in Equation (9).
    The assumption of exogenous changes in households and firms portfolios is a sim-
plification of a more complicated decision problem: households and firms savings and
borrowing decisions. Exogenous shocks to lt and bt are meant to capture the fact
that factors other than simple risk-return trade-offs influence those decisions. For in-
stance, changing liquidity needs, the use of incorrect heuristics or hedging demands
can affect those decisions. We come back to potential empirical counterparts of these
shocks in Section 4.1.2.



3    Model Estimation

In this section, we take the model presented in Section 2 to the data. This exercise
allows us to consider the ability of our theory to quantitatively rationalize the rela-
tionship between banks' balance sheets and expected returns throughout the yield
curve. Besides, we obtain an estimate of banks' willingness to take risk,  , a key
parameter of our model, which is also central to many macroeconomic models with
intermediaries.
    To define the state variable gt , we use equation (2) and construct the bank-level
                                                    Assetsit
gap git , which corresponds to 1 - Income Gapit ×   Equityit
                                                               (see Section 1.1.1). Table IA.6
confirms that the predictive results of Section 1.2 hold for this measure as well. To
estimate the dynamics of the model's state variables, we discretize the model using 1
year as the time unit. Concretely, if t is a year, we estimate the following equations,




                                          27
which correspond to the discrete-time version of Equation (7):
                             
                              (1)     (1)       (1)
                                +1 - yt   = -r yt - gr gt +
                             yt
                             
                                                                    r,t

                             gt+1 - gt = -g gt +
                             
                                                         g,t



where gt is the exposure measure defined above measured in the first quarter of the
year. We use a parametric bootstrap to correct the estimates of r , g and gr for
small sample bias. r and g are estimated as the empirical standard deviation of                      r

and      g   respectively. We estimate ( ) = (cr Ar ( ) + cg Ag ( )) defined in Proposition 1
by regressing bond the one-year holding excess returns of bonds of maturity  on gt
at the yearly frequency. We calibrate 1
                                      
                                        , the time-to-maturity of the long term asset,
to 10 years.25 We use these estimated coefficients and the calibrated  to compute
^r =    1                   ^r ( ) =   1-e- ^r 
I       ^r
        
              1-   +^
                    r
                        and A            ^r
                                                .

       Finally,  , the risk-aversion coefficient is estimated by minimizing the squared dis-
tance between the average ( ) across maturities ( 1                5      ^( )) and their theoretical
                                                                          
                                                  4                 =2

counterpart. Table 6 presents the coefficient estimates. The estimated risk-aversion
is about 19. Given banks optimization problem in Equation 5, this risk-aversion coef-
ficient corresponds to a relative-risk aversion coefficient. The model reveals a much
larger risk-aversion than the typical calibration in macroeconomic models with a fi-
nancial sector. He and Krishnamurthy (2014b) use a relative-risk aversion coefficient
of 2; Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) use log-utility. This number is within the
range of the estimates of Greenwood and Vayanos (2014), who use variations in Trea-
sury supply to identify the absolute risk-aversion of all arbitrageurs in fixed income
  25
    To assess the importance of this calibration, we provide a sensitivity analysis below using a range
of alternative values for .



                                                    28
markets. Because their method does not observe the arbitrageurs directly, they must
make assumptions on their total wealth, giving rise to a wide range of plausible esti-
mates. We can obtain point estimates without such assumptions because we directly
measure the portfolios of banks. If we assume that banks constitute the whole group
of arbitrageurs in the market for interest rate risk, their estimates are a third of
ours.26 The literature on quantitative easing interventions reports estimates of risk
aversion that are about 85% of what we find here.27 The other interpretation of this
difference is that banks are only a subset of arbitrageurs in this market. Under this
view, banks constitute a sizable part of this group, between a third and 85% depend-
ing on the supply-response estimates.
   We confirm the model's ability to fit risk premium dynamics across maturities. Fig-
ure IA.5 shows the model's goodness of fit by comparing the empirical estimates ^( )

­ the coefficient estimates obtained when regressing bond excess returns of maturity
 on g ­ with their model-implied counterpart. For the 2-year bond, the model slightly
overestimates the sensitivity of bond risk premia to the income gap; at all other hori-
zons, the model-implied estimates and the empirical estimates are very close. Figure
IA.6 investigates robustness relative to our calibration for . Our baseline estimation
uses an average time-to-maturity for the long term asset of 10 years ( = .1). Figure
IA.6 re-estimates our model using different values of 1/ ranging from 2 to 50. For
high values of  ( 50), the risk aversion coefficient is estimated at 10, while a time-to
  26
     Greenwood and Vayanos (2014) have a point estimate for the absolute risk aversion of arbitrageurs
of 57. To obtain a relative risk aversion, assuming arbitrageurs are only banks, one needs to multiply
this number by the total banking sector's capital as a fraction of GDP. In 2015, the U.S. GDP was
$18tn, banks' total assets were $17tn, and banks' capital to assets ratio was 11.7%. These numbers
imply a relative risk aversion of 6.3.
  27
     D'Amico and King (2013) find supply effects two and a half as large as Greenwood and Vayanos
(2014), and Hamilton and Wu (2012) report an absolute risk aversion twice as large.



                                                 29
maturity of 5 years leads to a relative-risk aversion for banks of 25.



4     Interpretation

The model developed in Section 2 provides a simple interpretation of our results. In
this section, we first present a collection of empirical observations supporting this
view and then discuss several challenges to this interpretation.


4.1     Supporting Evidence

4.1.1   The Income Gap or Other Balance Sheet Quantities?

Our theory relates the quantity of interest rate risk borne by banks with the market
price of this risk. Empirically, the predictive power of the income gap may come
from specific features of banks' average balance sheets that happen to correlate with
bond risk premia for reasons unrelated to banks risk management of interest rate
risk. If this were the case, we should observe similar or higher predictability using
dimensions of the balance sheets that do not focus on the net exposure to interest rate
risk. In what follows, we consider two particular dimensions.


The income gap and its components.              Our first tests estimate separately the
ability of the asset and liability components of the income gap to forecast bonds' ex-
cess returns. Figure IA.7 shows these two components: "Non-exposed assets" corre-
spond to the average bank-level ratio of assets that either reprice or mature within
a year normalized by total consolidated assets (in blue); "Non-exposed liabilities" is
the opposite of the average bank-level ratio of liabilities that either reprice or mature


                                           30
within a year normalized by total consolidated assets (in red). If the forecasting power
of the income gap comes only from, say, its asset side (the blue line), then our inter-
pretation cannot be valid: in our theory, only banks' total portfolio exposure should
forecast bonds' excess returns. Since the liability side of the gap varies significantly
in the time-series, such a result would invalidate our interpretation.
      To implement this test, we simply replace the Income Gap in Equation (3) by its
two components: "Non-exposed assets" and "Non-exposed liabilities". Table 7 reports
the results. For brevity, we only show the estimated coefficients when the dependent
variable is the excess return on 5-year maturity bonds. Column (1) replicates the re-
sults of Column (4), Table 2. Column (2) and (3) show that taken individually, each of
the two components of the average income gap does not forecast robustly future bond
excess returns. The estimated coefficients have low statistical significance and are
small in magnitudes. In Column (4), we include the two components simultaneously
in the regression. Both coefficients then become statistically significant and of a mag-
nitude close to that of the income gap alone. Thus, consistent with our interpretation,
only the overall exposure of the average financial intermediary explains bond risk
premia.


Interest rate risk versus liquidity risk. Similarly, we ask whether balance sheet
aggregates focusing on liquidity risk predict bond returns. We consider the liquidity
mismatch index (LMI) of Bai, Krishnamurthy, and Weymuller (2018), the bank liq-
uidity creation index of Berger and Bouwman (2009), which we equal-weight or value-
weight by total gross assets across banks (BB), and the Basel Committee's liquidity
coverage ratio (LCR) as constructed by Choi and Choi (2016).28
 28
      We thank the authors of this work who graciously shared their data with us.

                                                  31
       The measures of liquidity risk behave differently from banks average income gap.
Figure IA.8 plots these four measures jointly with the income gap, standardized to
have a unit standard deviation. We flip the sign of the BB measure so that low val-
ues correspond to high liquidity risk, like LMI and LCR. The time-series behavior of
liquidity risk differs from the income gap in at least three ways. First, while the aver-
age income gap evolves smoothly around the crisis, LMI experiences a sharp drop and
rebounds right after the financial crisis.29 Second, the liquidity measures all exhibit
strong growth in the post-crisis period. Third, in the earlier part of the sample, these
measures depict a slow secular increase in liquidity risk while there are substantial
cyclical variations in the average income gap.
       The measures of liquidity risk do not predict bond returns. Table IA.7 reports
our baseline predictive regressions, replacing the income gap by the value-weighted
BB index, which features an extended sample and echoes the behavior of the other
measures in the late part of the sample. None of the coefficients are statistically
significant, and the adjusted R2 are all well below 1%. Interestingly these results
also dispel the idea that it would be enough to exhibit somewhat of a downward trend
to capture bond risk premia.30


4.1.2     Demand Shocks and Bond Risk Premia

We consider three measures of the "demand" for savings and borrowing instruments
and ask whether they forecast excess bond returns: (1) the aggregate demand for
  29
     Bai et al. (2018) argue this feature reflects the superiority of their measure, which also leads to a
better ability to capture how cross-sectional differences in liquidity risk are related to bank lending.
  30
     We reproduced this analysis for the equal-weighted measure and also found no significant coeffi-
cients and all R2 below 1%. The shorter sample measures, LMI and LCR, do not perform better, with
no coefficients distinct from 0 and low R2 of about 2% even in the short sample.



                                                   32
adjustable-rate mortgages (2) the aggregate demand for deposits (3) the aggregate
supply of government bonds. These measures correspond to the supply/demand shocks
of long-lived assets in the model of Section 2. In particular, none of these shocks
should have a significant forecasting power for bond risk premia above and beyond
the average income gap. Indeed, as per our model, a sufficient statistic for bond risk
premia is the net interest rate risk held by banks, captured by the income gap. Em-
pirically, we consider three such observable shifts in quantities:
   Households' choice of fixed-rate vs. adjustable-rate mortgages (ARM) depends on
multiple determinants, which can change over time.31 Using the Monthly Interest
Rate Survey, we compute the quarterly ratio of ARM issuance to total mortgage is-
suance. To the extent that shifts in households' demand are the source of some of
these variations, as in our model, an increase in the share of ARM in total mortgage
issuance forces banks to hold more ARM. Everything else equal, banks' average in-
come gap should decrease. Figure IA.10(a) shows that there is, in fact, a positive
correlation (59%) between the share of ARM in mortgage issuance and the average
income gap, at least until 2006.32
   We also consider the average quarterly bank-level ratio of non-interest-bearing
deposits normalized by total consolidated assets. When households increase their
relative demand for non-interest-bearing deposits, banks end up in equilibrium with
more interest rate sensitive liabilities. Thus, everything else equal, their income
  31
     This choice involves a risk-return trade-off and households may use simple imprecise heuristics to
make decisions (Koijen, Hemert, and Nieuwerburgh, 2009). This choice also partly reflects the desire
of households to manage their liquidity, which may depend on aggregate factors (Chen, Michaux, and
Roussanov, 2013).
  32
     Of course, this unconditional positive correlation does not have to be present, since other shifts in
the demand for other components of banks' balance sheets may force them to adjust their income gap
in an opposite direction.



                                                   33
gap increases. There are several time-varying determinants of the demand for non-
interest-bearing deposits. Depositors have a choice between many stores of wealth,
which, beyond a standard risk-return trade-off, will be determined by liquidity con-
siderations (Tobin (1956), Baumol (1952)) or demand for safety (Krishnamurthy and
Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012).33 Figure IA.10(b) shows the time-series evolution of non-
interest-bearing deposits and its positive correlation (64%) with the average income
gap.
   Finally, we consider the aggregate supply of government bonds. We use the maturity-
weighted supply of treasuries, normalized by GDP, as in Greenwood and Vayanos
(2014). By varying the supply of long-term bonds in the economy, the government
may shift the availability of interest rate risk. For instance, to fund an expansionary
fiscal policy, the government will increase the Treasury supply, and, in equilibrium,
the income gap of banks should decrease. Figure IA. 10(c) show the time-series evo-
lution of the maturity-weighted Treasuries supply measure. Given the low-frequency
fluctuations in Treasuries supply, this series does not exhibit much correlation with
the average income gap.
   We investigate whether these measured fluctuations in the supply/demand for in-
terest rate risk predict bond risk premia. We start by replacing the average income
gap by each of these "demand" factors in Equation (3). We then add the average in-
come gap to the forecasting regression. The estimated coefficients are presented in
Table 8. Column (1) and (5) show that the share of adjustable-rate mortgages and
the maturity-weighted Treasury supply measure of Greenwood and Vayanos (2014)
do not significantly correlate with future bonds excess returns. Thus, unsurprisingly,
 33
    For instance, the fraction of non-interest-bearing deposits exhibits a correlation of 46% with the
HP-filtered monetary aggregate M1.


                                                 34
Column (2) and (6) of Table 8 show that the forecasting power of the average income
gap is not affected by the inclusion of these two variables in Equation (3). Column
(3) shows an R2 of 8.7% when using the average ratio of non-interest-bearing deposits
normalized by consolidated assets to predict returns on 5-year bonds. However, Col-
umn (4) shows that once we control for the average income gap, non-interest-bearing
deposits do no longer correlate with bond risk premia, while the income gap remains a
statistically significant predictor with an economic magnitude similar to our baseline
specification.
   All these results are consistent with our interpretation: the net exposure to in-
terest rate risk borne by banks, as measured by the average income gap, appears to
better capture variations in expected excess bond returns than quantities of particu-
lar types of financial assets.


4.1.3   Risk-Sharing Evidence

We exploit information on income gap at the bank level to study the time-series be-
havior of the income gap across heterogeneous banks. In our model, the equilibrium
risk premium adjusts so that banks are collectively willing to bear the interest rate
risk supplied by other agents in the economy. Even if banks face customers with het-
erogeneous demand, they can use financial markets to share interest rate risk. To
the extent that banks have similar risk preferences, they would end up with the same
net exposure. Therefore, even across heterogeneous banks, one would expect to find
common variations in their income gap, close to the average income gap. We find ev-
idence supporting this risk-sharing view using three sources of heterogeneity across
banks: size, geography, and leverage.


                                         35
   Panel (a) of Figure 2 represents the time series of the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and
90th percentile of the cross-sectional distribution of the gap each quarter. There are
substantial cross-sectional variations in income gap across banks: the interquartile
range is about 20%. However, the whole distribution appears to shift up and down
over time, suggesting common variations. Panel (b) reinforces this point: it presents
the demeaned time series of the various percentile. Those series are all strongly
positively correlated.
   The first dimension of bank heterogeneity we consider is size.34 We split banks
into ten groups based on decile of total assets. Figure 3 represents the average in-
come gap for each size group. All series are remarkably similar to the average income
gap except for the largest size group, for which we do not capture the income gap ac-
curately, most likely because of their use of interest rate derivatives. The correlation
with the average income gap is about 85% for each size group except the fourth (72%)
and the tenth (18%).
   We repeat this comparison across nine geographic regions of the United States.
Because of heterogeneity in local economic conditions, one would expect banks in
different regions to face different demand for interest rate exposure. However, Figure
4 shows that across these nine regions, banks share similar net exposure to interest
rates. The local average income gaps all exhibit a strong correlation with the national
average income gap. All correlations are between 80% and 90% except for the South-
West Center (Panel 8, 63%) and the Mountain region (Panel 4, 45%).35
   Finally, we compare banks that vary directly in the composition of their balance
  34
     For example, Kashyap and Stein (2000), document variation in bank balance sheet composition
across the size distribution.
  35
     The latter is the only substantial deviation, likely caused by individual measurement error as the
Mountain region has the lowest number of banks in our sample, between 7 and 23 per quarter.


                                                  36
sheets. For each bank, we compute the equity-to-assets ratio and deposits-to-assets
ratio. Book leverage consists of the ratio of book equity over consolidated assets. The
fraction of deposits is the ratio of checking deposits to total assets. For each of those
characteristics, we split our sample into two groups. Panel (a) of Figure 5 presents
the average income gap of banks sorted on equity-to-assets. The top group has an
average ratio of 10% and the bottom one of 7%. The average income gap for each
group does not exhibit any substantial deviation from each other. Panel (b) compares
the two groups based on deposits-to-assets. The average level for the ratio for the two
groups is 8% and 17%, a distinction reflecting the likely exposure to interest rate risk
of deposits. Over time, the two series also exhibit a strong positive correlation.


4.2   Challenges to Interpretation

We now discuss several challenges to the interpretation of our results described in
Section 2. These challenges all pertain to a particular assumption that is central to
the banking view of bond risk premia. Our model builds on a risk management objec-
tive for banks: when banks hold significant balance sheet exposures and the interest
rate increases, banks' value should decrease. This assumption underlies banks' risk
management decisions, which, in turn, drive the relationship between the average in-
come gap and excess returns on Treasury bonds. In this section, we use banks' equity
returns to test this assumption and its implications.
   Our first test investigates the empirical relationship between banks' equity re-
turns and Treasury returns and how this relationship depends on the average income
gap. In the simple framework of Section 2, when banks' average income gap is low,
banks' value should decrease when interest rates increase. Measuring banks' value

                                           37
through banks' equity returns, we expect the correlation of realized banks' returns
with realized bond returns to be significantly lower when banks' average income gap
is low. We test this hypothesis on quarterly data from 1986 to 2014. We measure
banks' returns as the excess 1-quarter return of the Fama-French industry portfolio
for banks. We measure bond returns as the excess 1-quarter return of the Fama port-
folio of bonds with maturities ranging from five to ten years. We then estimate the
following equation:


                   rxbanks,t = b0 + b1 rT bond,t + b2 Gapt-1 + b3 Gapt-1 × rT bond,t .         (13)


Table 9 presents the estimation results. Periods of low-income gap appear to be nega-
tively, rather than positively, related to banks' exposure to bond returns (i.e., b3 > 0).
This result suggests that when banks' balance sheet exhibit significant exposure, a
rise in interest rate increases, rather than decreases, banks' equity value. This result
is inconsistent with the risk management motive for banks highlighted in our model.
Note, however, that once we control for the equity market returns (Column (2)), b0 , b1
and b2 become insignificant.36 With this added control, the relation between banks' in-
come gap and the covariance between banks and bond returns is neither economically
nor statistically significant.
       We can also construct a more specified test that builds on the particular mean-
variance framework used in Section 2. In our model, banks aim to limit the volatility
of their equity value. This particular specification of banks' risk management objec-
tive implies that bond risk premia should be proportional to the expected covariance
  36
   While not a direct consequence of the theoretical model of this paper, controlling for market ex-
posures to understand intermediary risk is a frequent feature of intermediary asset pricing models,
adopted for instance by Adrian et al. (2014) and He et al. (2017).


                                                  38
of banks' equity returns with bond returns. Table 10, Column (2) tests this prediction
empirically. Each quarter, we compute the covariance of excess daily returns from the
Fama portfolio of Treasuries with maturities ranging from five to ten years and the
Fama-French industry index for banks. We then construct a forecast of this quantity
using an AR(1) model and use this forecast as a predictor of bond returns. The coeffi-
cient is small and insignificant. The regression's adjusted R2 is negative. There is no
meaningful relationship between bond excess returns and the predicted covariance of
daily excess returns on long-term bonds and banks stock returns. This analysis re-
jects the mean-variance framework that we use to motivate banks' risk management
decisions at the heart of the model in Section 2.
    Another, related, view of banks' objective function is that banks consider risk in a
segmented way. In particular, banks may care specifically about the volatility created
by their interest rate exposure. In this case, banks are reluctant to hold large total
quantity of interest rate risk, so that bond risk premia should be proportional to the
product of their net quantity of exposed assets and the current variance of long-term
bond returns. Table 10, Column (6) shows this is not the case empirically. Using the
Fama portfolio returns, we construct a quarterly measure of expected variance similar
to the measure of covariance described above. The interaction of banks' income gap
and bond variance does not significantly forecast bond risk premia: the predictability
of bond excess returns arising from banks' income gap is not higher when interest
rate risk is larger. This result is not surprising since the variance of bond returns
itself does not forecast bond risk premia (Table 10, Column (4)).37
  37
     The fact that a strong predictor of return does not significantly correlate with return volatility and
that return volatility does not predict future returns is not unique to our setting. For example, Moreira
and Muir (2017) find similar evidence for equities



                                                   39
    These analyses, together with the evidence of predictability in Section 1 and the
evidence in Section 4.1, constitute an exciting puzzle: banks' balance sheet exposures
strongly and robustly forecast bond risk premia (Section 1); a natural interpretation
of these results relies on banks' risk management: banks try to limit their interest
rate exposure, and only take on significant exposures when bond risk premia provide
appropriate compensation (Section 2); this interpretation is consistent with the col-
lection of evidence presented in Section 4.1; yet, this interpretation relies importantly
on banks' risk management motives, a motive that remains elusive in the data.



5    Conclusion

While banks are central intermediaries in the market for interest rate risk, they are
notably absent of the standard empirical analyses of bond risk premia. Our paper
fills this gap in the literature. We show that the net exposure of the banking sector
to interest rate risk, as measured through banks' average income gap, strongly fore-
casts future bond excess returns. The economic magnitude of this forecastability is
significant: an increase of banks holding of short-term or variable rate assets by 4.2
percentage points (as a fraction of their total assets) is associated with a 231 basis
points decrease in the 1-year excess returns of 5-year maturity bonds. This relation-
ship is stronger for bonds with longer maturities and survives a battery of robustness
checks.
    A natural interpretation of these findings considers banks as large marginal in-
vestors in the market for interest rate risk. In our term-structure model, the price of
interest rate risk adjusts so that banks are collectively willing to bear this interest


                                           40
rate risk and banks' holdings forecast bond risk premia. We document a collection of
empirical findings consistent with this interpretation. We show that only the average
income gap forecasts bond risk premia, and not its liability or asset components. We
also find that standard measures of liquidity risk do not forecast bond risk premia,
in contrast to our measure of banks' balance sheet exposure. Additionally, isolated
shocks to the realized net demand and supply of interest rate risk do not bring ad-
ditional forecasting power to our income gap measure. Finally, we present evidence
consistent with interest rate risk-sharing among heterogeneous banks.
   This interpretation, however, faces a significant challenge: the banking view of
bond risk premia we highlight in this paper requires that banks suffer when they
hold significant balance sheet exposures and interest rates increase. This risk man-
agement motive remains elusive in the data. Solving this apparent puzzle is a chal-
lenge we hope to tackle in future research.


References
Adrian, Tobias, Richard K Crump, and Emanuel Moench, 2013a, Pricing the term structure with linear
  regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 110, 110­138.

Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and Tyler Muir, 2014, Financial intermediaries and the cross-section of
  asset returns, The Journal of Finance 69, 2557­2596.

Adrian, Tobias, Emanuel Moench, and Hyun Song Shin, 2013b, Leverage asset pricing, Staff Reports
  625, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin, 2013, Procyclical leverage and value-at-risk, Review of Financial
  Studies hht068.

Ang, Andrew, and Geert Bekaert, 2006, Stock return predictability: Is it there?, The Review of Finan-
  cial Studies 20, 651­707.

Ang, Andrew, and Monika Piazzesi, 2003, A no-arbitrage vector autoregression of term structure dy-
  namics with macroeconomic and latent variables, Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 745­787.

                                                 41
Bai, Jennie, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Charles-Henri Weymuller, 2018, Measuring liquidity mis-
  match in the banking sector, The Journal of Finance 73, 51­93.

Baker, Malcolm, Robin Greenwood, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2003, The maturity of debt issues and pre-
  dictable variation in bond returns, Journal of Financial Economics 70, 261­291.

Bauer, Michael D, and James D Hamilton, 2017, Robust bond risk premia, The Review of Financial
  Studies 31, 399­448.

Baumol, William J., 1952, The transactions demand for cash: An inventory theoretic approach, The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 66, 545­556.

Beeler, Jason, and John Y Campbell, 2012, The long-run risks model and aggregate asset prices: An
  empirical assessment, Critical Finance Review 1, 141­182.

Begenau, Juliane, Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider, 2015, Banks' Risk Exposures, NBER Work-
  ing Papers 21334, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Berger, Allen N, and Christa HS Bouwman, 2009, Bank liquidity creation, The review of financial
  studies 22, 3779­3837.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2009, Market liquidity and funding liquidity,
  Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201­2238.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov, 2014, A macroeconomic model with a financial sector,
  American Economic Review 104, 379­421.

Campbell, John Y, and Robert J Shiller, 1991, Yield Spreads and Interest Rate Movements: A Bird's
  Eye View, Review of Economic Studies 58, 495­514.

Chen, Hui, Michael Michaux, and Nikolai Roussanov, 2013, Houses as ATMs? Mortgage Refinanc-
  ing and Macroeconomic Uncertainty, NBER Working Papers 19421, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.

Choi, Dong, and Hyun-Soo Choi, 2016, The effect of monetary policy on bank wholesale funding, Fed-
  eral Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 759.

Cieslak, Anna, and Pavol Povala, 2015, Expected returns in treasury bonds, Review of Financial Stud-
  ies .

Cochrane, John H., and Monika Piazzesi, 2005, Bond risk premia, American Economic Review 95,
  138­160.



                                                42
Cooper, Ilan, and Richard Priestley, 2009, Time-varying risk premiums and the output gap, Review of
  Financial Studies 22, 2801­2833.

D'Amico, Stefania, and Thomas B King, 2013, Flow and stock effects of large-scale treasury purchases:
  Evidence on the importance of local supply, Journal of Financial Economics 108, 425­448.

Di Tella, Sebastian, and Pablo Kurlat, 2017, Why are banks exposed to monetary policy?, Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl, 2016, The deposits channel of monetary policy,
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl, 2018, Banking on deposits: Maturity transforma-
  tion without interest rate risk, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Duffee, Gregory R, 2011, Information in (and not in) the term structure, The Review of Financial
  Studies 24, 2895­2934.

Duffee, Gregory R, 2018, Expected inflation and other determinants of treasury yields, The Journal of
  Finance .

English, William B., Skander J. Van den Heuvel, and Egon Zakrajsek, 2012, Interest rate risk and
  bank equity valuations, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-26, Board of Governors of
  the Federal Reserve System (U.S.).

Fama, Eugene F, and Robert R Bliss, 1987, The information in long-maturity forward rates, American
  Economic Review 77, 680­92.

FDIC, 2005, A changing rate environment challenges bank interest rate risk management, FDIC Su-
  pervisory Insights 2.

Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, Brian Sack, et al., 2011, The financial market effects
  of the federal reserve's large-scale asset purchases, International Journal of central Banking 7, 3­43.

Gomez, Matthieu, Augustin Landier, David Sraer, and David Thesmar, 2017, Banks exposure to inter-
  est rate risk and the transmission of monetary policy, Technical report, UC Berkeley.

Greenwood, Robin, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2014, Bond supply and excess bond returns, Review of Finan-
  cial Studies 3, 663­713.

Gurkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright, 2007, The u.s. treasury yield curve: 1961
  to the present., Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2291­2304.



                                                   43
 ¨
Gurkaynak, Refet S, and Jonathan H Wright, 2012, Macroeconomics and the term structure, Journal
  of Economic Literature 50, 331­67.

Hamilton, James D, and Jing Cynthia Wu, 2012, The effectiveness of alternative monetary policy tools
  in a zero lower bound environment, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 44, 3­46.

Hannan, Timothy H, and Allen N Berger, 1991, The rigidity of prices: Evidence from the banking
  industry, American Economic Review 81, 938­45.

Hanson, Samuel G., 2014, Mortgage convexity, Journal of Financial Economics 113, 270­299.

He, Zhiguo, Bryan Kelly, and Asaf Manela, 2017, Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence from many
  asset classes, Journal of Financial Economics 126, 1 ­ 35.

He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2013, Intermediary asset pricing, American Economic Review
  103, 732­70.

He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2014a, A macroeconomic framework for quantifying systemic
  risk, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2014b, A macroeconomic framework for quantifying systemic
  risk, Working Paper 19885, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hodrick, Robert J, 1992, Dividend yields and expected stock returns: Alternative procedures for infer-
  ence and measurement, Review of Financial Studies 5, 357­86.

Kashyap, Anil K, and Jeremy C Stein, 2000, What do a million observations on banks say about the
  transmission of monetary policy?, American Economic Review 407­428.

Kirti, Divya, 2017, Why do bank-dependent firms bear interest-rate risk? (International Monetary
  Fund).

Koijen, Ralph S.J., Otto Van Hemert, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2009, Mortgage timing, Journal of
  Financial Economics 93, 292­324.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2011, The effects of quantitative easing on
  interest rates: Channels and implications for policy, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2011,
  215­287.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012, The aggregate demand for treasury
  debt, Journal of Political Economy 120, pp. 233­267.

Ludvigson, Sydney C., and Serena Ng, 2009, Macro factors in bond risk premia, Review of Financial
  Studies 22, 5027­5067.

                                                 44
Malkhozov, Aytek, Philippe Mueller, Andrea Vedolin, and Gyuri Venter, 2016, Mortgage risk and the
 yield curve, The Review of Financial Studies 29, 1220­1253.

Mishkin, Frederic, and Stanly Eakins, 2009, Financial Markets and Institutions, 6th edition (Pearson
  Prentice Hall).

Moreira, Alan, and Tyler Muir, 2017, Volatility-managed portfolios, The Journal of Finance 72, 1611­
 1644.

Nelson, Charles R., and Andrew F. Siegel, 1987, Parsimonious modeling of yield curves, The Journal
  of Business 60, 473­489.

Neumark, David, and Steven A Sharpe, 1992, Market Structure and the Nature of Price Rigidity:
  Evidence from the Market for Consumer Deposits, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 657­
  80.

Piazzesi, Monika, 2005, Bond Yields and the Federal Reserve, Journal of Political Economy 113, 311­
  344.

Purnanandam, Amiyatosh, 2007, Interest rate derivatives at commercial banks: An empirical investi-
  gation, Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 1769­1808.

Rampini, Adriano A, S Viswanathan, and Guillaume Vuillemey, 2017, Risk management in financial
  institutions, Working Paper .

               es, 2017, Risk sharing and the term structure of interest rates, Working Paper .
Schneider, Andr´

Stambaugh, Robert F, 1999, Predictive regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 375­421.

Svensson, Lars EO, 1994, Estimating and interpreting forward interest rates: Sweden 1992-1994,
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Swanson, Eric T, 2011, Let's twist again: A high-frequency event-study analysis of operation twist and
  its implications for qe2, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 151.

Tobin, James, 1956, The interest-elasticity of transactions demand for cash, The Review of Economics
  and Statistics 38, pp. 241­247.

Vuillemey, Guillaume, 2017, Bank interest rate risk management, Working Paper .




                                                 45
Tables

                                 Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                   Variable Obs         Mean      Std. Dev.      P25      P50     P75
                Income Gap 109          .128        .042        .092     .122    .163
                y (1)       111          .041       .026         .015     .046    .059
                y (2)       111          .043       .025         .018     .047    .063
                  (3)
                y           111          .046       .025         .023     .048    .063
                  (4)
                y           111          .048       .024         .027      .05    .066
                y (5)       111           .05       .023          .03     .051    .069
                    (2)
                rx          108          .014       .022        -.001     .013    .027
                    (3)
                rx          108           .02       .033        -.002     .021    .042
                rx(4)       108          .026       .043        -.008     .026    .057
                    (5)
                rx          108           .03       .052        -.012     .031    .069
                IP Growth   107         .021        .042          .01    .028    .045
                Inflation   111         .028        .013          .02    .028    .036
                Output Gap 111          -.015       .017        -.027    -.013   -.001

Note: Quarterly data over the 1986-2014 period. The bank-level income gap is computed from the
quarterly Consolidated Financial Statements (Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference be-
tween the $ amount of assets that either reprice, or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the
liabilities that mature or reprice within a year, all scaled by total consolidated assets. Income Gap is
the average bank-level income gap. y (n) is the yield of GSW zero-coupon bonds of maturity n. rx(n)
is the excess 1-year return of GSW zero-coupon bonds of maturity n. IP growth is the 1-year growth
rate in industrial production (INDPRO in FRED). Inflation is the 1-year growth rate of the CPI, taken
from the FRED database. Output gap corresponds to the difference between the real seasonally ad-
justed GDP (GDPC96 from the FRED database) and the real potential GDP (GDPPOT from FRED),
normalized by the real seasonally adjusted GDP.




                                                  46
                      Table 2: Income Gap and Bond Excess Returns

                                               (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)
                                              rx(2)      rx(3)      rx(4)      rx(5)
               Income Gap                   -0.23**    -0.36**    -0.47**    -0.55**
                                             (0.10)     (0.15)     (0.21)     (0.27)

               Constant                     0.04**     0.07**      0.09**     0.10**
                                            (0.01)     (0.02)      (0.03)     (0.04)

               Bootstrapped p-value          0.023      0.024      0.035      0.048
               Observations                   106        106        106        106
               Adjusted R2                   0.172      0.200      0.201      0.189

Sample period: 1986-2014. Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consoli-
dated Financial Statements (Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of
assets that either reprice, or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature
or reprice within a year, all scaled by total consolidated assets. Income Gap is the average bank-level
income gap. rx(n) is the excess 1-year return of GSW zero-coupon bonds of maturity n. Standard errors
are computed using the reverse regression approach of Hodrick(1992).  ,  , and  means statistically
different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance, where the p-values are computed using the
bootstrap approach described in Section 1.2.1.




                                                  47
Table 3: Income Gap and Bond Excess Returns : Controlling for Macroeconomic Con-
ditions

                                                (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)
                                               rx(2)     rx(3)     rx(4)     rx(5)
                  Income Gap                  -0.21*    -0.34*    -0.44*    -0.52*
                                              (0.10)    (0.16)    (0.22)    (0.28)

                  Inflation                    0.49      0.58      0.61      0.60
                                              (0.34)    (0.53)    (0.71)    (0.87)

                  IP Growth                   -0.10     -0.10     -0.07     -0.01
                                              (0.07)    (0.13)    (0.20)    (0.27)

                  Output Gap                   0.06     -0.02     -0.14     -0.27
                                              (0.24)    (0.38)    (0.53)    (0.68)

                  Constant                     0.03      0.05      0.07      0.08
                                              (0.02)    (0.03)    (0.04)    (0.04)

                  Bootstrapped p-value         0.061     0.051    0.055     0.071
                  Observations                  104       104      104       104
                  Adjusted R2                  0.223     0.210    0.189     0.166

Sample period: 1986-2014. Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consoli-
dated Financial Statements (Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of
assets that either reprice, or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature
or reprice within a year, all scaled by total consolidated assets. Income Gap is the average bank-level
income gap. rx(n) is the excess 1-year return of GSW zero-coupon bonds of maturity n. IP growth is the
1-year growth rate in industrial production (INDPRO in FRED). Inflation is the 1-year growth rate of
the CPI, taken from the FRED database. Output gap corresponds to the difference between the real
seasonally adjusted GDP (GDPC96 from the FRED database) and the real potential GDP (GDPPOT
from FRED), normalized by the real seasonally adjusted GDP. NBER recession is a dummy equal to
1 for quarters flagged as a recession by the NBER. Standard errors are computed using the reverse
regression approach of Hodrick(1992).  ,  , and  means statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and
1% level of significance, where the p-values are computed using the bootstrap approach described in
Section 1.2.1.




                                                  48
              Table 4: Income Gap and Bond Excess Returns : In Real Time

                                                    (1)    (2)          (3)       (4)
                                                      (2)
                                                   rx     rx(3)        rx(4)     rx(5)
                 Predicted Excess Return          0.81* 0.72**        0.69*      0.71
                                                  (0.41) (0.36)       (0.38)    (0.43)

                 Constant                          0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00
                                                  (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.02)

                 Bootstrapped p-value             0.052     0.050     0.076     0.112
                 Observations                      71        71        71        71
                 Adjusted R2                      0.083     0.112     0.106     0.097

Sample period: 1991-2014. Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consoli-
dated Financial Statements (Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of
assets that either reprice, or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature
or reprice within a year, all scaled by total consolidated assets. Income Gap is the average bank-level
income gap. Predicted return is computed using the current value of the income gap and the coeffi-
cients from a regression of realized excess returns on the income gap using all data available until that
point. rx(n) is the excess 1-year return of GSW zero-coupon bonds of maturity n. Standard errors are
computed using the reverse regression approach of Hodrick(1992).  ,  , and  means statistically
different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance, where the p-values are computed using the
bootstrap approach described in Section 1.2.1.




                                                   49
                  Table 5: Income Gap and Bond Excess Returns : Testing the Spanning Hypothesis

                                               3 Principal Components                         5 Principal Components
                                       (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)        (7)         (8)
                                      rx(2)        rx(3)      rx(4)       rx(5)      rx(2)        rx(3)      rx(4)       rx(5)
               Income Gap           -0.39***     -0.60***   -0.77***    -0.89***   -0.36***     -0.55***   -0.71***    -0.83***
                                     (0.11)       (0.18)     (0.25)      (0.31)     (0.11)       (0.18)     (0.25)      (0.31)

               PC1                    0.09         0.12       0.15        0.16       0.09         0.12       0.14        0.15
                                     (0.03)       (0.05)     (0.06)      (0.08)     (0.03)       (0.05)     (0.06)      (0.08)

               PC2                    0.17         0.34       0.53        0.72       0.17         0.34       0.52        0.72
                                     (0.17)       (0.28)     (0.38)      (0.47)     (0.17)       (0.28)     (0.38)      (0.47)

               PC3                    -0.46        -1.05      -1.61       -2.11      -0.38        -0.93      -1.46       -1.94
                                     (0.82)       (1.34)     (1.81)      (2.24)     (0.82)       (1.33)     (1.80)      (2.23)

               PC4                                                                   -1.95        -2.45      -2.47       -2.07
50




                                                                                    (2.15)       (3.39)     (4.51)      (5.49)

               PC5                                                                   -4.27        -7.14    -10.06      -12.68
                                                                                    (3.39)       (5.57)    (7.65)      (9.57)

               Constant               0.03         0.06       0.08        0.09       0.05         0.08       0.11        0.13
                                     (0.02)       (0.03)     (0.05)      (0.06)     (0.03)       (0.04)     (0.05)      (0.07)

               Spanning p-value      0.003        0.003      0.007       0.015      0.005        0.009      0.012       0.020
               Observations           106          106        106         106        106          106        106         106
               Adjusted R2           0.417        0.428      0.426       0.414      0.442        0.451      0.447       0.433

     Sample period: 1986-2014. Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consolidated Financial State-
     ments (Files FR Y-9C) and is defined as the difference between the amount of assets that either reprice, or mature, within
     one year, and the amount of the liabilities that mature or reprice within a year, all scaled by total consolidated assets. Income
     Gap is the average bank-level income gap. rx(n) is the excess 1-year return of GSW zero-coupon bonds of maturity of maturity
     n. PC1 to PC5 are the principal components of GSW yields of maturity 1 to 10 years, divided by 100. Standard errors are
     computed using the reverse regression approach of Hodrick(1992).  ,  , and  means statistically different from zero at 10,
     5 and 1% level of significance, where the p-values are computed using the bootstrap approach described in Section 1.2.1. The
     last row reports the p-value of a test of the spanning hypothesis using the parametric bootstrap of Bauer and Hamilton (2017).
                                  Table 6: Model Estimation

                       Parameters      Estimates            90% CI
                       r                 0.146         [ -0.033, 0.295]
                       g                 0.062         [ -0.164, 0.263]
                       gr                0.019          [ 0.012, 0.029]
                       r                0.0001        [ 0.0001, 0.0002]
                       g                 0.071          [ 0.037, 0.093]
                       ^(2)
                                         0.016          [ 0.008, 0.026]
                       ^(3)
                                         0.030          [ 0.016, 0.047]
                       ^(4)
                                         0.042          [ 0.023, 0.064]
                       ^(5)
                                         0.051          [ 0.026, 0.079]
                                        19.221         [ 1.767, 75.995]

This table presents the model's parameter estimates. The estimation procedure is described in details
in Section 3. 90% CI corresponds to bootstrapped 90% confidence intervals.




                                                 51
         Table 7: Asset and Liability Risk Exposure and Bond Excess Returns

                                                    (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)
                                                   rx(5)      rx(5)     rx(5)     rx(5)
               Income Gap                        -0.55**
                                                  (0.27)

               Non-Exposed Assets                            -0.10               -0.50*
                                                             (0.18)              (0.27)

               - Non-Exposed Liabilities                               -0.36    -0.78**
                                                                       (0.23)    (0.34)

               Constant                           0.10**      0.07      -0.08     0.01
                                                  (0.04)     (0.08)    (0.07)    (0.08)
               Observations                        106        106        106      106
               Adjusted R2                        0.189      0.001     0.081     0.233

Sample period: 1986-2014. Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consoli-
dated Financial Statements (Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of
assets that either reprice, or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature
or reprice within a year, all scaled by total consolidated assets. Income Gap is the average bank-level
income gap. rx(n) is the excess 1-year return of GSW zero-coupon bonds of maturity n. Non-exposed
Assets is the average bank-level ratio of assets that either reprice or mature within a year normalized
by total consolidated assets. - Non-exposed liabilities is the opposite of the average bank-level ratio of
liabilities that either reprice or mature within a year normalized by total consolidated assets. Stan-
dard errors are computed using the reverse regression approach of Hodrick(1992).  ,  , and  means
statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance,where the p-values are computed
using the bootstrap approach described in Section 1.2.1.




                                                   52
             Table 8: Changing Asset Quantities and Bond Excess Returns

                                         (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)
                                        rx(5)      rx(5)     rx(5)     rx(5)     rx(5)      rx(5)
    Income Gap                                   -0.83**              -0.51*              -0.60**
                                                  (0.32)              (0.27)               (0.26)

    ARM Fraction of Issuance           -0.02       0.09
                                       (0.06)     (0.07)

    Non Int.-Bearing Deposits                               -0.94      -0.15
                                                            (0.63)    (0.64)

    Mat.-Weighted Debt/GDP                                                       -0.00      0.01
                                                                                (0.01)     (0.01)

    Constant                            0.04      0.11*     0.15*      0.12      0.04       0.09
                                       (0.03)     (0.04)    (0.08)    (0.08)    (0.04)     (0.05)
    Observations                         98         98       106       106       106        106
    Adjusted R2                        -0.004     0.269     0.087     0.182     -0.007     0.194

Sample period: 1986-2014. Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consoli-
dated Financial Statements (Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of
assets that either reprice, or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature
or reprice within a year, all scaled by total consolidated assets. Income Gap is the average bank-level
income gap. rx(5) is the excess 1-year return of GSW zero-coupon bonds of 5-year maturity. ARM frac-
tion of issuance is the quarterly share of adjustable-rate mortgages in total mortgage issuance, from
the Monthly Interest Rate Survey. Non int. bearing deposits is the average of the quarterly bank-level
ratio of non-interest-bearing deposits normalized by total consolidated assets. Mat.-weighted Debt /
GDP is the maturity-weighted Treasuries supply measure of Greenwood and Vayanos (2014). Stan-
dard errors are computed using the reverse regression approach of Hodrick(1992).  ,  , and  means
statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance, where the p-values are computed
using the bootstrap approach described in Section 1.2.1.




                                                  53
                   Table 9: Banks' Stock Return Exposure to Treasuries

                                                            (1)          (2)
                                                         rxbanks,t    rxbanks,t
                       Income Gapt-1                       0.06         0.10
                                                          (0.26)       (0.19)

                       rxT bond,t                        -4.35***       -0.17
                                                          (1.08)       (0.78)

                       Income Gapt-1 × rxT bond,t        28.13***       3.65
                                                          (8.22)       (5.74)

                       rxmkt,t                                        1.09***
                                                                       (0.09)

                       Constant                            0.02        -0.01
                                                          (0.04)       (0.03)
                       Observations                        109          109
                       Adjusted R2                        0.124        0.620

Sample period: 1986-2014. Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consoli-
dated Financial Statements (Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of
assets that either reprice, or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature
or reprice within a year, all scaled by total consolidated assets. Income Gap is the average bank-level
income gap. rxbanks is the excess 1-quarter return of the Fama-French industry portfolio for banks.
rxT bond is the excess 1-quarter return of the Fama portfolio of bonds with maturities ranging from five
to ten years. rxmkt is the excess 1-quarter return of the CRSP value-weighted index. Newey-West stan-
dard errors with a bandwidth of 2 years are reported in parentheses.  ,  , and  means statistically
different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance.




                                                  54
            Table 10: Alternative Risk Measures and Bond Excess Returns

                                      X = Covt (rbanks , rT bond )       X = Vart (rT bond )
                              (1)       (2)               (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)
                             rx(5)     rx(5)             rx(5)       rx(5)      rx(5)     rx(5)
    Income Gap             -0.55**                     -0.68**                -0.59**    -1.04*
                            (0.27)                      (0.29)                 (0.27)    (0.53)

    X                                  -0.01            0.03         -0.03     -0.10      -0.33
                                       (0.03)          (0.03)        (0.10)    (0.10)     (0.28)

    Income Gap × X                                                                         2.00
                                                                                          (1.93)

    Constant                0.10**     0.03            0.12**         0.04    0.13**     0.18**
                            (0.04)    (0.01)           (0.04)        (0.03)   (0.05)     (0.08)
    Observations             106       106              106           106      106        106
    Adjusted R2             0.189     -0.008           0.218         -0.008   0.202      0.211

Sample period: 1986-2014. Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consoli-
dated Financial Statements (Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of
assets that either reprice, or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature
or reprice within a year, all scaled by total consolidated assets. Income Gap is the average bank-level
income gap. rx(n) is the excess 1-year return of GSW zero-coupon bonds of maturity n. The conditional
variance and covariance forecasts are constructed in two steps: first compute realized values using
daily returns for each month, then create a forecast by estimating an AR(1) in the full sample. Stan-
dard errors are computed using the reverse regression approach of Hodrick(1992).  ,  , and  means
statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance,where the p-values are computed
using the bootstrap approach described in Section 1.2.1.




                                                  55
Figures

            Figure 1: Average Income Gap and Future Bond Excess Returns




                                                                                       .15
                .2




                                                                                       .1
                                                                                       Excess Returns
                .15




                                                                                                .05
          gap




                                                                                          0
                .1




                                                                                       -.05
                .05




                                                                                       -.1
                 1985q1   1990q1    1995q1     2000q1      2005q1     2010q1     2015q1
                                                date

                                              gap
                                              rx2             rx3
                                              rx4             rx5



Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consolidated Financial Statements
(Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of assets that either reprice,
or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature or reprice within a year,
all scaled by total consolidated assets. "gap" is the average income gap, computed across all U.S. bank
holding companies with total consolidated assets of $1Bil or more. rxn is the excess 1-year return of
zero-coupon bonds of maturity n, using data from Gurkaynak et al. (2007).




                                                  56
                      Figure 2: Cross-Sectional Distribution of the Income Gap


                                                                                .1
        .4




                                                                                .05
        .2




                                                                                0
        0




                                                                                -.05
                                                                                -.1
        -.2




              1985   1990      1995       2000   2005       2010    2015               1985   1990   1995        2000   2005       2010   2015
                                          date                                                                   date

                            gap equal-weighted      Percentile 10                                    Gap                Percentile 10
                            Percentile 25           Percentile 50                                    Percentile 25      Percentile 50
                            Percentile 75           Percentile 90                                    Percentile 75      Percentile 90



                        (a) Raw Distribution                                                         (b) Demeaned

Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consolidated Financial Statements
(Files FR Y-9C) and is defined as the difference between the amount of assets that either reprice, or
mature, within one year, and the amount of the liabilities that mature or reprice within a year, all
scaled by total consolidated assets. We compute the various percentile of the income gap in each date
on the top panel. The bottom panel presents the demeaned time-series.




                                                                           57
                                  Figure 3: Income Gap across Bank Sizes
    .3




                                              .3




                                                                                        .3
    .2




                                              .2




                                                                                        .2
    .1




                                              .1




                                                                                        .1
    0




                                              0




                                                                                        0
         1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015        1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015        1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                        date                                      date                                      date
    .3




                                              .3




                                                                                        .3
    .2




                                              .2




                                                                                        .2
    .1




                                              .1




                                                                                        .1
    0




                                              0




         1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015        1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015   0    1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                        date                                      date                                      date
    .3




                                              .3




                                                                                        .3
    .2




                                              .2




                                                                                        .2
    .1




                                              .1




                                                                                        .1
    0




                                              0




                                                                                        0




         1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015        1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015        1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                        date                                      date                                      date




Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consolidated Financial Statements
(Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of assets that either reprice,
or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature or reprice within a year,
all scaled by total consolidated assets. The dark line represents the average income gap, computed
across all U.S. bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $1Bil or more. Each panel
corresponds to the average income gap within a decile of total consolidated assets, in increasing order.
We represent the first two deciles on the first panel.




                                                               58
                                      Figure 4: Income Gap across U.S. Regions
   .3




                                                   .3




                                                                                             .3
   .2




                                                   .2




                                                                                             .2
   .1




                                                   .1




                                                                                             .1
   0




                                                   0




                                                                                             0
              1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015        1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015        1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                             date                                      date                                      date
                                                   .3




                                                                                             .3
   .1 .2 .3




                                                   .2




                                                                                             .2
                                                   .1




                                                                                             .1
                                                   0




                                                                                             0
   0




              1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015        1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015        1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                             date                                      date                                      date
   .3




                                                   .3




                                                                                             .3
   .2




                                                   .2




                                                                                             .2
   .1




                                                   .1




                                                                                             .1
   0




                                                   0




                                                                                             0




              1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015        1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015        1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                             date                                      date                                      date




Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consolidated Financial Statements
(Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of assets that either reprice,
or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature or reprice within a year,
all scaled by total consolidated assets. The dark line represents the average income gap, computed
across all U.S. bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $1Bil or more. Each panel
corresponds to the average income gap within one of 9 regions of the US.




                                                                    59
                           Figure 5: Income Gap across Bank Characteristics

                               By Equity/Assets                                               By Checking Deposits/Assets
        .25




                                                                          .25
                                                                          .2
        .2




                                                                          .15
        .15




                                                                          .1
        .1




                                                                          .05
        .05




                                                                          0




         1985q1   1990q1    1995q1   2000q1   2005q1   2010q1   2015q1     1985q1    1990q1     1995q1   2000q1   2005q1    2010q1   2015q1
                                      date                                                                date

                           Low Equity          High Equity                                Low Deposits             High Deposits


                           (a) Equity/Assets                                        (b) Checking Deposits/Assets

Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consolidated Financial Statements
(Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of assets that either reprice,
or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature or reprice within a year,
all scaled by total consolidated assets. Panel (a) represents the average income gap for banks split
into two groups based on the average value of the ratio of book equity to consolidated assets. Panel (b)
represents the average income gap for banks split into two groups based on the average value of the
ratio of checking deposits to assets.




                                                                     60
Internet Appendix (Not for Publication)

A        Proofs
The banks' first-order condition is simply:

                                   ( )
                                  µt     - rt = Ar ( )r,t + Ag ( )g,t                                   (IA.1)
                                                           
                                               2               ( )
                                         j,t = j              xt Aj ( )d, for j = g, r                  (IA.2)
                                                       0

                            ( )
    We can also express µt , the returns on a  -maturity bond using the law of motions:

     ( )
    µt     = Ar ( )rt + Ag ( )gt + C ( ) + Ar ( )r (rt - r
                                                         ¯) + Ar ( )gr (gt - g
                                                                             ¯) + Ag ( )g (gt - g
                                                                                                ¯)      (IA.3)
                 1             1
             + Ar ( )2 r  2
                            + Ag ( )2 g 2
                 2             2

    Identifying the terms in gt , rt and the constant, we obtain a set of ODEs. In particular Ar and Ag
solve the following system, with initial conditions Ar (0) = Ag (0) = 0:

                                            1 = Ar ( ) + r Ar ( )                                       (IA.4)
                                                                              
                           2
                    Ar ( ) r                        2
                             Ir - gr = Ag ( ) + g - g                            e-u Ag (u)du Ag ( )    (IA.5)
                                                                          0


The solutions of these equations are given by

                                           1 - e-r 
                                   Ar ( ) =                                                             (IA.6)
                                               r
                                           Z 1 - e-   ^g 
                                                            e-r  - e- ^g 
                                  Ag ( ) =                -                                             (IA.7)
                                           r       ^g         ^ g - r
                                                              
                                             2   1
                                      Z = r           - gr                                              (IA.8)
                                                + r
                                                                                                        (IA.9)

where ^ g solves
                                                 
                                    2
                          ^ g = g - g
                                                    e-u Ag (u)du                                       (IA.10)
                                             0

                                    2       Z       1          1                
                          ^ g = g - g
                                                         -                    -                        (IA.11)
                                            r       + ^g   ^ g - r
                                                                          + r   +^g




                                                              61
   Clearly, Ar is positive and increasing. For Ag , its derivative is:

                                                      e-r  - e- ^g 
                                         Ag ( ) = Z                                             (IA.12)
                                                        ^ g - r
                                                        

The function e-x is decreasing in x, so Ag is of the same sign as Z . Combined with Ag (0), we obtain
that Ag is of the same sign as Z and that Ag = 0 when Z = 0. This result corresponds to Proposition 3.
    Going back to the risk premia, we have:
                                                                             
               ( )
              µt                     2
                     - rt = gt Ar ( )r          e-u Ar (u)du + Ag ( )g
                                                                     2
                                                                                e-u Ag (u)du    (IA.13)
                                         0                               0
               ( )
              µt     - rt = gt ( )                                                              (IA.14)

Given that Ag and Ar are monotone of constant sign, both terms in the sum in parentheses are positive
and increasing in  . Therefore,  is positive and increasing, properties that correspond to Propositions
1 and 2 respectively.




                                                      62
B     Additional Tables and Figures

                       Table IA.1: Income Gap and Its Components


                  Variable                             Obs Mean          Std. Dev.    P25 P50 P75
 Income Gap =                                         47800 .126           .187       .011 .124 .243
 Assets maturing/resetting < 1 year                   47800 .425           .153       .323 .433 .525
 - Liabilities maturing/resetting < 1year =           47800 .299           .157       .191 .272 .384
 Short Term Liabilities                               47800 .288           .157        .18 .261 .372
 + Variable Rate Long Term Debt                       47800  .01           .027         0    0  .008
 + Short Maturity Long Term Debt                      47800 .001           .005         0    0    0
 + Prefered Stock                                     47800   0            .002         0    0    0

Note: Summary statistics are based on the quarterly Consolidated Financial Statements (Files FR Y-
9C) between 1986 and 2014 restricted to US bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of
$1Bil or more. The variables are all scaled by total consolidated assets (bhck2170) and are defined as
follows: Interest Sensitive Liabilities =(bhck3296+bhck3298+bhck3409+bhck3408)/bhck2170; Inter-
est Sensitive Assets=(bhck3197)/bhck2170; Short Term Liabilities=bhck3296/bhck2170; Variable Rate
Long Term Debt=bhck3298/bhck2170; Short Maturity Long Term Debt=bhck3409/bhck2170; Prefered
Stock=bhck3408/bhck2170




                                                 63
  Table IA.2: Income Gap and Bond Excess Returns: Newey-West Standard Errors

                                        (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)
                                       rx(2)      rx(3)        rx(4)       rx(5)
                  Income Gap         -0.23**    -0.36***     -0.47***    -0.55***
                                      (0.09)     (0.12)       (0.15)      (0.17)

                  Constant     0.04***           0.07***     0.09***      0.10***
                                (0.01)            (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.02)
                  Observations   106               106         106          106
                             2
                  Adjusted R    0.172             0.200       0.201        0.189

Sample period: 1986-2014. Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consoli-
dated Financial Statements (Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of
assets that either reprice, or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature
or reprice within a year, all scaled by total consolidated assets. Income Gap is the average bank-level
income gap. rx(n) is the excess 1-year return of GSW zero-coupon bonds of maturity n. Standard errors
are computed using the reverse regression approach of Hodrick(1992).  ,  , and  means statistically
different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance, where the p-values are computed using the
bootstrap approach described in Section 1.2.1.




                                                  64
             Table IA.3: Income Gap and Bond Excess Returns: Quarterly

                                                (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)
                                               rx(2)      rx(3)     rx(4)      rx(5)
                Income Gap                   -0.05**    -0.08**    -0.11*     -0.12*
                                              (0.02)     (0.04)    (0.05)     (0.07)

                Constant                     0.01**     0.02**     0.02**     0.02*
                                             (0.00)     (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)

                Bootstrapped p-value          0.021      0.035      0.054     0.076
                Observations                   109        109        109       109
                Adjusted R2                   0.038      0.035      0.029     0.024

Sample period: 1986-2014. Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consoli-
dated Financial Statements (Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of
assets that either reprice, or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature
or reprice within a year, all scaled by total consolidated assets. Income Gap is the average bank-level
income gap. rx(n) is the excess 1-quarter holding return of Gurkaynak et al. (2007) zero-coupon bonds
of maturity n. Standard errors are computed using the reverse regression approach of Hodrick(1992).
 
 , , and  means statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance, where the
p-values are computed using the bootstrap approach described in Section 1.2.1.




                                                  65
              Table IA.4: Income Gap and Bond Excess Returns: Monthly

                                   (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)             (5)
                                  (12-24m)      (24-36m)     (36-48m)      (48-60m)        (60-120m)
                               rx            rx            rx           rx            rx
   Income Gap                   -0.01**       -0.02**       -0.03*       -0.03*          -0.03
                                 (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.02)         (0.02)

   Constant                      0.00**        0.00**       0.01**        0.01**         0.01*
                                 (0.00)        (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)

   Bootstrapped p-value           0.033        0.032         0.054         0.064           0.145
   Observations                    327          327           327           327             327
   Adjusted R2                    0.011        0.011         0.009         0.008           0.005

Sample period: 1986-2014. Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consoli-
dated Financial Statements (Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of
assets that either reprice, or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature
or reprice within a year, all scaled by total consolidated assets. Income Gap is the average bank-level
income gap. rx(n) is the excess 1-month holding return of Fama bond portfolios of maturity in the range
indicated in superscript. Standard errors are computed using the reverse regression approach of Ho-
drick(1992).  ,  , and  means statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance,
where the p-values are computed using the bootstrap approach described in Section 1.2.1.




                                                  66
  Table IA.5: Income Gap and Bond Excess Returns : Controlling for the CP factor

                                             (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)
                                            rx(2)        rx(3)       rx(4)       rx(5)
             Income Gap                   -0.27***     -0.44***    -0.57***    -0.68**
                                           (0.10)       (0.17)      (0.23)      (0.28)

             CP Factor                      0.52         0.85        1.16        1.45
                                           (0.27)       (0.45)      (0.61)      (0.74)

             Constant                       0.05         0.08        0.10        0.12
                                           (0.01)       (0.02)      (0.03)      (0.04)

             Bootstrapped p-value          0.008        0.005       0.007       0.012
             Observations                   106          106         106         106
             Adjusted R2                   0.299        0.353       0.372       0.372

Sample period: 1986-2014. Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consoli-
dated Financial Statements (Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of
assets that either reprice, or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature
or reprice within a year, all scaled by total consolidated assets. Income Gap is the average bank-level
income gap. rx(n) is the excess 1-year return of GSW zero-coupon bonds of maturity n. CP factor is
the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) factor and is constructed as in Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) over
the 1964-2013 period. Standard errors are computed using the reverse regression approach of Ho-
drick(1992).  ,  , and  means statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance,
where the p-values are computed using the bootstrap approach described in Section 1.2.1.




                                                  67
                      Table IA.6: Exposure gt and Bond Excess Returns

                                                (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)
                                               rx(2)      rx(3)     rx(4)      rx(5)
                 gt                           2.19**     3.52**    4.57**     5.34**
                                              (0.87)     (1.40)    (1.93)     (2.46)

                 Constant                      -0.01     -0.01      -0.02     -0.02
                                               (0.01)    (0.02)     (0.02)    (0.03)

                 Bootstrapped p-value          0.013     0.015      0.017      0.032
                 Observations                   106       106        106        106
                 Adjusted R2                   0.147     0.171      0.172      0.161

Sample period:      1986-2014.        Note:    gt is computed from the quarterly Consolidated
Financial Statements (Files FR Y-9C). We compute, at the bank-level:                      git = 1 -
($ amount of rate-sensitive assets-$ amount of rate-sensitive liabilitiesit )/$ Book Equityit , where the
$ amount of rate sensitive assets corresponds to item bhck3197 and $ amount of rate-sensitive li-
abilities corresponds to the sum of long-term debt that reprices within one year (item bhck3298),
long-term debt that matures within one year (bhck3409), variable-rate preferred stock (bhck3408)
and interest-bearing deposit liabilities that reprice or mature within one year (bhck3296). gt is then
the equal-weighted average of git across all banks in our sample. rx(n) is the excess 1-year return of
GSW zero-coupon bonds of maturity of maturity n. We multiply all coefficients by 100 for readability.
Standard errors are computed using the reverse regression approach of Hodrick(1992).  ,  , and 
means statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance, where the p-values are
computed using the bootstrap approach described in Section 1.2.1.




                                                   68
               Table IA.7: Bank Liquidity Risk and Bond Excess Returns

                                               (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)
                                              rx(2)     rx(3)     rx(4)     rx(5)
                 BB (VW)                     -0.00     -0.00     -0.00     -0.00
                                             (0.00)    (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)

                 Constant                     0.01      0.02      0.03      0.03
                                             (0.00)    (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)

                 Bootstrapped p-value        0.707     0.708     0.731     0.768
                 Observations                 106       106       106       106
                 Adjusted R2                 -0.003    -0.002    -0.003    -0.004

Sample period: 1986-2014. Note: The liquidity risk measure is the bank liquidity creation index
of Berger and Bouwman (2009) which we value-weight by total gross assets across banks (BB). We
normalize this measure to have standard deviation of 1% in our sample and flip its sign so that a low
value reflects high risk. rx(n) is the excess 1-year return of GSW zero-coupon bonds of maturity of
maturity n. Standard errors are computed using the reverse regression approach of Hodrick(1992).
 
 , , and  means statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance, where the
p-values are computed using the bootstrap approach described in Section 1.2.1.




                                                 69
                Figure IA.1: Income Gap: Derivatives and Largest Banks
           .4
           .3
           .2
           .1
           0




            1985q1       1990q1       1995q1      2000q1       2005q1       2010q1        2015q1
                                                   date

                            Gap equal-weighted                       Gap value-weighted
                            Gap never use derivatives                Gap top 10



Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consolidated Financial Statements
(Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of assets that either reprice,
or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature or reprice within a year, all
scaled by total consolidated assets. The solid black line represents the average income gap, computed
across all U.S. bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $1Bil or more. The solid red
line represents the weighted-average income gap, where we use BHCs' total consolidated assets as
weights. The dotted black line represents the average income gap across banks that never reports
derivative positions in their financial statements. The dotted red line represents the average income
gap across the ten largest banks.




                                                   70
                      Figure IA.2: Income Gap: Deposits and Leverage
           2
           1
           0
           -1
           -2




            1985q1       1990q1      1995q1       2000q1       2005q1       2010q1       2015q1
                                                   date

                         gap                               gap w/ deposits
                         gap scaled by equity              gap w/ deposits scaled by equity



Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consolidated Financial Statements
(Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of assets that either reprice,
or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature or reprice within a year, all
scaled by total consolidated assets. The solid black line represents the average income gap, computed
across all U.S. bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $1Bil or more. The orange line
is the average income gap, including core deposits. The blue line scales the gap by equity rather than
assets. The red line includes core deposits and scales by equity. All series are standardized to have
mean 0 and unit standard deviation.




                                                   71
                                 Figure IA.3: Longer Maturities



                       0.0




                      -0.5




                      -1.0




                      -1.5



                             2            4              6           8            10
                                                  Maturity(years)

                                              (a) Coefficients




                      0.18




                      0.15




                      0.12




                      0.09
                             2            4             6            8            10
                                                  Maturity(years)

                                              (b) Adjusted R2

Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consolidated Financial Statements
(Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of assets that either reprice,
or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature or reprice within a year,
all scaled by total consolidated assets. Income gap is the average income gap, computed across all US
bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $1Bil or more. We regress the excess 1-year
holding return of zero-coupon bonds of maturity n on the average income gap. We obtain zero-coupon
bond series with long maturities from Gurkaynak72  et al. (2007). Panel (a) of the figure reports, for each
maturity n, the coefficient on the average income gap, as well as its 95% confidence interval. Panel (b)
reports the corresponding R2 of each of these regressions.
                  Figure IA.4: Forecasts of 5-Year Treasury Bond Returns
           .1
           .05
           0
           -.05




             1985q1     1990q1       1995q1         2000q1     2005q1      2010q1       2015q1
                                                     date

                                  Income gap                   Cochrane-Piazzesi
                                  3 PCs of yields              5 PCs of yields



Note: The figure presents best linear forecasts of the 5-year Treasury excess returns using the income
gap, the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) combination of yields, the first three principal components of
yields, and the first five principal components of yields. The bank-level income gap is computed from
the quarterly Consolidated Financial Statements (Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference
between the $ amount of assets that either reprice, or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of
the liabilities that mature or reprice within a year, all scaled by total consolidated assets. The solid
black line represents the forecast based on the average income gap, computed across all U.S. bank
holding companies with total consolidated assets of $1Bil or more. The principal components of yields
are extracted from Gurkaynak et al. (2007) yields.




                                                    73
              Figure IA.5: Estimated vs. Model-Implied Coefficients




This figure shows the model-implied coefficients of a predictive regression of bond
excess returns of maturity  on banks' average income gap (y-axis) plotted against
the empirical coefficients (x-axis). The line corresponds to the 45 degree line.




                                        74
           Figure IA.6: Sensitivity Analysis on Calibration of Duration 




This figure shows estimates of the relative-risk aversion parameter  for alternative
calibration of 1/, the time-to-maturity of the long-term asset. The model estimation
is detailed in Section 6




                                        75
              Figure IA.7: Asset and Liability Components of the Income Gap
           .1
           .05
           0
           -.05
           -.1




             1985q1     1990q1       1995q1       2000q1       2005q1       2010q1         2015q1
                                                   date

                             gap
                             Non-exposed assets                - Non-exposed liabilities



Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consolidated Financial Statements
(Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of assets that either reprice,
or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature or reprice within a year,
all scaled by total consolidated assets. The dark line represents the average income gap, computed
across all U.S. bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $1Bil or more. The blue line
represents the average bank-level ratio of assets that either reprice or mature within a year normalized
by total consolidated assets. The red line represents the opposite of the average bank-level ratio of
liabilities that either reprice or mature within a year normalized by total consolidated assets.




                                                  76
                  Figure IA.8: Income Gap and Liquidity Risk Measures
           2
           0
           -2
           -4




            1985q1      1990q1       1995q1       2000q1       2005q1      2010q1       2015q1
                                                   date

                                           Gap
                                           LMI                   LCR
                                           BB (EW)               BB (VW)



Note: The figure presents the income gap and four bank liquidity risk measures. The bank-level
income gap is computed from the quarterly Consolidated Financial Statements (Files FR Y-9C) and
corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of assets that either reprice, or mature, within
one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature or reprice within a year, all scaled by total
consolidated assets. The thick solid line represents the forecast based on the average income gap,
computed across all US bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $1Bil or more. The
thin solid line is the liquidity mismatch index (LMI) of Bai et al. (2018). The dashed line is the Basel
Committee's liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) as constructed by Choi and Choi (2016). The dotted and
dotted-dashed lines are the bank liquidity creation index of Berger and Bouwman (2009), which we
equal-weight or value-weight by total gross assets across banks (BB). All measures are normalized to
have unit standard deviation and with sign chosen so that a low value reflects high risk.




                                                  77
                                     Figure IA.9: Income Gap and Asset Quantities




                                                                               .8
           .2




                                                                                                                    .2
                                                                               ARM Fraction of Issuance
                                                                                                   .6
              .15




                                                                                                                    .15
      Income Gap




                                                                                         .4
           .1




                                                                                                                    .1
                                                                                .2
           .05




                                                                                                                    .05
                                                                               0
              1985q1   1990q1   1995q1   2000q1   2005q1        2010q1   2015q1                                      1985q1     1990q1      1995q1                               2000q1   2005q1   2010q1   2015q1
                                          date                                                                                                                                    date

                                Income Gap                                                                                                             Income Gap
                                ARM Fraction of Issuance                                                                                               Non int. bearing deposits



      (a) Share of Adjustable-Rate Mortgages.                                                                      (b) Share of Non Interest-Bearing De-
                                                                                                                   posits.



                                                                                                                                                                           4.5
                                                       .2




                                                                                                                                              Maturity-weighted Debt / GDP
                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                          .15
                                                  Income Gap




                                                                                                                                                        3      3.5
                                                       .1




                                                                                                                                              2 2.5
                                                       .05




                                                          1985q1   1990q1    1995q1                       2000q1   2005q1     2010q1     2015q1
                                                                                                           date

                                                                            Income Gap
                                                                            Maturity-weighted Debt / GDP



                                                                    (c) Supply of Treasuries.

Note: The bank-level income gap is computed from the quarterly Consolidated Financial Statements
(Files FR Y-9C) and corresponds to the difference between the $ amount of assets that either reprice,
or mature, within one year, and the $ amount of the liabilities that mature or reprice within a year, all
scaled by total consolidated assets. The dark line represents the average income gap, computed across
all U.S. bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $1Bil or more. In panel (a), the
dashed red line represents the quarterly ratio of issuance of adjustable-rate mortgages normalized by
total issuance of mortgages. We use the Monthly Interest Rate Survey to compute this ratio. In panel
(b), the dashed red line represents the average of the quarterly bank-level ratio of non-interest-bearing
deposits normalized by total consolidated assets. In panel (c), the dashed red line is the maturity-
weighted Treasuries supply measure of Greenwood and Vayanos (2014).




                                                                                                          78
