                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               HOW DO OLDER WORKERS USE NONTRADITIONAL JOBS?

                                       Alicia H. Munnell
                                    Geoffrey T. Sanzenbacher
                                       Abigail N. Walters

                                       Working Paper 26379
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26379


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




The research reported herein was pursuant to a grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. The
findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views
of the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation or Boston College. This paper is released to inform interested
parties of research and to encourage discussion. Any views expressed on statistical,
methodological, technical, or operational issues are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, nor do they necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Alicia H. Munnell, Geoffrey T. Sanzenbacher, and Abigail N. Walters. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How do Older Workers use Nontraditional Jobs?
Alicia H. Munnell, Geoffrey T. Sanzenbacher, and Abigail N. Walters
NBER Working Paper No. 26379
October 2019
JEL No. J26,J32

                                           ABSTRACT

Working consistently through one's fifties and early sixties is key to attaining retirement security.
However, workers also need access to retirement plans ­ so they can continue to accumulate
resources ­ and health insurance ­ so they can avoid withdrawing assets in the event of a health
shock. Yet, despite the fact that a large literature focuses on nontraditional jobs that often lack
these benefits, it is unclear how older workers use these jobs and what the consequences are. This
paper uses the Health and Retirement Study to identify nontraditional jobs and relies on sequence
analysis to explore how workers ages 50-62 use them. The results suggest that the majority of
nontraditional jobs are used by workers consistently, and that fewer workers use these jobs briefly
or as a bridge to retirement. In the end, workers consistently in nontraditional jobs end up with
less retirement income and are also worse off by a more holistic measure of well-being ­ the
incidence of depression. Given this situation, expanding benefits to workers in non-traditional
jobs could increase their well-being in retirement.


Alicia H. Munnell                                 Abigail N. Walters
Center for Retirement Research                    Center for Retirement Research
at Boston College                                 at Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue                           140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467                           Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
munnell@bc.edu                                    walteran@bc.edu

Geoffrey T. Sanzenbacher
Boston College Department
of Economics 140
Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
sanzenba@bc.edu
Abstract
       Working consistently through one's fifties and early sixties is key to attaining retirement
security. However, workers also need access to retirement plans ­ so they can continue to
accumulate resources ­ and health insurance ­ so they can avoid withdrawing assets in the event
of a health shock. Workers without access to these benefits will likely struggle as they approach
retirement, both financially and perhaps emotionally, as they deal with the stress of being
unprepared. Yet, despite the fact that a large literature focuses on nontraditional jobs that often
lack these benefits, it is unclear how older workers use these jobs and what the consequences are.
If some older workers use nontraditional work for much of their late careers, then they likely will
end up worse off. If, instead, older workers use nontraditional jobs only temporarily, then it is
unlikely that their situation will substantially change. This paper uses the Health and Retirement
Study to identify nontraditional jobs and relies on sequence analysis to explore how workers ages
50-62 use them. The results suggest that the majority of nontraditional jobs are used by workers
consistently, and that fewer workers use these jobs briefly or as a bridge to retirement. In the
end, workers consistently in nontraditional jobs end up with less retirement income than other
workers and are more likely to be depressed, even controlling for their financial situation and
depression prior to age 50. Given this situation, policymakers may want to consider ways to
expand benefits to workers in these jobs to improve their well-being in retirement.
Introduction
         While working consistently through one's fifties and early sixties is key to achieving
retirement security, working ­ by itself ­ may not be enough. Workers in jobs that lack
retirement and health benefits are at risk of a retirement income shortfall. Few households save
for retirement outside of employer-sponsored plans, and poor health drains resources for those
without health insurance. Yet, despite the increased focus on "nontraditional" jobs ­ jobs that
usually lack these benefits ­ it is unclear how older workers use these jobs and how they might
affect well-being approaching retirement. 1 If some older workers end up in nontraditional work
for much of their later careers, then they likely will end up worse off financially, and perhaps
emotionally too as they struggle with the possibility of a less secure retirement. If, instead, older
workers use nontraditional jobs only temporarily before returning to traditional work or as a
bridge to retirement, then it is unlikely that their situation will substantially change.
         To gain a better understanding of the uses and impact of nontraditional jobs in workers'
late careers, this project follows workers from ages 50 through 62 in the Health and Retirement
Study (HRS), and determines at each age whether they are in a traditional job, a nontraditional
job, not working, or retired. 2 The next step is to use sequence analysis to group older workers
who have similar employment patterns, calculate the share following each pattern, and compare
the personal characteristics of each group. Finally, the project will use the employment
groupings from the sequence analysis as explanatory variables in two sets of regression analyses.
The first set of regressions will focus on the effects of each sequence on the availability of
retirement resources. The second set of regressions will look at a more holistic measure of well-
being ­ the incidence of depression. The results will shed light on the ways in which older
workers use nontraditional work, how the use of that work varies by socioeconomic status, and
ultimately its impact on the workers' using it.
         The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The first section provides
background on how older workers use nontraditional jobs late in their careers. The second
section describes the data and provides details on how nontraditional jobs are identified in the
HRS, and also offers a comparison to other estimates of the prevalence of these jobs. The third



1
 See Katz and Krueger (2016, 2019).
2
 In practice, not working is defined as earning less than $5,000 per year, unemployed, or out of the labor force
(which includes disabled individuals).
section describes the methodology behind sequence analysis as well as the regression
formulations used, while the fourth section presents the results. The final section concludes that
just 26 percent of the sample works in a traditional job with benefits throughout their 50s and
early 60s ­ this "ideal" pattern of employment is just not that common. Of the remainder, four
patterns emerge: 1) those who retire well before age 62 (21 percent); 2) those who are only
weakly attached to the labor force (16 percent); 3) those who work consistently, but in
nontraditional jobs (11 percent); and 4) those who work consistently and mainly in traditional
jobs, but with brief periods of nontraditional work or not working (26 percent). Regarding their
well-being, individuals in nontraditional jobs consistently have lower projected retirement
income and are more likely to experience depression than otherwise similar individuals who are
in traditional jobs consistently, even conditional on their lifetime income and incidence of
depression at age 50. Expanding benefits to workers in these jobs ­ for example, through access
to retirement savings vehicles such as state-level auto-IRAs ­ may therefore be a valuable policy
goal.


Background
           Despite the possibility that nontraditional jobs could occur at any time in a worker's late
career, almost all research on how nontraditional work fits into late-career employment patterns
has been focused on jobs that serve as a stepping-stone to ease the transition into retirement. 3
Johnson and Kawachi (2007) find that older workers who switch jobs near retirement are likely
to end up in a nontraditional job that does not offer benefits, but also report greater satisfaction
with those jobs, in part due to less stress and lighter physical demands. Some evidence also
exists that workers use these lower-compensating jobs to gain flexibility in their schedules as
they approach retirement (James, Swanberg, and McKechnie 2011). Indeed, Cahill, Giandrea,
and Quinn (2011) find that more than 60 percent of older workers who left full-time career jobs
moved to this sort of "bridge job." In other words, this literature would suggest that using
nontraditional jobs as a transition to retirement may be somewhat common.
           A limited literature also suggests that some older workers use these jobs more frequently.
Specifically, research shows that workers who were in nontraditional jobs for an extended period
have difficulty transitioning back to traditional work (Fournier et al. 2011). For example, about

3
    Quinn and Burkhauser (1990) and Ruhm (1990) provide early reviews of partial retirement and bridge jobs.


                                                          2
one-fifth of temporary workers become trapped in a "precarious job carousel" where they cycle
between bad jobs and no jobs (Barbieri and Scherer 2009; Fuller and Stecy-Hildebrandt 2015).
However, it is unclear exactly how common this outcome is for older workers specifically.
         While researchers have not focused on how older workers use nontraditional jobs in their
late-career working patterns, other work has used sequence analysis to investigate labor force
participation at older ages more generally. For example, Calvo, Madero-Cabib, and Staudinger
(2017) use sequence analysis to examine how workers' labor force status evolves in their 60s.
Their analysis considers full- and part-time employment and non-employment to show that few
workers follow the transition from full-time work to complete retirement at age 65. Instead, the
retirement process is much more diverse and includes early and late retirement, as well as people
who remain partly retired all the way up to age 70. However, their study does not consider the
traditional or nontraditional nature of any jobs and does not focus on the 50s, a time of life when
people should be working to prepare for a secure retirement. 4


Data
         Given the lack of research on the use of nontraditional jobs throughout late careers, this
paper uses the 1992 to 2016 waves of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), a biennial
longitudinal survey of older Americans to characterize workers' labor force patterns from ages
50 through 62 and to see how nontraditional work fits in. The sample consists of members of the
Original HRS, War Baby, and Early Baby Boomer birth cohorts, for whom data on work history
are currently available through age 62. Although the analysis seeks to follow workers from ages
50 to 62, to increase the sample size the paper also includes those entering the HRS at 52 and
imputes these individuals' age 50 work status. 5 The sample is further restricted to respondents
who live to at least 62, do not otherwise exit the HRS prior to 62, do not have missing
demographic variables (described below), and work at least one time between ages 50-62.
Within this sample, some people are missing information for individual waves ­ if this omission
happens for three or more waves the individual is dropped from the analysis; if it is for two or


4
  Gustman and Steinmeier (2000) also examine patterns of full-time work, partial retirement, and complete
retirement but do not use sequence analysis; their analysis is limited to the first four waves of the HRS, so the
number of potential patterns is more manageable.
5
  All imputations are carried out using STATA's mi (multiple imputation) framework, as described in Halpin
(2013).


                                                           3
fewer waves then their work status is imputed for the missing periods. The final sample consists
of 4,174 respondents (see Table 1 for detail on the exclusions).
        Once the sample is identified, the next step is to identify each individual's work status at
each wave from ages 50 through 62. For the sequence analysis, each individual is assigned one
of four statuses in each wave: 1) not working (but not retired); 2) retired; 3) working in a
traditional job; and 4) working in a nontraditional job. Not working is defined as earning less
than $5,000 a year but not claiming to be fully retired. 6 "Retired" is defined as not working and
classified as retired by the RAND labor force status variable. Among those who are working, the
key distinction is between traditional and nontraditional work. The issue is how to define
nontraditional work.


Defining Nontraditional Work
        Defining nontraditional work is complicated ­ an agreed upon definition does not exist,
and different definitions yield vastly different estimates. Much of the existing literature has
defined this type of work based on the nature of the relationship workers have with employers.
Using this approach, researchers have come up with a wide range of estimates. The narrowest
definitions of nontraditional work are limited to workers in the "gig economy" (e.g., Uber, Task
Rabbit) or in short-term employment relationships. 7 These groups include just 1 percent and 2
percent of workers, respectively. 8 At the other extreme, the U.S. Government Accountability
Office's broadest concept, which includes the self-employed and those in part-time jobs, covers
31 percent of the workforce. 9 In between these extremes is the definition of "alternative" work
used by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) ­ which has received considerable attention
through research by Katz and Krueger. 10 The BLS definition includes independent contractors
and workers who are either with a temp agency, employed by a contract firm, or on-call. Under
this definition, the prevalence of nontraditional work hovers around 10 percent. Another
definition in between the two extremes is that of "1099 workers," as used in a 2019 study by


6
  This definition also includes those who claim not to be working because they are disabled, unemployed, or
otherwise out of the labor force.
7
  Short-term jobs are defined as expected to last less than one year.
8
  See Farrell and Grieg (2016); U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2018); and Collins et al. (2019).
9
  U.S. Government Accountability Office (2015).
10
   Katz and Krueger (2016, 2019).



                                                         4
Collins et al. These workers are self-employed individuals who work for firms (i.e. freelancers
and "gig" work) but do not fall under normal employment classification rules, and file 1099 tax
forms. Using this definition, nontraditional work would account for 11.8 percent of the
workforce. 11
          Regardless of how nontraditional jobs are defined, the common thread is that they often
lack basic benefits, such as health insurance and retirement plans, and/or have volatile earnings
and employment. For this reason, our analysis adopts a more direct measure of nontraditional
jobs based on such job characteristics. Specifically, the analysis will define nontraditional work
in two ways: 1) broadly as any job lacking both health insurance and retirement benefits; and 2)
more narrowly as a job without these benefits that also has some measure of job instability. 12 In
the HRS, these characteristics can be identified for an individual's current "main" job at the time
of their HRS interview. Because these characteristics cannot be easily identified for jobs held in
between HRS interviews, the sequence analysis is limited to "snapshots" of individual's
employment status at the seven interviews occurring between ages 50 and 62. 13
          Given the variation in prevalence across the various definitions, it is useful to see how a
definition based on job characteristics like benefits compares to the more employer-employee
relationship definitions from the existing literature. To ensure an accurate comparison, the
analysis requires a dataset with questions on both the worker-employer relationships used in the
other definitions presented above, and job characteristics like the availability of benefits that are
used in this paper. For this purpose, the BLS's Current Population Survey (CPS) is the best
source.
          For the comparison of the various definitions that exist in the literature to the one used in
this paper, we first compute the share of workers ages 50-62 in 2017 who are in employer



11
   Collins et al. (2019).
12
   One potential problem with identifying health insurance being offered by an employer is that the line of
questioning in the HRS only asks if individuals are covered by their employers' plan, not whether they are offered it.
So married individuals with coverage through their spouse would look like they are not offered health insurance.
Looking at the CPS, it turns out roughly 70 percent of married individuals with health insurance through their
spouse were also offered it at their job ­ we assume that if a person's spouse has employer health insurance that they
were offered coverage through their employer. This approach provides a conservative estimate of nontraditional
work.
13
   While the questions necessary to derive the nontraditional definition used in this paper are only asked about the
main job, it seems unlikely that individuals would have health and retirement benefits through a job that they do not
consider to be their main source of employment, so any effect on the sequence analysis of focusing on the main job
is likely to be limited.


                                                          5
relationships under the standard BLS definition. Next, the share of workers in jobs without
health insurance and retirement benefits is calculated ­ i.e., our broad "no benefits" definition of
nontraditional work (unfortunately, the CPS does not have the right variables to get at the
measures of instability used in the narrow definition). Under the BLS measure, 11 percent of
workers in 2017 were in nontraditional jobs, compared to 20 percent under the broader no-
benefits measure (see the solid bars in Figure 1, which also includes other definitions for
additional context). The estimates in Figure 1 are for a single point in time. Figure 2 compares
the two measures over 1994-2016, and it still finds a large and persistent gap.
        Given the considerable gap between the two definitions of nontraditional work, the
question is: which does a better job of picking up the vulnerable workers that researchers are
concerned with? It turns out, compared to the workers defined as nontraditional under the BLS
definition, the additional workers picked up by the broader no-benefits definition tend to have
shorter job tenure and lower socioeconomic status (see Table 2). 14 The basic issue is that the
BLS definition includes many independent contractors, and those individuals tend to have been
employed in that type of work for a while with relatively high incomes even though they may
lack benefits. 15 By picking up many employees working without benefits instead of workers
who lack benefits only because they employ themselves, the definition used in this paper and
based on the presence of benefits picks up more vulnerable workers than the BLS measure,
making it a better choice for this paper.
        Given that the benefits-based definition used in this paper seems to appropriately capture
vulnerable workers, it is worth exploring how the definition looks in the longitudinal data needed
to do sequence analysis ­ the HRS. Reassuringly, the HRS data show that the percentage of
workers ages 50-62 in jobs with no benefits is generally similar to that using the CPS data
despite a noticeable difference early in the period (see the gray versus the red lines in Figure 3). 16
As noted above, the concern over nontraditional jobs stems not just from a lack of benefits, but


14
   The Current Population Survey May Supplement does not ask earnings questions for all workers.
15
   Authors' calculation from the CPS. For example, the median tenure for an independent contractor ages 50-62 is
15 years, much higher than for the typical worker, and they have an average household income of $85,000, similar
to traditional workers under the BLS definition.
16
   The definition shown in Figure 3 defines nontraditional as lacking benefits. Another approach would be to use the
longitudinal nature of the data to see if the job ever offered those benefits. Such an approach reduces the share of
those in nontraditional jobs by 3-4 percentage points. This approach is not used as the default since it seems
relevant that the person said the job was lacking those benefits in a given year.



                                                         6
also a lack of stability in earnings or employment. Some of the jobs that lack benefits will be
stable, and these workers may be less vulnerable. So, the paper also uses a more narrow
definition that takes into account job stability. This definition will count a job as nontraditional
if it lacks benefits and: 1) has hours that are variable at some point during the job; or 2) if the
worker is self-employed with no benefits and with no employees. 17 Under this definition, the
percentage of jobs that are nontraditional falls from 16.9 percent to 7.6 percent, somewhat lower
than the standard BLS definition of nontraditional workers.


Methodology

        With each worker assigned a status as not working, retired, working in a traditional job,
or working in a nontraditional job, the next step is to identify various patterns of work for ages
50-62 using sequence analysis. Then, the project turns to analyzing the relationship between
these employment sequences and retirement resources using a regression analysis.


Sequence Analysis
        Sequence analysis is a relatively novel technique in the social sciences; its strength is that
the outcome of interest is an individual's entire employment history rather than employment
status or job transition at a given age. The goal of sequence analysis is to group together workers
with similar employment statuses at similar times and in a similar order. Consider the
hypothetical example below, which shows how three workers move between traditional work
(T), nontraditional work (N), not-working (U), and retired (R).


Example 1. Employment Sequences for Hypothetical Workers

                                                         Age
                    50           52           54         56            58           60          62
Worker A            T            T            N           N            T            T           R
Worker B            T            T            N           T            T            T           R
Worker C            T            T            N           N            N            U           R




17
  The study includes the self-employed with no benefits and with no employees as nontraditional work to capture
those who run a small business or are independent contractors.


                                                        7
       In this example, the sequence analysis will likely group workers A and B together,
because they both started as traditional workers, used nontraditional work temporarily before
returning to traditional work, and then retired at the same age. The only difference is small: how
long they experienced nontraditional work. That experience differs distinctly from the pattern
for worker C, who moved from traditional to nontraditional work at the same age as A and B,
and retired at the same age, but never returned to traditional work.
       In more technical terms, sequence analysis compares all of the sequences for sample
members and constructs a matrix of how different each sequence is from the others. The
difference between sequences is based on the minimum number of modifications needed to
transform one sequence into another. A modification can take one of two forms. The first form
is a substitution in which the state of one sequence is changed to match the state from another
(e.g., changing work status at age 56 from nontraditional to traditional so that workers A and B
have the same sequence). The second form is an insertion or deletion. An insertion occurs
where a state is plugged into a sequence and every other state pushed back one wave to an older
age. A deletion occurs when a state is removed and every subsequent state pulled forward to a
younger age. Insertions and deletions typically happen simultaneously: a state is inserted and
another state is deleted to preserve the number of observations.
       To determine the difference between two sequences, the analysis follows the literature
and uses optimal matching analysis (OMA). OMA requires that each substitution and insertion
or deletion be assigned a "cost" to calculate the difference between sequences. The simplest way
to calculate these differences would be to add up the number of substitutions and
insertions/deletions ­ in other words to assign a uniform cost of one ­ but this approach has
several disadvantages. Most notably, it does not recognize that some substitutions reflect much
bigger changes than others ­ e.g., substituting a traditional job for a person who is not working at
all may be a bigger leap than substituting a status of retired. Simply assigning substitution costs
based on theories of which transitions are more likely to run the risk of being highly arbitrary, so
this project uses an intuitive metric. Observed transition probabilities ­ transitions that are
observed frequently in the data ­ e.g., from not working to retired ­ are assigned a lower
substitution cost than those that are uncommon. Once substitution costs are assigned, this paper




                                                  8
follows the approach commonly taken in the literature and sets the cost of insertions/deletions to
one-tenth of the highest substitution cost.18
         The end result of OMA is a so-called pairwise distance matrix, which contains the sum of
the costs of all substitutions and insertion/deletions required to transform each sequence into
another. To group similar sequences together, a Hierarchical Cluster Analysis is used to detect
groupings among the individual sequences with respect to their pairwise distances. 19 The last
step is to determine the number of groups for the analysis to detect. To choose the number of
groups, the process was run assuming 2 through 12 groupings, with the final choice reflecting the
number that maximized the Caliniskin and Harabasz index such that the resulting sequences
made theoretical sense. 20


Regression Methodology
         With the sequences in hand, the next question is how individuals' employment patterns
relate to their available retirement resources and their emotional well-being at age 62. The issue
is that people experiencing different patterns of non-employment, retirement, traditional work,
and nontraditional work in their 50s and early 60s will also have different initial characteristics
that may cause them to fall into those sequences, and those initial characteristics are likely to
affect both their preparedness and their emotional well-being.
         For example, workers frequently doing nontraditional work may have less education and
therefore contribute less to retirement accounts even when they have the resources. Failure to
control for education would therefore exaggerate the negative role of a sequence showing
frequent nontraditional work ­ i.e., these workers would indeed have less, but some of the effect
would be due to their education level. Or, workers who spend their late careers in nontraditional
jobs may have spent their early careers in these jobs too, leading to less pension coverage earlier


18
   Assigning the insertion and deletion cost to one =-tenth of the highest substitution cost tends to create sensible
sequence groupings (MacIndoe and Abbott 2004; Hollister 2009).
19
   Specifically, the project used Ward's hierarchical clustering linkage criteria to group sequences that are similar to
each other such that the groupings minimize the difference between sequences within the group and maximize the
difference between sequences among the groups.
20
   The Caliniskin Harabasz index is a measure of the extent to which sequences within clusters are similar to one
another and sequences across clusters are dissimilar (Cornwell, 2015). Specifically, the index is the ratio of the
between group sum of squared differences to the within group sum of squared differences. Sequence analysis is
vulnerable to claims that the results are the consequence of an ad hoc trial and error. To test the validity of the
results, this paper used different cost assignments and dropped imputed respondents and achieved similar results.
For critiques of sequence analysis and responses to those critiques, see Aisenbrey and Fasang (2010).


                                                           9
in life or lower lifetime incomes and therefore lower retirement income. In this case, it would
not necessarily be the late-career experience of these jobs driving poor outcomes, but earlier
experiences as well. On the emotional health side, if workers who are able to maintain
traditional employment throughout their 50s and early 60s were less likely to be depressed
entering their late careers, then failure to control for age 50 emotional health would exaggerate
the benefits of the traditional work sequence. Therefore, controlling for both demographic
characteristics and an individual's initial state (i.e., prior to age 50) regarding financial or
emotional health is crucial to understanding how the late-career use of nontraditional jobs
impacts well-being approaching retirement.
         The paper therefore estimates two sets of regressions in which the individual's
assignment of a sequence group serves as the independent variable of interest. The first set of
regressions use retirement income at age 62 as the dependent variable. These regressions are
estimated as quantile regressions at the median to lessen the impact of outlier levels of retirement
income and control for demographics and initial health, the availability of retirement plans, and
lifetime income prior to late career. The complete equation to be estimated is:
                               

               ,62 = 0 +   , + ,50  + ,50 + ,50 + ,50 +  + 
                              =2

where  ,62 is the log of the individual's retirement income at age 62: defined benefit pension
income, Social Security benefits, and annuitized defined contribution plan and other financial
wealth. 21 The variable , is an indicator for whether person i was assigned to sequence group j.
Therefore,  is the predicted percentage point change in median retirement resources associated
with being in sequence group j relative to the base sequence group, which is assigned as the one
with the highest amount of traditional work. The vector ,50 contains demographic
characteristics that could ultimately affect an individual's preparedness, like education, gender,
race/ethnicity, and their age-50 marital status. 22 ,50 is an index of the individual's initial health
at age 50 that is based on objective measures, with higher values indicating worse health,



21
   Social Security wealth is obtained based on RAND imputations that use Social Security administrative data.
Defined-contribution and financial wealth are assumed to be annuitized at a rate consistent with private market data
from ImmediateAnnuities.com.
22
   For those who are not observed at age 50, the closest wave to age 50 is used.



                                                         10
whereas  enters year of sample entry fixed effects. 23 Finally, ,50 and  ,50 are coverage by
retirement plans and lifetime income, respectively, at age 50.
         The second set of regressions is similar to the first, except that the dependent variable
here is the incidence of depression and the controls include depression prior to late career instead
of lifetime income. These regressions are estimated as a probit, with average marginal effects
reported in the results section below. The full specification to be estimated is:
                                   
                  
                      ,62   = 0 +   , + ,50  + ,50 +  ,50 +  ,50 +  + 
                                  =2

Where   ,62 is the latent propensity of the individual to be depressed at age 62,  ,50 is an
indicator for depression at age 50, and the other variables are the same as defined above.
         The hypothesis is that, even conditional on the initial characteristics described, sequences
containing primarily traditional work with little interruption will be associated with higher
retirement income and a lower incidence of depression at age 62. The next-best sequence will
occur where nontraditional work is used sparingly as a stopgap, followed by long spells of
nontraditional work. The sequences with the worst outcomes ­ i.e., lowest retirement income or
highest incidence of depression ­ will be those associated with long spells of nontraditional work
­ in other words, weak attachment to the labor force ­ or very early retirement. This hypothesis
means that relative to the base sequence of consistent traditional work, the coefficients  will be
increasingly negative for the retirement income median regressions, and increasingly positive for
the depression probit regressions as they move from mostly traditional work to mostly
nontraditional work and finally to unattached.


Results
         This section first presents the results of the sequence analysis, before turning to the
regression results.




23
   In practice, eight health conditions and five limitations to activities of daily living are used: The health conditions
are: 1) high blood pressure with medication; 2) diabetes with insulin; 3) cancer of any kind, seeing doctor; 4)
activity limiting lung disease; 5) heart condition, taking medication; 6) emotional/psychological problems; 7) stroke
with problems afterward; and 8) arthritis with medication. The limitations to activities of daily living involve
needing help with: 1) bathing; 2) getting dressed; 3) eating; 4) using a map; and 5) walking.


                                                           11
Sequence Analysis
         The results show late-career employment patterns of HRS workers and how
nontraditional jobs fit into those patterns. The sequence groupings were calculated for each
definition of nontraditional work, the broad no-benefits definition and the narrower definition
that includes both no-benefits and instability.
         With the broad no-benefits definition of nontraditional work, five work patterns emerge
(see Figure 4). The first two involve individuals who do not work consistently throughout their
50s and 60s. These individuals are either in an "Early Retirement" sequence with retirement in
their 50s (21 percent of sample members) or are in a "Weak Attachment" sequence, with
frequent spells of not working despite not retiring (16 percent). The next three sequences consist
of people who work most of the time, and include sequences of work that are: "Mostly
Nontraditional" (11 percent); "Mostly Traditional" (26 percent); and "All Traditional" (26
percent). The "ideal" employment pattern of working throughout one's 50s and early 60s in a
job with benefits is rare ­ less than a third of workers do it. Although somewhat surprising, the
result does not seem to be an artifact of the HRS data used here; individuals in the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics (PSID) from 1998-2010 showed almost the same low share of workers fitting
the ideal pattern. 24
         With respect to how nontraditional jobs are used within those sequences, it turns out that
the vast majority of nontraditional work is done by those who do it often ­ it is used less often as
a bridge to retirement or a stopgap to unemployment. To illustrate, Table 3 shows the
distribution of nontraditional jobs across these sequence groups ­ under the broad definition,
16.9 percent of all jobs are nontraditional. The table shows that 53.7 percent of all nontraditional
jobs (9.1/16.9) are within the Mostly Nontraditional sequence. The comparable number is 11.0
and 25.7 percent for both the Early Retirement and Weak Attachment sequences, representing a
total of 36.7 percent of all nontraditional jobs. The remaining 9.6 percent of nontraditional jobs
fit into the Mainly Traditional sequence. Overall, older workers tend to fall into two very
different groups: they use these jobs either often or only briefly.

24
   In that dataset, both retirement plans and health insurance were identified for a sample of 403 individuals ages 50-
52 in 1998 (the same start wave as the War Baby Cohort in the HRS), who worked at least once, and who were
observed continuously through 2010. In this sample, only 24.6 percent worked in a traditional job the entire time ­
remarkably similar to the number in the HRS. It seems that it really is not that common to be in a consistent,
traditional job between ages 50 and 62.



                                                          12
         Turning to the more narrow definition of nontraditional work (see Figure 5) ­ jobs with
no benefits and less stability ­ the fundamental nature of the sequence groupings is unchanged,
although a sixth group differentiates very early retirements from those who simply retire prior to
age 62. 25 The main difference between the two definitions is intuitive ­ sequences involving
nontraditional work are less common. Table 3 shows that the majority of nontraditional jobs are
done by the small percentage of workers in the Mostly Nontraditional sequence, who use
nontraditional jobs consistently throughout their 50s and 60s. And within the group doing
mostly traditional jobs, fewer spells of nontraditional work exist under the narrow definition.
         Tables 4 and 5. Respectively, highlight the demographics of older workers, by sequence
group, at their first HRS observation, based on the broad and narrow definitions of nontraditional
work. Since most nontraditional jobs are held by people who do them frequently, the focus is on
this sequence group. This group appears more vulnerable than workers who are mostly in more
traditional work arrangements, although the differences are not as extreme as one might expect
given their continued work in jobs without benefits. For example, those who are in the Mostly
Nontraditional sequence are 77 percent white, compared to 81 percent for those in the Mostly
Traditional sequence. Similarly, 47 percent of those in the Mostly Nontraditional sequence have
at least some college education, compared to 57 percent in the Mostly Traditional sequence. The
share who are female, the marriage rates, and the number of health conditions are fairly similar
between the two groups. Table 5 shows a similar conclusion when the narrower definition of
nontraditional work is used.
         It would be nice to understand why some people spend most of their late work lives in
nontraditional jobs. Latent Class Analysis (LCA), which identifies unobservable subgroups
within a population (See Box 1), shows that workers who spend most of their time in
nontraditional work fall into three basic categories (see Table 6). 26 The first group is defined by
a lack of education: 15.4 percent of the Mostly Nontraditional sample lacks a high school degree.


25
   The five-group cluster analysis result for the narrow definition of nontraditional work grouped together older
workers who do not consistently work with those who are in nontraditional work all of the time. The six-group
cluster analysis result separated this combined grouping.
26
   Three groups were chosen because the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) was lower for three groups than for
either two or four groups. An LCA analysis was also conducted for the more narrow definition of nontraditional
work and is available upon request. Overall, the results were similar, with one group composed disproportionately
of high school dropouts, the second of individuals in dual-earner relationships, and the third of individuals without
an earning spouse. The main differences were that, under the narrow definition, the less-educated group included
some high school graduates and the group without an earning spouse included no married individuals at all.


                                                         13
The second is defined by their marital status: the 35.5 percent of workers in this sequence are
married and have an earning spouse. For these two groups, working in mostly nontraditional
jobs makes sense. The less educated group likely has trouble finding good work, and the group
with an earning spouse likely has much less need to hold a job with benefits. It is not as clear
why a third group ends up in nontraditional work. This group is defined by not having an
earning spouse, but otherwise appears fairly similar to the typical worker ­ albeit more likely to
be non-white, slightly less educated, and slightly less healthy. Future work should investigate
how workers who appear to be demographically similar end up in different work patterns in their
early careers, but this question is beyond the scope of the current paper.

Box 1. Description of Latent Class Analysis

Latent class analysis (LCA) is a tool that allows researchers to identify relationships among
observed categorical variables as a function of some unobserved grouping. The analysis starts
with the observation that within the population, the observed variables are not independent. For
example, within the group of workers in the Mostly Nontraditional group, being a high school
dropout may tend to occur together with being nonwhite. The goal of latent class analysis is to
group the observations so that within each group, or "latent class," the observed categorical
variables are locally independent. That is, being a high school dropout and nonwhite are both
explained by some unobserved third variable, for example the level of economic advantage.

Conditional on an assumed number of classes, LCA outputs two sets of estimates: 1) the share of
the population within each class; and 2) the conditional probabilities of having a given value for
each observed variable within each class. These parameters are estimated by Maximum
Likelihood Estimation. The second output ­ the conditional probabilities ­ have a special
interpretation within LCA since they represent an association between the class and the observed
characteristic. That is, if one class is comprised disproportionately of high school dropouts who
are nonwhite, then that class can be viewed as more economically disadvantaged than the other.


Regression Results
       The regression results for retirement income are presented in Tables 7a (broad definition)
and 7b (narrow definition) and for depression in Tables 8a and 8b. In each table, four
sensitivities are shown: 1) only sequence groupings (and year dummies) as independent
variables; 2) adding demographics and initial health; 3) adding pension coverage; and 4) adding
lifetime income or initial depression. Showing the regressions in this manner illustrates how
much of the raw relationship between the sequence and the outcome of interest is explained
away by the added factors.



                                                 14
         Looking first at retirement income, under the broad definition of nontraditional work
(Table 7a) each sequence shown is associated with lower median retirement income than the
base case (which is those in traditional jobs their entire late career). Focusing on those
consistently in nontraditional jobs ­ the way in which most nontraditional jobs are used ­ this
difference is nearly 28 percent. Moving to the second column, little of this difference is
explained by demographics alone, as the coefficient remains at negative 26 percent even after
these controls are introduced. Instead, much ­ but not all ­ of the difference is due to the
availability of pensions and high lifetime income prior to late career; the coefficient drops to
negative 7.7 percent by the time both these factors are introduced. The decline in the coefficient
suggests much of the negative relationship between having a late-career work history defined by
nontraditional work and retirement income is due to things that happened prior ­ perhaps an
entire career of non-traditional work. Still, the fact that the coefficient remains significant (at
least at the 10-percent level) suggests that spending a majority of one's late career in
nontraditional work likely does lower retirement income. The other coefficients in the regression
are largely intuitive, with more education and marriage being associated with more retirement
income and minority status and poor initial health with less.
        Moving to the narrow definition of nontraditional work (Table 7b), the overall
interpretation of the results is similar. Perhaps the most notable difference is that, because the
coefficient on the mainly nontraditional sequence starts out smaller initially, by the time all
controls are introduced the result (negative 6.6 percent) is no longer statistically significant. The
other coefficients are again intuitive.
        Turning to a more holistic measure of well-being ­ depression ­ the results under the
broad definition (Table 8a) suggest that those in nontraditional jobs frequently are significantly
more likely to be depressed than those consistently in traditional work. Furthermore, the effect is
largely invariant to the controls added, with the sequence associated with a 5.9-percent increase
in depression at 62 without controls and a 5.0-percent increase with the complete set of controls.
Unlike in the case of retirement income, going to the narrow definition of nontraditional work
(Table 8b) does not affect the interpretation of the depression regression much ­ in the
specification with full controls, being in the mostly nontraditional sequence is associated with a
4.8-percent increase in the likelihood of depression. Again, the other coefficients are largely
intuitive.



                                                  15
Conclusion
       Despite the increased focus on nontraditional jobs in the popular press and academic
literature, how older workers use these jobs and their effect on how well older workers are
prepared for retirement has not been studied. Yet, working consistently in a job with benefits
throughout one's 50s and early 60s is likely key to retirement preparedness. This paper uses
sequence analysis to characterize how older workers use nontraditional jobs in their late careers
and then regression analysis to see how these patterns relate to their available retirement income.
       The results suggest that a third or less of workers have the "ideal" sequence of late-career
employment: a traditional job with benefits consistently from ages 50-62. Many retire early or
have brief bouts of not working or nontraditional work and, worse, many have a weak
attachment to the labor force or are in nontraditional jobs consistently. The regression results
show that being employed frequently in nontraditional work during one's late career is
associated with both lower retirement income and higher rates of depression. Furthermore, these
differences remain even when controlling for lifetime income or depression prior to age 50 (with
the exception of retirement income under the narrow definition), suggesting late-career
nontraditional work is at least partially the culprit. This finding suggests that public programs,
such as state-level auto-IRAs, that aim to extend benefits to these workers could help improve
their retirement security.




                                                 16
References

Aisenbrey, Silke and Anette E. Fasang. 2010. "New Life for Old Ideas: The `Second Wave' of
       Sequence Analysis Bring the `Course' Back into the Life Course." Sociological Methods
       & Research 38(3): 420-462.

Barbieri, Paolo and Stefani Scherer. 2009. "Labour Market Flexibilization and its Consequences
       in Italy." European Sociological Review 25(5): 677-692.

Cahill, Kevin E., Michael D. Giandrea, and Joseph F. Quinn. 2011. "How Does Occupational
        Status Impact Bridge Job Prevalence?" Working Paper 447. Washington, DC: U.S
        Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Calvo, Esteban, Ignacio Madero-Cabib, and Ursula M. Staudinger. 2017. "Retirement Sequences
       of Older Americans: Moderately De-Standardized and Highly Stratified across Gender,
       Class, and Race." The Gerontologist 58(6): 116-1176.

Collins, Brett, Andrew Garin, Emilie Jackson, Dmitri Koustas, and Mark Payne. 2019. Is Gig
       Work Replacing Traditional Employment? Evidence from Two Decades of Tax Returns.
       Statistics of Income Working Paper. Washington, DC: Internal Revenue Service.

Cornwell, Benjamin. 2015. Social Sequence Analysis Methods and Applications. New York, NY:
      Cambridge University Press.

Farrell, Diana and Fiona Grieg. 2016. "The Online Platform Economy: Has Growth Peaked?"
        New York, NY: JP Morgan Chase & Co. Institute.

Fournier, Geneviève, Hélène Zimmermann, and Christine Gautheir. 2011. "Instable Career Paths
       Among Workers 45 and Over: Insight Gained from Long-Term Career Trajectories."
       Journal of Aging Studies 25(3): 316-327.

Fuller, Sylvia and Natasha Stecy-Hildebrandt. 2015. "Career Pathways for Temporary Workers:
        Exploring Heterogeneous Mobility Dynamics with Sequence Analysis." Social Science
        Research 50: 76-99.

Gustman, Alan L. and Thomas L. Steinmeier. 2000. "Retirement Outcomes in the Health and
      Retirement Study." Social Security Bulletin 63(4): 57-71.

Halpin, Brendan. 2013. "Imputing Sequence Data: Extensions to Initial and Terminal Gaps,
       Stat's mi." Working Paper 2013-01. Limerick, Ireland: University of Limerick
       Department of Sociology.

Hollister, Matissa. 2009. "Is Optimal Matching Suboptimal?" Sociological Methods & Research
        38(2): 235-264.




                                              17
James, Jacquelyn B., Jennifer E. Swanberg, and Sharon P. Mckechnie. 2007. "Responsive
       Workplaces for Older Workers: Job Quality, Flexibility and Employee Engagement."
       Issue Brief 11. Chestnut Hill, MA: Sloan Center on Aging and Work at Boston College.

Johnson, Richard W. and Janette Kawachi. 2007. "Job Changes at Older Ages: Effects on
      Wages, Benefits and Other Job Attributes." Working Paper 2007-4. Chestnut Hill, MA:
      Center for Retirement Research at Boston College.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Alan B. Krueger. 2016. "The Rise and Nature of Alternative Work
       Arrangements in the United States, 1995-2015." Working Paper. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
       University.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Alan B. Krueger. 2019. "Understanding Trends in Alternative Work
       Arrangements in the United States." Working Paper 25425. Cambridge, MA: National
       Bureau of Economic Research.

MacIndoe, Heather and Andrew Abbott. 2011. "Sequence Analysis and Optimal Matching
      Techniques for Social Science Data." In Handbook of Data Analysis, edited by Melissa
      Hardy and Alan Bryman, 387-406. London, UK: SAGE Publications LTD.

Quinn, Joseph and Richard Burkhauser. 1990. "Work and Retirement," in Handbook of Aging
       and the Social Sciences (3rd edition), edited by Robert Binstock and Linda George. San
       Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Ruhm, Christopher J. 1990. "Bridge Jobs and Partial Retirement." Journal of Labor Economics
      8(4): 482-501.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2018. " Contingent and Alternative Work Arrangements."
        Washington, D.C.

U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2015. Contingent Workforce. GAO-15-168R.
       Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Accountability Office.




                                              18
Table 1. Sample Restrictions
Restriction                                                Sample
Total HRS sample                                           37,495
Born from 1939 to 1954 and observed at 52                  11,732
Live to age 62                                             10,940
Not dropped by the HRS                                     10,097
Report working with income                                  8,513
Have less than three missing observations                   5,030
Work at least once between ages 50 and 62                   4,174

Source: Authors' calculations from Health and Retirement Study (1992-2016).




Table 2. Select Characteristics of Workers in Nontraditional Jobs, 2017

                                  "Alternative"            No benefits
                                      BLS                  minus BLS
Average tenure                      11 years                6 years
Household income
10th percentile                     $22,500                 $17,500
25th percentile                      45,000                  32,500
Median                               67,500                  55,000
Demographics
At least some college                      65%                    52%
Non-white                                  20                     34

Note: The "no benefits minus BLS" column consists of those workers without benefits who are not already captured
under the BLS definition.
Source: Authors' calculations from Current Population Survey May Supplement (2017).




                                                      19
Table 3. Share of Jobs that are Nontraditional and in Each Sequence Group

                                                       Nontraditional jobs
                                                                                  Distribution of
                                          Distribution of          No benefits    no benefits and
Sequence group                No benefits no benefits jobs         and instable    instable jobs
Very early retirement             -                                     0.5%             6.4%
Early retirement                 1.9%          11.0%                    3.6            17.9
Weak attachment                  4.3           25.7                     1.4            47.3
Mostly nontraditional            9.1           53.7                     0.7              9.2
Mostly traditional               1.6             9.6                    1.4            19.1
Traditional                      0.0               0                      0              0.0
Total                           16.9            100                     7.6             100
Source: Authors' calculations from Health and Retirement Study (1992-2016).




                                                      20
Table 4. Older Workers' Demographics for Benefits Only Definition of Nontraditional Work

                                                        Sequence group
                                      Early      Weak       Mostly        Mostly        All
Demographics at ages 50-52         retirement attachment nontraditional traditional traditional
Share of total sample                    21%        16%        11%           26%          26%
Female                                   62         65         55            55           52
Race
  White                                   78              76           77              81             84
  Black                                   17              15           15              13             11
  Other                                    4               9            9               5              5
Education
  Less than high school                   16              19           15               9              6
  High school                             38              34           38              34             29
  Some college                            24              23           26              29             26
  College                                 22              24           21              28             39
Coupled                                   82              81           76              81             82
Has pension wealth
  DB pension                              32             20            13              32            29
  DC pension                              26             20            12              27            33
Number of health conditions              1.0            0.8           0.7             0.7           0.6
Household size                             2              3             2               3             3
Number of Children                         3              3             3               3             2
Median wages                        $35,796        $24,423       $17,898         $43,135       $58,396
Median wealth
  Financial                         $15,488        $11,051        $9,127         $17,898       $21,477
  Housing                           $93,052        $80,540       $70,530         $81,088       $93,052

Notes: Wages and wealth are in 2018 dollars. AIME is an individual's Average Indexed Monthly Earnings based on
a linkage to Social Security Administrative data summarized by RAND in its version of the HRS.
Source: Authors' calculations from Health and Retirement Study (1992-2016).




                                                     21
Table 5. Older Workers' Demographics for Nontraditional Work with No Benefits and Unstable Hours Definition of Nontraditional
Work

                                                                        Sequence group
                                     Very early          Early       Weak         Mostly             Mostly
                                                                                                                 Traditional
Demographics at ages 50-52           retirement       retirement  attachment nontraditional        traditional
Share of total sample                        7%               21%         9%            5%                 26%          32%
Female                                      61                59         76            51                  55           52
Race
  White                                       77               78                  75        83          80             83
  Black                                       17               17                  16        10          13             12
  Other                                        5                6                   9         6           6              5
Education
  Less than high school                       21               11                  27         9          10              7
  High school                                 37               36                  38        29          34             31
  Some college                                22               25                  21        30          29             26
  College                                     19               28                  14        32          27             35
Married                                       57               57                  51        44          52             48
Has pension wealth
  DB pension                                 29                36                8            15          28             27
  DC pension                                 20                31                8            12          25             30
Number of health conditions                 1.2               0.9              1.0           0.6         0.7            0.6
Household size                                3                 3                3             2           3              3
Number of children                            3                 3                3           2.5           3              2
Median wages                           $37,576           $52,019          $16,636       $30,327     $47,245        $54,462
Median wealth
  Financial                             94,580            67,700           57,429       100,186      82,313         73,381
  Housing                              114,578           119,172          108,269       149,815     108,051        123,842

Note: Wages and wealth are in 2018 dollars.
Source: Authors' calculations from Health and Retirement Study (1992-2016).




                                                                              22
Table 6. LCA Analysis of Mostly Nontraditional Sequence Group

                                                     High school        Married with an
                                                      dropouts          earning spouse    Solo earners
Share of "mostly nontraditional" sequence               15.4%                35.5%           49.1%
Female                                                  53.7                 60.4            52.1
Non-white                                               44.8                 16.9            22.1
Education
 High school dropouts                                   100.0                   0.6           0.0
 High school graduates                                    0.0                  39.6          47.9
 Some college                                             0.0                  33.8          28.2
 College graduate                                         0.0                  26.0          23.9
Marriage status
 Married                                                   80.4               100.0          40.4
 Married with an earning spouse                            32.8                94.2           0.0
Employer-sponsored plans from past job
 Defined benefit                                            0.0                31.2           8.4
 Defined contribution                                       7.5                24.7           7.5
Other limiting factors
 Own health limits work                                    18.5                 5.8          13.2
 Caregiving for someone with ADL/IADL                       9.6                12.9          17.9
Source: Authors' calculations from Health and Retirement Study (1992-2016).




                                                      23
    Table 7a. Effect of Select Variables on Median Retirement Income, No Benefits Definition

                                                                                   Specification
                                                              (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
Sequence (Traditional = base case)
Mostly traditional                                        -0.0730***        -0.0553*          -0.0299           -0.0305
                                                         (0.0265)          (0.0326)          (0.0325)          (0.0312)
Mostly nontraditional                                     -0.2783***        -0.2623***        -0.1682***        -0.0774*
                                                         (0.0357)          (0.0440)          (0.0454)          (0.0437)
Weak attachment                                           -0.1497***        -0.1459***        -0.0864**         -0.0377
                                                         (0.0305)          (0.0370)          (0.0379)          (0.0363)
Early retirement                                          -0.1131***        -0.0171           -0.0134            0.0114
                                                         (0.0284)          (0.0343)          (0.0344)          (0.0330)
Other controls
 Black                                                                      -0.1592***        -0.1617***        -0.1112***
                                                                           (0.0338)          (0.0336)          (0.0324)
 Other non-white                                                            -0.2404***        -0.2091***        -0.0648
                                                                           (0.0593)          (0.0590)          (0.0567)
 Female                                                                      0.0689***         0.0883***         0.0458*
                                                                           (0.0254)          (0.0254)          (0.0243)
 Some college                                                                0.2082***         0.1997***         0.1205***
                                                                           (0.0282)          (0.0282)          (0.0271)
 College degree                                                              0.4335***         0.3926***         0.2765***
                                                                           (0.0291)          (0.0293)          (0.0284)
 Married                                                                     0.4655***         0.4794***         0.1518***
                                                                           (0.0320)          (0.0319)          (0.0329)
                                                                            -0.0710***        -0.0694***        -0.0472***
 Number of initial health conditions
                                                                           (0.0129)          (0.0128)          (0.0123)
                                                                                               0.1759***         0.0452*
 Retirement plan at age 50
                                                                                             (0.0261)          (0.0255)
                                                                                                                 0.3626***
 Average Indexed Monthly Earnings at age 50
                                                                                                               (0.0162)
Start wave dummies included?                                  Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
Number of observations                                      3,219             2,287             2,287             2,262
Pseudo R-squared                                            0.030             0.174             0.184             0.282

    Notes: Regression is a quintile regression at the median. Standard errors are in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
    * p<0.1.
    Source: Authors' calculations from the Health and Retirement Study (1992-2016).




                                                            24
    Table 7b. Effect of Select Variables on Median Retirement Income, No Benefits with Instability
    Definition of Nontraditional Work

                                                                                   Specification
                                                              (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
Sequence (Traditional = base case)
Mostly traditional                                        -0.0904***        -0.0818**         -0.0709**         -0.0466
                                                         (0.0272)          (0.0331)          (0.0314)          (0.0285)
Mostly nontraditional                                     -0.1526***        -0.1723**         -0.0835           -0.0513
                                                         (0.0535)          (0.0669)          (0.0639)          (0.0584)
Weak attachment                                           -0.3102***        -0.2417***        -0.1680***        -0.0565
                                                         (0.0392)          (0.0489)          (0.0478)          (0.0439)
Early retirement                                          -0.0168           -0.0015           -0.0115           -0.0076
                                                         (0.0288)          (0.0344)          (0.0325)          (0.0296)
Very early retirement                                     -0.1566***        -0.0604           -0.0365            0.0155
                                                         (0.0418)          (0.0503)          (0.0477)          (0.0437)
Other controls
 Black                                                                      -0.1637***        -0.1479***        -0.1199***
                                                                           (0.0365)          (0.0345)          (0.0315)
 Other non-white                                                            -0.2148***        -0.2143***        -0.0860
                                                                           (0.0635)          (0.0600)          (0.0548)
 Female                                                                      0.0739***         0.0902***         0.0527**
                                                                           (0.0274)          (0.0261)          (0.0237)
 Some college                                                                0.2015***         0.1946***         0.1057***
                                                                           (0.0304)          (0.0289)          (0.0264)
 College degree                                                              0.4438***         0.3990***         0.2618***
                                                                           (0.0313)          (0.0300)          (0.0276)
 Married                                                                     0.4630***         0.4696***         0.1540***
                                                                           (0.0345)          (0.0326)          (0.0321)
                                                                            -0.0618***        -0.0695***        -0.0495***
 Number of initial health conditions
                                                                           (0.0140)          (0.0132)          (0.0120)
                                                                                               0.1795***         0.0625**
 Retirement plan at age 50
                                                                                             (0.0265)          (0.0246)
                                                                                                                 0.3712***
 Average Indexed Monthly Earnings at age 50
                                                                                                               (0.0158)
Start wave dummies included?                                   Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes
Number of observations                                       3,219             2,288             2,288            2,263
Pseudo R-squared                                             0.030             0.171             0.184            0.282

    Notes: Regression is a quintile regression at the median. Standard errors are in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
    * p<0.1.
    Source: Authors' calculations from the Health and Retirement Study (1992-2016).



                                                            25
Table 8a. Effect of Select Variables on Likelihood of Depression at Age 62, No Benefits
Definition

                                                                        Specification
                                                   (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
Sequence (Traditional = base case)
Mostly traditional                              0.0340*           0.0279*           0.0263*          -0.0017
                                              (0.0174)          (0.0146)          (0.0146)          (0.0093)
Mostly nontraditional                           0.0591**          0.0431**          0.0350*           0.0504***
                                              (0.0245)          (0.0198)          (0.0199)          (0.0144)
Weak attachment                                 0.0884***         0.0520***         0.0462***         0.0211*
                                              (0.0225)          (0.0173)          (0.0175)          (0.0114)
Early retirement                                0.1184***         0.0618***         0.0585***         0.0616***
                                              (0.0222)          (0.0166)          (0.0166)          (0.0117)
Other controls
 Black                                                            0.0112            0.0111           -0.0111
                                                                (0.0122)          (0.0122)          (0.0080)
  Other non-white                                                 0.0495**          0.0500**          0.0897***
                                                                (0.0216)          (0.0216)          (0.0161)
  Female                                                          0.0159*           0.0146            0.0158**
                                                                (0.0096)          (0.0096)          (0.0072)
  Some college                                                   -0.0248***        -0.0237***        -0.0001
                                                                (0.0087)          (0.0088)          (0.0068)
  College degree                                                 -0.0576***        -0.0557***        -0.0351***
                                                                (0.0077)          (0.0079)          (0.0062)
  Married                                                        -0.0208**         -0.0210**         -0.0212***
                                                                (0.0090)          (0.0090)          (0.0061)
                                                                  0.0414***         0.0413***         0.0297***
  Number of initial health conditions
                                                                (0.0042)          (0.0042)          (0.0029)
  Retirement plan at age 50                                                        -0.0131           -0.0170***
                                                                                  (0.0089)          (0.0060)
  Depression at age 50                                                                                0.1638***
                                                                                                    (0.0134)
Start wave dummies included?                        Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes
Number of observations                            3,909             2,870             2,870            1,761
Pseudo R-squared                                  0.027             0.072             0.073            0.131

Notes: Table shows the average marginal effect on the probability of depression for each variable. Standard errors
are in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Source: Authors' calculations from the Health and Retirement Study (1992-2016).




                                                         26
Table 8b. Effect of Select Variables on Likelihood of Depression at Age 62, No Benefits with
Instability Definition of Nontraditional Work

                                                                        Specification
                                                   (1)                (2)            (3)                 (4)
Sequence (Traditional = base case)
Mostly traditional                              0.0489 ***        0.0332 **         0.0317 **         0.0224 **
                                              (0.0170)          (0.0136)          (0.0136)          (0.0098)
Mostly nontraditional                           0.0469            0.0338            0.0283            0.0483 ***
                                              (0.0319)          (0.0259)          (0.0256)          (0.0185)
Weak attachment                                 0.1620 ***        0.0958 ***        0.0881 ***        0.0577 ***
                                              (0.0298)          (0.0225)          (0.0229)          (0.0153)
Early retirement                                0.0723 ***        0.0435 ***        0.0433 ***        0.0500 ***
                                              (0.0189)          (0.0144)          (0.0143)          (0.0106)
Very early retirement                           0.1263 ***        0.0303            0.0275            0.0712 ***
                                              (0.0305)          (0.0201)          (0.0199)          (0.0166)
Other controls
 Black                                                            0.0106            0.0105           -0.0094
                                                                (0.0122)          (0.0122)          (0.0081)
  Other non-white                                                 0.0456 **         0.0456 **         0.0798 ***
                                                                (0.0211)          (0.0210)          (0.0155)
  Female                                                          0.0133            0.0121            0.0165 **
                                                                (0.0096)          (0.0096)          (0.0073)
  Some college                                                   -0.0239 ***       -0.0228 ***       -0.0005
                                                                (0.0087)          (0.0088)          (0.0069)
  College degree                                                 -0.0567 ***       -0.0549 ***       -0.0357 ***
                                                                (0.0077)          (0.0080)          (0.0061)
  Married                                                        -0.0240 **        -0.0241 **        -0.0253 ***
                                                                (0.0102)          (0.0102)          (0.0072)
  Number of initial health conditions                             0.0420 ***        0.0419 ***        0.0298 ***
                                                                (0.0042)          (0.0042)          (0.0030)
  Retirement plan at age 50                                                        -0.0116           -0.0188 ***
                                                                                  (0.0089)          (0.0060)
  Depression at age 50                                                                                0.1657 ***
                                                                                                    (0.0135)
Start wave dummies included?                        Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes
Number of observations                            3,909             2,871            2,871             1,762
Pseudo R-squared                                  0.029             0.074            0.074             0.127
Notes: Table shows the average marginal effect on the probability of depression for each variable. Standard errors
are in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Source: Authors' calculations from the Health and Retirement Study (1992-2016).




                                                         27
Figure 1. Percentage of Workers Ages 50-62 in Nontraditional Jobs by Definition

40%

                                                                              31.2%
30%

                                                                20.3%
20%

                                     11.4%         11.8%
10%

           0.9%          2.3%
 0%




Notes: "Gig" definition as in Ferrell and Grieg (2016) and covers all workers. "1099" workers defined as in Collins
et al. (2019) and applies to all workers. "Contingent" (BLS), "Alternative" (BLS), "No benefits," and "Contingent"
(GAO) were calculated by the authors and apply to workers age 50-62.
Sources: Farrell and Grieg (2016); Collins et al. (2019); and Current Population Survey May Supplement (2017).




                                                        28
Figure 2. Percentage of Workers in Nontraditional Jobs under Different Definitions, 1994-2016

 25%
                 No benefits
                 "Alternative" - BLS
 20%


 15%


 10%


  5%


  0%
       1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016
Note: "Alternative" estimate comes from Katz and Krueger (2019) and includes all workers.
Sources: Current Population Survey March Supplement (1995-2017); and Katz and Krueger (2019).

Figure 3. Percentage of Workers Ages 50-62 in Jobs with No Benefits by Dataset, 1992-2010

25%


20%


15%


10%


 5%                                                                         HRS
                                                                            CPS

 0%
        1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010

Sources: Authors' calculations from Health and Retirement Study (1992-2010); and Current Population Survey
March Supplement (1995-2011).



                                                      29
Figure 4. Work Histories from Ages 50-62, No Benefits Definition of Nontraditional Work


      Early retirement (21%)

    Weak attachment (16%)

Mostly nontraditional (11%)

    Mostly traditional (26%)


            Traditional (26%)


                                         50          52             54         56          58        60         62
                                                                            Age
                                              Traditional           Nontraditional     Not working        Retired
Source: Authors' calculations using Health and Retirement Study (1992-2016).



Figure 5. Work Histories from Ages 50-62, No Benefits with Instability Definition of
Nontraditional Work
Very early retirement (7%)

    Early retirement (21%)
   Weak attachment (9%)
Mostly nontraditional (5%)

  Mostly traditional (26%)



          Traditional (32%)


                                    50          52             54         56          58        60             62
                                                                         Age
                                          Traditional          Nontraditional       Not working      Retired

Source: Authors' calculations using Health and Retirement Study (1992-2016).



                                                          30
                 RECENT WORKING PAPERS FROM THE
        CENTER FOR RETIREMENT RESEARCH AT BOSTON COLLEGE
Will More Workers Have Nontraditional Jobs as Globalization and Automation Spread?
Matthew S. Rutledge, Gal Wettstein, and Sara Ellen King, July 2019

Do States Adjust Medicaid Enrollment in Response to Capitation Rates? Evidence from the
Medicare Part D Clawback
Laura D. Quinby and Gal Wettstein, June 2019

The Effect of Medicare Part D on Evergreening, Generic Entry, and Drug Prices
Geoffrey T. Sanzenbacher and Gal Wettstein, May 2019

Is the Drop in Fertility Due to The Great Recession or a Permanent Change?
Alicia H. Munnell, Anqi Chen, and Geoffrey T. Sanzenbacher, March 2019

Will Fewer Children Boost Demand for Formal Caregiving?
Gal Wettstein and Alice Zulkarnain, March 2019

The Relationship Between Occupational Requirements and SSDI Activity
Matthew S. Rutledge, Alice Zulkarnain, and Sara Ellen King, February 2019

How Does Contingent Work Affect SSDI Benefits?
Matthew S. Rutledge, Alice Zulkarnain, and Sara Ellen King, February 2019

Do Pension Cuts for Current Employees Increase Separation?
Laura D. Quinby and Gal Wettstein, January 2019

Competition, Asymmetric Information, and the Annuity Puzzle: Evidence from a
Government-Run Exchange in Chile
Gastón Illanes and Manisha Padi, January 2019

Failure to Contribute: An Estimate of the Consequences of Non- and Underpayment of
Self-Employment Taxes by Independent Contractors and On-Demand Workers on Social
Security
Caroline Bruckner and Thomas L. Hungerford, January 2019

How Much Income Do Retirees Actually Have? Evaluating the Evidence from Five
National Datasets
Anqi Chen, Alicia H. Munnell, and Geoffrey T. Sanzenbacher, November 2018


        All working papers are available on the Center for Retirement Research website
  (https://crr.bc.edu) and can be requested by e-mail (crr@bc.edu) or phone (617-552-1762).




                                             31
