                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     MINIMUM WAGE IN A MULTI-TIER SEARCH AND WAGE-POSTING MODEL
                 WITH CROSS-MARKET SUBSTITUTIONS

                                      C. Y. Kelvin Yuen
                                         Ping Wang

                                     Working Paper 26378
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26378


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2019




We are grateful for valuable comments and suggestions from Derek Laing, Rody Manuelli, and
Yongs Shin. Needless to say, the usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by C. Y. Kelvin Yuen and Ping Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Minimum Wage in a Multi-Tier Search and Wage-Posting Model with Cross-Market Substitutions
C. Y. Kelvin Yuen and Ping Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 26378
October 2019
JEL No. D83,E24,E60,J64

                                           ABSTRACT

While minimum wage policy is widely adopted in the real world, can it effectively raise the
average wage of lower paid jobs without having large detrimental consequences for employment?
The empirical literature fails to establish robust findings. We develop a general-equilibrium search
and wage-posting framework with heterogeneous workers and tasks matching in multi-tier labor
markets: abstract, routine high-skilled, routine middle-skilled, manual middle-skilled and manual
low-skilled. We incorporate rich cross-market spillovers and compositional effects from individual
responses to market thickness. As a result of minimum wage hikes, we show that (i) the
unemployment rate at the minimum wage binding market is higher, while all other markets enjoy a
lower unemployment rate; (ii) employment in the manual low-skilled jobs is lower, whereas
employment in the routine high-skilled and manual middle-skilled markets is higher due to cross-
market substitutions; and, (iii) employment in other markets has ambiguous responses due to
conflicting effects on potential worker entry and unemployment. By calibrating the model to fit the
U.S. data, we evaluate the impacts of the federal minimum wage hike (2007-2009) and the on-
going minimum wage increase in Seattle (2017-2021). We find that the minimum wage effects on
employment on the binding markets depend crucially on the magnitudes of spillover and
compositional effects and that the employment effects may be weak in a nonbinding market.
Moreover, our results suggest that, while both minimum wage hikes reduce aggregate output, they
only generate small effects on submarket average and overall average wages.


C. Y. Kelvin Yuen
Department of Economics
Washington University in St. Louis
Campus Box 1208
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130
kelvincyyuen@gmail.com

Ping Wang
Department of Economics
Washington University in St. Louis
Campus Box 1208
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
and NBER
pingwang@wustl.edu
1        Introduction

Since the pivotal contribution by Stigler (1946), there has been numerous studies on the labor
market consequences minimum wage policy. While minimum wage policy is designed to mitigate
poverty and to diminish the power of "monopsony employers,"the literature has identi...ed conicting
empirical results about the minimum wage e¤ect on employment, unemployment, and market wage
distribution. Of greater concern is the consequences of employment, because it is essential for a
successful minimum wage policy not to hinder labor hires by much. In particular, some studies
do ...nd signi...cantly negative e¤ects of minimum wage on employment (e.g., Aaronson and French
2007; Stewart 2004), though others fail to establish such e¤ects in a robust manner (e.g., Card and
Krueger 1995; Dube, Lester and Reich (2010); Strobl and Walsh 2011).1 To some degree, the lack of
a robust employment e¤ect is not surprising because only a small fraction of workers is responsive
to the policy changes (cf. MaCurdy 2015). But to understand why such e¤ects are not identi...ed
consistently, one must go deeper to reveal the underlying mechanism through which a hike in the
minimum wage inuences labor matching and bargained wage outcomes, which is the main purpose
of our paper.
        Let us take a closer look at the empirical ...ndings focusing on low-skilled workers in low-paid
markets and if the minimum wage hike is large and binding. In this case, it is more likely to ...nd an
increase in the minimum wage to raise unemployment (e.g., Fitoussi 1994). More recently, Aaronson
and Phelan (2019) ...nd that with minimum wage hikes, relative employment declines at cognitively
routine occupations (which may be viewed as a market with routine task ...lled by skilled labor) but
not manually routine or non-routine low-wage occupations. On the contrary, Cengiz et al. (2019)
do not ...nd any evidence for substitution away from routine-task intensive occupations, including
both cognitively routine and manually routine occupations. This recent literature points to a new
direction: the employment consequences of minimum wage policy should depend crucially on the
nature of tasks and the skill level of workers.
        Accordingly, in our paper, we incorporate explicitly multi-tier labor markets with workers of
di¤erent skills. To be more speci...c, we consider three types of workers ­ high-skilled, middle-
skilled, and low-skilled workers ­and three types of tasks created by ...rms ­abstract, routine, and
manual. There are ...ve segmented labor markets under consideration: abstract, routine high-skilled,
routine middle-skilled, manual middle-skilled, and manual low-skilled. Each of the routine and the
manual ...rms may create vacancies in di¤erent markets, whereas each of the better skilled may
    1
        For earlier studies, the reader is referred to a comprehensive survey by Brown (1999).



                                                             1
choose to enter one of the potential markets.
       Our modeling strategy is to be rooted on the job-search and wage-posting framework developed
by Burdett and Mortensen (1998). In addition to its empirical relevance,2 the usefulness of this
framework is best illustrated by Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2016):

         "The steady-state random search and wage-posting model of Burdett and Mortensen
         (1998) has become the canonical structural framework for empirical analysis of worker
         turnover and equilibrium wage dispersion." (p. 135)

To suit the purpose of our study, we generalize Burdett-Mortensen framework in several signi...cant
and important ways. First of all, we have considered multi-tier labor markets that are segmented
with di¤erent market thickness in which workers of identical skills may be paid with di¤erent wages.
Second, ...rms may post the same type of tasks in di¤erent markets featuring di¤erent productivities.
Third, we allow job ...nding rates to be endogenously determined.3 As to be elaborated below, these
elements of generalization, particularly, endogenous job ...nding together with task substitution,
either from the ...rm or from the worker side, will play a crucial role to determine how a minimum
wage hike in a given market may generate a "spillover" e¤ect on other markets. This general
structure allows us to study labor market performance in each of the segmented markets as well as
in all aggregate measures, including potential labor pools, vacancies, unemployment rates, market
tightness, mean wages, wage dispersion, and most importantly employment and output.
       Theoretically, we ...nd that even when a minimum wage only binds in the lowest market (manual
low-skilled), it would still generate rich spillover e¤ects on other markets through worker and task
substitutions. For example, an increase in the minimum wage would lead to the manual task ...rms
posting more vacancies for the middle-skilled workers. As a result, middle-skilled workers have more
incentive to work in manual task jobs, entailing a smaller potential labor pool in the routine middle-
skilled market, which would in turn discourage vacancy postings in the same market. Thus, this
spillover e¤ect features "cross-adjacent market substitution"and creates a chain e¤ect propagating
through all the markets in the economy. In equilibrium, we ...nd that while the unemployment rate
at the minimum wage binding market is higher, all other markets enjoy a lower unemployment
rate. This leads to unambiguously lower employment in the manual low-skilled jobs and higher
employment in the manual middle-skilled market as a result of cross-adjacent market substitution
   2
       In his book Mortensen (2003) provides evidence that the Burdett-Mortensen wage posting framework suits quite
well for studying wage posting setting.
   3
     Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2016) also allow for endogenous meeting rate in a similar wage posting game. How-
ever, their paper focuses on business cycle dynamics in the absence of minimum wage considerations.


                                                          2
from the ...rm side. For other markets, such as those abstract and routine middle-skilled jobs, the
e¤ect on employment is ambiguous due to the conicting e¤ects on the potential labor pool and the
unemployment rate.
   We next conduct quantitative analysis by calibrating the model to ...t the data from the U.S.
labor market. Speci...cally, under a standard market discount rate and matching elasticity of workers
together with a common labor intensity measure across all tasks, we jointly calibrate matching
e¢ cacy, task-speci...c productivity, and job separation rates to ...t the targets of relative wages (of a
higher market to the lowest manual low-skilled market) as well as submarket unemployment rates.
We then evaluate the impacts of the federal minimum wage increase during the great recession
(2007-2009) and the ongoing local minimum wage increase in Seattle (2017-2021) on the relevant
(national or local) labor market. Such experiments are intriguing. In particular, prior to such
minimum wage hikes, the minimum wage is binding only in the lowest market. After the Federal
minimum wage hike, the minimum wage becomes binding in the two lower markets, whereas after
implementing the local minimum wage policy in Seattle, it is binding in the three lower markets.
   Our quantitative results suggest that with the 2007-2009 federal minimum wage hikes, the
minimum wage becomes binding not only in the manual low-skilled market, but also in the manual
middle-skilled market. We ...nd that in general the minimum wage elasticities become larger in
absolute value when the minimum wage becomes binding in the second lowest market. This is
because the cross-adjacent market substitution e¤ect is ampli...ed by the direct e¤ect from the
binding market. With the federal minimum wage increase, we ...nd the employment in the manual
low-skill market falling by 3:49%, but that in the manual middle-skilled market rising by 14:52%.
The combined employment e¤ect on the two binding markets without their di¤erent employment
size weighed in is found to be positive. For the non-binding markets, through cross-adjacent market
substitutions, we ...nd an employment drop in the routine middle-skilled jobs by 1:99% as well as
an employment expansion in the routine high-skilled market by 7:56% and in the abstract market
moderately by 0:25% whose weak employment e¤ect is not surprising because of its more remote
chain e¤ect through cross-adjacent market substitution from the ...rm and the worker sides and
because of its special requirement of high skilled labor. In addition, the minimum wage increase
induces lower wage inequality in the binding markets, a drop of 36:57% in the manual low-skilled
market and a fall of 6:60% in the manual middle-skilled market; its e¤ects on non-binding markets
are relatively small. Overall, the federal minimum wage hike raises the aggregate unemployment
rate by 0:41 percentage point, while lowering the aggregate employment and aggregate output by
0:46%. The aggregate e¤ects on the average wage and the wage inequality in the whole economy


                                                    3
are found to be quantitatively small due to conicting compositional e¤ects in various markets.
Finally, we ...nd the density of workers at the minimum wage in the binding markets to be positively
correlated with the ...rm'
                         s pro...t in these markets, while the overall e¤ect on the average wage in
these markets is found to be negative due to the dominating general equilibrium e¤ect.
   In the case of the relatively large local minimum wage increase in Seattle from $11 to $15, we ...nd
that the minimum wage now becomes e¤ective also in the third market (routine middle-skilled). As
a result, while the qualitative e¤ects of the minimum wage hike are similar to the federal case, the
quantitative e¤ects turn out to be much larger. For instance, the drop in employment and output
in the manual low-skilled workers is sizable at 17:47%, while the increase in the employment and
output in the manual middle-skilled market is more dramatic at 48:62%. On the aggregate level,
the local minimum wage increase leads to a much larger 2:33 percentage point increase in overall
unemployment rate and 2:77% drop in aggregate employment and output.
   The main takeaway is that a full evaluation of the minimum wage policy must account for (i)
di¤erential job tasks and di¤erential worker skills, (ii) compositional changes in various markets
where the minimum wage may or may not bind, and (iii) rich spillovers through cross-adjacent
market substitution from both the ...rm and the worker sides. Our paper ...lls this knowledge gap by
providing a systematic evaluation of the minimum wage policy under a uni...ed search and matching
framework. Such compositional changes and spillover e¤ects serve to better understand the conict-
ing empirical observations, thus o¤ering better assessment of the widely adopted minimum wage
policy in the real world.

Related literature

   The most relevant work to ours is one by Burdett and Mortensen (1998) whose search and
matching framework is the root of our model structure. In their paper, however, the job ...nding
rate is assumed to be exogenous. Hence, when workers are homogenous, unemployment rate is
constant with respect to minimum wage, which simply shifts the whole wage distribution (see our
Proposition 2). They show that when workers have di¤erent unemployment bene...ts, there exists
ine¢ cient unemployment and minimum wage may actually increase employment in this case. In our
model, the job ...nding rate is endogenously determined, and minimum wage may have equilibrium
impact and spillover e¤ects on unemployment rates, even though workers are homogenous within
each market.
   A closely related work is by Kumar (2008). Although the focus of his paper is on how the
interaction between the minimum wage and the capital tax policies may a¤ect labor market out-


                                                  4
comes, a baseline ...nding with minimum wage hikes but without corresponding capital tax changes
can be directly compared with our quantitative results on aggregate measures (see Table 4 in his
paper and Table 6 in our paper). In both papers, aggregate employment, aggregate output and
aggregate wage dispersion are lower whereas aggregate unemployment is higher. While mean wage
in Kumar'
        s paper is higher, it is lower in our paper. The main drivers of this di¤erence are two
folds. One the one hand, we have 5 markets with heterogeneous tasks, which can naturally lead to
di¤erent aggregate outcome. One the other hand, labor supply in Kumar (2008) shrinks in response
to higher minimum wage; however, potential labor pools in our 4 non-binding markets may rise or
fall, adjusting in an alternating way (see our Proposition 3), which may again result in di¤erent
aggregate outcome.
   There are a few more remotely related studies. For example, Fitoussi (1994) ...nds that an in-
crease in the minimum wage would cause an increase in unemployment rate among the low skilled
workers, yet it would lead to an increase or a decrease in the real wage of the higher skilled labor
depending on whether the high skilled and low skilled workers are substitutes or complements. In
our model, we recon...rm his argument by establishing that middle skilled wage is rising with mini-
mum wage because middle and low skilled workers are substitutes. In two country model of Davis
(1998) in the presence of a binding minimum wage, technical progress leads to higher unemploy-
ment and possibly higher relative wage for the unskilled workers. In contrast, we obtain much richer
results in our sensitivity analysis when there is capital biased technological change. Postel-Vinay
and Robin (2002) construct an on-the-job search model with productivity di¤erences to generate
wage distribution endogenously and ...nd a thin tail at the lower end that is consistent with institu-
tionalized minimum wage. Brochu and Green (2013) incorporate learning about matching quality
into the Burdett-Mortensen­Pissarides framework to explain the empirically identi...ed negative ef-
fects of minimum wage on job ...nding and job separations rates. More recently, Berger, Herkenho¤
and Mongey (2019) links minimum wage to markdown via labor market power, showing that a
higher minimum wage may induce some ...rms to compress their markdowns and raise wages while
expanding employment along workers'labor supply curves. Thus, in a market featuring a greater
density of workers at the minimum wage, one would expect ...rms to earn lower pro...ts whereas the
market's average wage is expected to be higher. We support their ...nding based on a very di¤erent
mechanism ­ a minimum wage hike in a binding market forces some low o¤er vacancies to post
higher wage and the upward shift of the wage distribution raises the wage cost, thus lowering the
pro...t accrued.



                                                  5
2      The Model

There are three types of workers: high-skilled (h), middle-skilled (m), and low-skilled (l) workers,
each with a ...xed measure ni ; i 2 fh; m; lg : On the ...rm's side, there are three types of tasks: abstract
(a), routine (r), and manual (n). Each task has a total number of vacancies vj ; j 2 fa; r; ng ; of
which       j   will be allocated to the labor market and 1       j   to capital. In the data, a vast majority of
abstract tasks are performed by high-skilled employees, whereas most of low-pay manual tasks are
...lled by low-skilled workers. Accordingly, in the model, only high-skilled workers conduct abstract
tasks, and the low-skilled takes low-pay manual tasks. That is, routine tasks can be done by both
high-skilled and middle-skilled workers, whereas manual tasks can be ...lled by both middle-skilled
and low-skilled workers. Thus, there are ...ve markets, labeled by              2 fa; rh; rm; nm; nlg, each having
di¤erent jobs . One may think of the abstract market ( = a) features jobs such as professionals,
engineers and managers, the high-routine market ( = rh) contains high-level o¢ cers/production
supervisors, the middle-routine market ( = rm) consists of all the standard routine tasks such as
manufacture and sales, the middle-level manual market ( = nm) may be called manually routine,
whereas the low-manual market ( = a; rh; rm; nm; nl) covers all the standard low-skilled manual
jobs such as traditional services.
      There is directed search for each job at the relevant market. Let n and v be the measure of
workers (both employed and unemployed) and vacancies in the                  market. Under the aforementioned
worker-task matching structure, we have na + nrh = nh and vrh + vrm = vr : Figure 1 summarizes
the labor market structure of ...rms and workers.


2.1        Workers

Unemployed workers with previous experience in the                market receives a ow utility b : With ow
                                                                  v
probability         ( ) they receive a wage o¤er, where       =   n     is the (endogenously determined) labor
market tightness in the          market. Thus, similar to Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2016), we allow
job ...nding rates to be endogenously determined, rather than exogenously ...xed as in the original
wage-posting framework developed by Burdett and Mortensen (1998). Let F (w) be the wage o¤er
distribution, then the value of being unemployed with experience in the                      market but searching in
the    0   market must satisfy the Bellman equation:
                                           Z
                       rU 0 = b + ( )   0    max U 0 ; E      0       w0   dF   0   w0       U   0               (1)

where E 0 (w0 ) is the value of being employed at the wage w0 in the                     0   market and the term in
the square bracket measures the change in value from unemployed to employed. The entry into

                                                       6
                               Figure 1: Labor market allocations


each relevant market (say, a high-skilled may enter market a or rh) is balanced because more entry
reduces the tightness and lowers the ow probability to receive an o¤er.
   Clearly, there exists a reservation wage R 0 below which unemployed workers would never accept
the o¤er: In the special case when workers are always searching in the same market, it can be shown
that
                                              R =b                                                (2)

That is, the reservation wage is just the ow bene...t of unemployment.
   As mentioned before, high-skilled workers can choose to search between the a and rh market,
and middle-skilled workers can choose between rm and nm market. On the contrary, low-skilled
workers can only search in the nl market. Hence, the values of being unemployed for these types of
                      a = max fU a ; U a g, U rh = max U rh ; U rh , U rm = max fU rm ; U rm g, U nm =
workers are given by Uh         a     rh     h          a      rh     m           rm     nm      m
      nm ; U nm g, and U nl = U nl :
max fUrm    nm          l      nl

   Employed workers receives a wage w and faces an exogenous job separation probability          : For
simplicity, we assume that currently employed workers in market         can only search in her own
market (say, as a result of own market advantages) and face the same on-the-job-search probability
 ( ) as the unemployed searching in this market. Hence, the value of being employed follows:
                    Z
 rE (w) = w + ( )       max E w0 ,E (w) -E (w) dF w0 + [max fU ,U 0 g -E (w)] (3)


                                                  7
which states that the ow value of being employed must be equal to the current wage, plus the
expected ow value changing from current to another job and the expected ow value changing to
unemployed. Two clari...cation remarks are in order. First, to an employed high paid worker, it is in
general di¢ cult to ...nd a better job because it is more likely to have max fE (w0 ) ; E (w)g = E (w).
Second, the probability to switch job also depend on the density of the wage distribution f (w0 ).
As a result, taking    ( ) the same as the unemployed is innocuous.


2.2   Firms

In this economy, each ...rm in a market        posts a wage á la Burdett and Mortensen (1998), subject
to the statutory minimum wage wmin considered in our paper. The posted wage must maximize the
pro...t and the maximized pro...t     must be equalized between all ...rms in the market. Speci...cally,
each ...rm in market    solves the following problem:

                                       =        max          (p     w) ` (w)                         (4)
                                            w fR ;wmin g

where p is the productivity of the job         and ` (w) is the number of available workers per ...rm at
the wage w: That is, ...rm'
                          s output (sales) is given by y = p ` . It is noted that ` (w) is not the
typical labor demand function in neoclassical theory of production, but the available workers for
each wage that yields identical pro...t. Thus, it is immediate that for a higher wage posted, more
workers can be attracted to the job post.
    Clearly, the minimum wage has an impact in the ...rm'
                                                        s o¤er distribution only if wmin > R : In
this case, we call the minimum wage as e¤ ective in the market :
    Similar to the occupational choice problem of the unemployed workers, ...rms of di¤erent tasks
(except a) can choose to post vacancies in two di¤erent markets. Hence, the pro...ts of routine and
manual tasks are given by

                              r   = max f    rh ;   rm g ;    n   = max f   nm ;   nl g              (5)


3     Equilibrium

We consider a stationary wage posting equilibrium where a non-degenerate distribution of ...rms is
posting wages in each market, workers search in the same market, and

                                        rh    rh    nm    nm
                                       Ua  = Urh ; Urm = Unm                                         (6)



                                                         8
In other words, unemployed high-skilled workers who previously worked in the abstract task strictly
                       a > U a ), but those with previous experience in rh job are indi¤erent between
prefer abstract task (Ua    rh

a and rh jobs. Similarly, unemployed middle-skilled workers previously in the routine job strictly
                      rm > U rm ), but those with previous experience in nm job are indi¤erent
prefer routine task (Urm    nm

between rm and nm jobs.
    There are 6 market clearing conditions, one each for the three types of vacancy tasks and one
each for the three types of workers:

                                va =    a va ;   vrh + vrm =       r vr ;       vnm + vnl =        n vn
                                                                                                                                   (7)
                                 na + nrh = nh ; nrm + nnm = nm ; nnl = nl

It is clear that both U     0   and      depend on labor market tightness                         : Hence, the market tightness
    measures for all markets           2 fa; rh; rm; nm; nlg, the 5 types of vacancies posted in each market
and the 5 types of workers in each market can be determined by the ...ve market tightness de...nitions
          v
(     =   n   ), the 6 market clearing conditions and the 4 indi¤erence boundary conditions given below:

                                  rh ( rh )      =   rm ( rm ) ;     nm ( nm )       =   nl   (   nl )
                                                                                                                                   (8)
                                 rh ( ) = U rh (
                                Ua                               nm                     nm
                                      a    rh            rh ) ; Urm (           rm ) = Unm (      nm )

These indi¤erent boundary conditions determine labor market tightness endogenously.


3.1       Comparative Static Analysis

In this subsection, we characterize the stationary wage posting equilibrium. Our chief goal is to
analyze the e¤ects of changes in the minimum wage. To do so, we shall examine a key channel of
such comparative statics, namely, the market tightness of each market .
    We begin with the following proposition:

Proposition 1 (Market Tightness, Wage Distribution and Pro...ts)

(i) The wage distribution rises (in the ...rst-order stochastic dominance sense) with a tighter market,
          i.e.,
                                                          @F (w;            )
                                                                                <0
                                                             @

(ii) Suppose the separation rate is less than the job ...nding rate, i.e.                                <   ( ) ; then ...rm's pro...t
          declines when the market is tighter, i.e.,

                                                               @
                                                                      <0
                                                               @

                                                               9
   Regarding part (i) of Proposition 1, it is clear that when market is tighter to ...rms, they must
post higher wage and as a result the cdf of a particular wage w must be lower. To understand
part (ii), note that a tighter market implies a higher job ...nding rate and hence higher wage. More
complicated, there are three e¤ects on pro...t. First, there is a direct wage cost e¤ ect : higher wage
lowers the markup p     w, thus reducing pro...t directly. Second, there is a production scale e¤ ect : an
increase in market tightness means that worker'
                                              s job ...nding rate is higher. The higher wage would
attract more workers as well, thus raising the pro...t. Finally, there is an employment outow e¤ ect :
more worker inows must be accompanied by more outows as a result of on-the-job search in the
steady state, and such outows o¤set part of the production scale e¤ect and hence lower pro...t.
Under the condition speci...ed in part (ii), the ...rst and third e¤ects outweigh the second, resulting
in a reduction in pro...t.
   We next study how changes in the minimum wage in a particular market a¤ect that market'
                                                                                         s
wage distribution and pro...t:

Proposition 2 (Minimum Wage, Wage Distribution and Pro...ts) Suppose minimum wage is e¤ ec-
tive in market . Then, with a rise in the minimum wage in this market,

(i) the wage distribution rises (in the ...rst-order stochastic dominance sense), i.e.,

                                             @F (w; ; wmin )
                                                             <0
                                                 @wmin

(ii) the pro...t accrued by ...rms in this market also decreases, i.e.,

                                              @      ( ; wmin )
                                                                <0
                                                     @wmin


   Part (i) is easily understood: when a rise in a market'
                                                         s minimum wage is e¤ective, it forces
some low o¤er vacancies to post higher wage, thus reducing the cdf of a particular wage w. This
immediately leads to the ...nding in part (ii): given the market tightness, a higher posted wage has
a direct wage cost e¤ect, which lowers the pro...t accrued by low o¤er vacancies and hence all ...rms
in the market as a result of pro...t equalization.
   The reader should be warned that the result in Proposition 2 is under a ...xed measure of
market tightness. To characterize the equilibrium e¤ects of minimum wage, we must investigate how
minimum wage a¤ects the 4 indi¤erence boundaries given in (8). Consider a rise in the minimum
wage in the lowest market        = nl. With Proposition 2, we are ready to analyze the indi¤erent
boundaries for each routine ...rm and each manual ...rm to post in two possible markets. Yet, we

                                                      10
must also study the indi¤erent boundaries for each high skilled and each middle skilled to enter into
two potential markets. To do so, we impose a mild regularity condition that the own-market e¤ect
of market tightness on its search workers'values is all positive:
   Condition R (Regularity Condition)
                    rh ( )        rh (             nm (
                  @Ua    a      @Urh   rh )      @Urm    rm )     U nm ( nm )
                           > 0;             > 0;              > 0; nm         >0
                    @ a           @ rh              @ rm             @ nm

   In our calibration analysis, the validity of Condition R will be checked. In the following proposi-
tions, we perform several sets of comparative statics of changes in the minimum wage in the lowest
market    = nl.

Proposition 3 (Minimum Wage and Labor Market Allocation) Suppose that minimum wage is
e¤ ective only in market nl, i.e. wmin > Rnl ; and that Condition R holds. Then as the minimum
wage rises, the equilibrium possesses the following properties:

(i) (e¤ ect on the potential labor pool of each market) There is a cross-adjacent market substitution
      e¤ ect on the worker side such that potential labor pools adjust in an alternating way as follows:

                              @na        @nrh      @nrm       @nnm
                                   < 0;       > 0;       < 0;       >0
                             @wmin      @wmin      @wmin      @wmin

(ii) (e¤ ect on the vacancies in each market) There is a cross-adjacent market substitution e¤ ect on
      the ...rm side such that vacancies adjust in an alternating way as follows:

                              @vrh      @vrm       @vnm        @vnl
                                   > 0;       < 0;       > 0;       <0
                             @wmin      @wmin      @wmin      @wmin


   Recall from Proposition 2 that higher minimum wage lowers the pro...t of the ...rms operating in
the nl market. Hence, there is incentive for the manual task vacancies to shift to nm market to hire
middle-skilled workers instead. This is a cross-adjacent market substitution e¤ ect on the ...rm side.
Therefore, we have vnl drops but vnm rises. Now since there are more vacancies in the nm market,
more middle-skilled workers are attracted to that market, which is a typical matching externality
e¤ ect. Hence, we have nnm increases and nrm falls, where the latter entails a cross-adjacent market
substitution e¤ect on the worker side. Similarly, seeing less workers available in the rm market,
routine task ...rms choose to post more vacancies in the rh market instead. Thus, we have vrm
reduces and vrh increases. Finally, with more high-skilled workers being attracted to the rh market,
nrh rises and na falls. In short, Proposition 3 is a result of cross-adjacent market substitution e¤ects
on both sides of the labor market in conjunction of matching externality e¤ects.

                                                  11
    We turn next to examining the e¤ect of lowest market minimum wage on market tightness
        v
(   =   n   ):

Proposition 4 (Minimum Wage and Labor Market Tightness) Suppose that minimum wage is
e¤ ective only in market nl (wmin > Rnl ) and that Condition R holds. Then as the minimum wage
rises, the lowest market nl is tighter, but all the other markets are thicker, i.e.,
                                          @
                                               > 0;      2 fa; rh; rm; nmg
                                         @wmin
                                          @ nl
                                               <0
                                         @wmin



    Using Proposition 3, we can see that, with higher minimum wage in the lowest market nl, its
vacancies are lower whereas the labor pool in the highest market a is larger, implying a tighter market
in nl but a thicker market in a. Concerning the next highest market rh, we learn from Proposition
3 that there are more vacancies posted which in turn attracts more high-skilled workers. Notice
however that in this market it does not pay as much as in market a. Thus, to maintain indi¤erence
          rh ( ) = U rh (
boundary Ua    a    rh          rh ),    it must be that market rh is also thicker. Regarding market
rm, Proposition 3 indicates that the vacancies in market rm are now lower and its labor pool is
smaller. Since market rh is thicker and ...rm pro...t          rh ( rh )   reduces (Proposition 1(ii)), to maintain
indi¤erence boundary     rh ( rh )   =    rm ( rm )   requires that market rm is thicker too. Finally, we turn
to market nm and note from Proposition 3 that its vacancies are higher and its labor pool becomes
                                                                        nm (
larger. Because market rm is thicker, to maintain indi¤erence boundary Urm                                nm (
                                                                                                rm )   = Unm     nm ),

we must have a thicker market nm as well.
    Since higher market tightness leads to higher job ...nding rates, unemployment must fall unam-
biguously. Thus, the following proposition is an immediate consequence of Proposition 4.

Proposition 5 (Minimum Wage and Unemployment) Suppose that minimum wage is e¤ ective only
in market nl (wmin > Rnl ) and that Condition R holds. Then as the minimum wage rises, the lowest
market has a higher unemployment rate, but unemployment rates in all the other markets are lower,
i.e.,
                                          @u
                                               < 0;      2 fa; rh; rm; nmg
                                         @wmin
                                          @unl
                                               >0
                                         @wmin



                                                          12
   Since higher market tightness leads to higher job ...nding, which in turn entails lower unemploy-
ment, the result follows immediately from the Proposition 4. The result is interesting: although a
minimum wage hike has a direct consequence raising the unemployment rate in the lowest market,
it helps reducing unemployment in all other markets. Of course, the overall unemployment e¤ect
of the entire economy remains a quantitative question.
   Finally, we investigate the minimum wage e¤ects on employment in each market, namely, e =
n (1    u ) for    2 fa; rh; rm; nm; nlg. This is the heart of our research, as elaborated in the
introduction.

Proposition 6 (Minimum Wage and Employment) Suppose that minimum wage is e¤ ective only
in market nl (wmin > Rnl ) and that Condition R holds. Then as the minimum wage rises, the
equilibrium possesses the following properties:

(i) Employment in the lowest market nl falls, i.e.,

                                                   @enl
                                                        <0
                                                  @wmin

(ii) Employment in the routine high-skilled and manual middle-skilled markets are higher, i.e.,

                                           @erh      @enm
                                                > 0;       >0
                                          @wmin      @wmin

(iii) Changes in employment in the abstract and routine middle-skilled markets are generally am-
       biguous.



   The results are direct consequences of Propositions 3(i) and 5. Whenever the minimum wage
e¤ects on the potential labor pool and the unemployment rate are opposite, its e¤ect on employment
is unambiguous. Speci...cally, in markets rh and nm, the e¤ects of a minimum wage hike are to
enlarge their labor pools and to reduce their unemployment rates. Thus, equilibrium employment
rises in these markets. In the lowest market nl, the labor pool is unchanged while the unemployment
rate is higher, thereby suppressing its equilibrium employment. In the remaining two markets, a
and rm, the potential labor pools shrink but the unemployment rates are lower as well. Hence, the
net e¤ects turn out to be ambiguous. What is interesting is the unambiguous bene...cial e¤ects of a
minimum wage hike on the employment measures in the high-routine market (rh) and the middle-
manual market (nm). Such a ...nding is a consequence of a combination of two novel channels ­
the cross-adjacent market substitution e¤ ects on both sides of the labor market and the matching

                                                  13
                 Task                                         Occupation
              Abstract      Professional & related, Management, business, & ...nancial operations
               Routine      O¢ ce & administrative, Sales & related
               Manual       Production, Transportation, Installation, Construction & Service

                                         Table 1: Occupations and tasks


externality e¤ ects in all labor markets. Since Y = p e , the e¤ects of a minimum wage hike on
total output in each market follows immediately.
        The net employment e¤ect of a minimum wage hike on the abstract market and the middle-
routine markets and the overall employment e¤ect of the entire economy remain a quantitative
question, to which we now turn.


4        Quantitative analysis

In this section, the model is calibrated to the US labor market. We then evaluate the impacts of
the federal minimum wage increase during the great recession and the ongoing local minimum wage
increase in Seattle on the labor market.


4.1        Data

To compute wages and other labor market statistics for each task in the US economy, we use the
micro-data from the CPS Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC), which is conducted
every March and asks detailed questions about each individual'
                                                             s labor income. Our sample contains
workers aged 16 to 64 from 2003 to 2017. We exclude armed forces and those out of labor force.
Workers'occupations are aggregated into ten occupation groups according to the de...nition in ASEC.
Following the theory-based occupational classi...cations in Jaimovich and Siu (2018) and Foote and
Ryan (2015), we then categorize these ten occupation groups into abstract (a), routine (r), and
manual (m) tasks, as shown in Table 1 4 .
        We calculate the hourly wage by dividing the total annual wage and salary earnings by the
product of the number of weeks worked and the usual hours workers per week. All wages are
deated to 2003 dollars using the Consumer Price Index from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. As is
    4
        Speci...cally, we identify Nonroutine Cognitive as Abstract tasks, Routine Cognitive as Routine tasks, and Routine
Manual and Nonroutine Manual as Manual tasks.



                                                             14
standard in the literature, we trim wages at the 0.1 and 99.9 percentiles.
   Finally, we de...ne skill level of a worker by her education level. Speci...cally, we take low skill
workers as those with less than high school diploma, middle skill workers as those who completed
high school but less than four-year college, and high skill workers as those with at least four-year
college.


4.2    Calibration and speci...cation

We assume a standard constant-returns-to-scale matching function M (n; v ) = An v 1          : Hence the
job ...nding rate is given by

                                       M (n ; v )                   1
                                ( )=              = M (1;    )=A                                          (9)
                                          n

One period in the model corresponds to one year. We set the real interest rate as r = 5%, as
commonly used in macro studies. The matching elasticity of workers in the matching function, ; is
taken to be 0:5, which is also standard in the literature (e.g., see Petrongolo and Pissarides, 2001).
We will nonetheless perform sensitivity analysis with regard to .
   The population of the economy is normalized to one. Hence, fnh ; nm ; nl g is taken to the
fraction of workers (both employed and unemployed) for each skill, which are measured to be
f0:30; 0:58; 0:12g : For each task k 2 fa; r; ng, we also measure the e¤ective number of jobs      k vk   as
the number of workers working in each task and by setting the labor intensity    k   as 0:5 for all tasks.
Again, robustness check will be performed.
   The rest of the parameters f ; p ; Ag are jointly calibrated to match the US labor market
statistics. In particular, the separation rates are chosen to match the unemployment rate for each
market, and the labor productivity of each job is calibrated to match the relative wages of each
job in the data, after normalizing the labor productivity of job nl as one. Finally, the ow utility
of unemployment is taken to be 40% of the productivity of each market, following Shimer (2005).
In the baseline calibration, we set the level of minimum wage as the 2007 federal minimum wage
($5:15), which corresponds to 0.407 in terms of labor productivity unit in the model.
   Table 2 shows the baseline parameters, and Table 3 shows the comparison of data vs. model
with respect to the target moments. Lastly, Table 4 shows the baseline results on aggregate output,
employment, and potential labor pool in each market.




                                                 15
Parameters                     Meaning                     Values
    ba          Flow utility of unemployment for job a      1.12
   brh         Flow utility of unemployment for job rh      0.92
   brm         Flow utility of unemployment for job rm      0.69
   bnm         Flow utility of unemployment for job nm      0.53
   bnl         Flow utility of unemployment for job nl      0.40

     a                 Separation rate of job a            0.00098

    rh                Separation rate of job rh            0.0044

    rm                Separation rate of job rm            0.0018

    nm                Separation rate of job nm            0.0097

    nl                Separation rate of job nl            0.0053
    pa               Labor productivity of job a            2.80
   prh               Labor productivity of job rh           2.31
   prm              Labor productivity of job rm            1.72
   pnm              Labor productivity of job nm            1.32
   pnl               Labor productivity of job nl            1
    r                        Interest rate                  0.05
                         Matching elasticity                 0.5
    A                     Matching e¢ cacy                  0.057

     a                Labor intensity of task a              0.5

     r                 Labor intensity of task r             0.5

     n                Labor intensity of task n              0.5
    va                    Firm size of task a               0.52
    vr                    Firm size of task r               0.56
   vn                    Firm size of task n                0.92
   nh                   Number of h workers                 0.30
   nm                   Number of m workers                 0.58
    nl                   Number of l workers                0.12
  wmin       Minimum wage in terms of labor productivity    0.41

         Table 2: Parameters (Baseline calibration)



                                16
                              Wage ratio                        Unemployment rate
                        wa    wrh     wrm    wnm
             Moment     wnl   wnl     wnl    wnl     ua         urh      urm     unm     unl
             Data      3.02   2.31    1.76   1.36    0.018      0.032    0.048   0.067   0.098
             Model     2.93   2.39    1.78   1.34    0.018      0.033    0.045   0.069   0.095

                         Table 3: Target moments, data vs. model


            Market   Aggregate output (Y )    Employment (e)            Potential labor pool (n)
              a               0:79                       0:28                    0:29
             rh               0:02                       0:01                    0:01
             rm               0:85                       0:49                    0:51
             nm               0:09                       0:07                    0:07
              nl              0:11                       0:11                    0:12

                                     Table 4: Baseline results


4.3   Federal minimum wage increase (2007 - 2009)

Over a decade ago, there was a federal minimum wage hike, where wmin increased from $5:15 in 2007
to $7:25 in 2009 over several incremental rises in two years. For comparison purposes, we convert
all values in 2003 dollars. As such, this minimum wage hike corresponds to an increase from $4:57
to $6:22.
   In the theory established, we conduct comparative statics with respect to a small increase of
minimum wage that prevails only in the lowest (nl) market. In our quantitative analysis, the size of
minimum wage increase is large. Thus, it is possible that the minimum wage may become e¤ective
in the second lower (nm) or even the middle ranked (rm) market. As it can be seen below, in the
case of the federal minimum wage increase, minimum wage at the end becomes e¤ective in both the
nl and the nm markets; for the local minimum wage increase in Seattle, minimum wage by 2021
will be e¤ective in all three lower markets, nl, nm and rm.
   For illustrative purposes, think of the federal case where minimum wage binds in both the nl
and the nm markets. On the one hand, the minimum wage hike in the nl market generates a
cross-adjacent market substitution e¤ect from the ...rm side a¤ecting all labor market measures in
the nm market. On the other, there is a direct minimum wage e¤ect in the nm market because it is
binding after the change. When the former cross-adjacent market substitution e¤ect and the latter


                                                    17
                 0.6



                 0.5


                                                                                      a
                 0.4                                                                  rh
                                                                                      rm
                                                                                      nm
                 0.3



                 0.2



                 0.1



                   0
                       4.6   4.8      5       5.2     5.4      5.6     5.8       6         6.2
                                                     wmin

                 Figure 2: Potential labor pool (federal minimum wage increase)


direct e¤ect a¤ect a labor market measure in the nm market in the same direction, the net e¤ect
is ampli...ed. When the former and the latter direct e¤ects are conicting with each other, the net
e¤ect is dampened and the sign may even be switched if the latter is stronger.
    By plotting a labor market measure against the minimum wage, we can see the emerge of a
"kink" that is corresponding to the binding of the minimum wage in a higher (than the lowest)
market. For the sake of brevity, we present only such changes for potential labor pool (Figure 2)
and unemployment (Figure 3) in each market and in aggregation, while delegating others to the
Appendix. As it can be seen, the minimum wage becomes binding in the nm market when it reaches
about $5:95.
    In order to understand the net e¤ect of a minimum wage hike, we thus compute how responsive
of each labor market measure changes before and after the kink (i.e., the minimum wage elasticities
wmin @xij
xij @wmin ,   evaluated at $4:57 and $6:22, respectively). These elasticities are summarized in Table 5.
    The results suggest that the minimum wage elasticities of potential labor pool in market          2
fa; rh; rm; nmg become larger in absolute value when the minimum wage becomes binding in the
nm market. This is consistent with Proposition 3: the cross-adjacent market substitution e¤ect from



                                                     18
0.14


0.12


 0.1

               a
0.08           rh
               rm
               nm
0.06           nl
               agg.

0.04


0.02


  0
       4.6   4.8      5   5.2    5.4   5.6   5.8   6    6.2
                                wmin

Figure 3: Unemployment rate (federal minimum wage increase)




                                19
                           At wmin                                                    At wmin
       Measure           4.57     6.22    Change              Measure              4.57     6.22    Change
 Potential labor pool                                    Vacancy allocation
            na          -0.007   -0.019    -0.012                va                  0        0        0
            nrh         0.213    0.530     0.317                vrh                0.223    0.556    0.333
            nrm         -0.056   -0.154    -0.097               vrm               -0.047   -0.128    -0.081
            nnm         0.413    0.964     0.550                vnm                0.427    0.255    -0.172
            nnl            0       0         0                  vnl               -1.722   -2.175    -0.453
 Unemployment rate                                   Employment or Output
            ua          -0.003   -0.009    -0.006             ea or Ya            -0.007   -0.019    -0.012
            urh         -0.005   -0.012    -0.008            erh or Yrh            0.214    0.531    0.317
            urm         -0.005   -0.013    -0.008           erm or Yrm            -0.056   -0.153    -0.097
            unm         -0.006   0.329     0.336            enm or Ynm             0.414    0.939    0.525
            unl         0.781    0.951     0.171             enl or Ynl           -0.083   -0.139    -0.056

            Table 5: Minimum wage elasticities (federal minimum wage increase)


the ...rm side and the direct e¤ect on the potential labor pool in the nm market are both positive
and reinforcing, leading to a larger increase in nnm and hence larger changes in other potential
labor pool via cross-adjacent market substitution e¤ects from both sides. Similar reinforcing e¤ect
is found in ...rm pro...t in which a minimum wage hike causes a larger drop after it becomes binding
in the nm market. Turning now to unemployment, we can see that the negative cross-adjacent
market substitution e¤ect from the ...rm side is small but there is a sizable direct and positive e¤ect
on unm (recall Proposition 5). This induces a sign switch from (small) negative to (large) positive.
As a consequence, the minimum wage elasticity of market tightness         nm   also turns from positive to
negative.
   With the above discussion in mind, we are ready to examine how much percentage changes in
each labor market measure this federal minimum wage hike induces. The results are summarized
in Table 6.
   Let us begin with the e¤ects of federal minimum wage hike on employment (or output), which is
heart of this study. Recall that e = n (1 u ) and Y = p e . As a result of the reinforcing positive
e¤ects from cross-adjacent market substitution and direct minimum wage changes, the potential
labor pool in the nm market features the largest 14:63 percentage point increase. Through cross-

                                                    20
     Measure                                       Percentage Change (%)
Potential labor pool      na             nrh              nrm              nnm             nnl
                         -0.25           7.55             -2.00            14.63            0
Vacancy allocation        va             vrh              vrm              vnm             vnl
                           0             7.92             -1.66            11.71         -47.22
Unemployment rate         ua             urh              urm              unm             unl
                        -0.002          -0.005           -0.007            0.084          3.155
   Average wage        wmean;a        wmean;rh          wmean;rm        wmean;nm        wmean;nl
                         0.001          0.003             0.004            0.068         -0.163
  Employment or        ea or Ya       erh or Yrh       erm or Yrm      enm or Ynm      enl or Ynl
 Aggregate output        -0.25           7.56             -1.99            14.52          -3.49
 Income inequality     2 (log(w ))    2 (log(w ))      2 (log(w ))     2 (log(w ))     2 (log(w ))
                                  a              rh               rm              nm              nl

                         -0.12          -0.16             -0.16            -6.60         -36.57
Aggregate measures       uagg            wagg             Yagg         Yproductivity   2 (log(w ))
                                                                                                  agg

                         0.41           -0.25             -0.46            -0.03          -0.73

Table 6: Percentage change of economic variables (federal minimum wage increase)




                                                 21
adjacent market substitution from the worker side, it also induces a 2:00 percentage point drop in the
rm market potential labor pool and through cross-adjacent market substitution from the ...rm side a
7:55 percentage point rise in the rh market potential labor pool. While the binding minimum wage
in the nl market results in a sizable 3:16 percentage point increase in its unemployment rate, the
conicting e¤ects from cross-adjacent market substitution and direct minimum wage changes in the
nm market lead to a modest rise of 0:084 percentage point in its unemployment. This replicates the
empirical results by Aaronson and Phelan (2019), who ...nd that while an increase in minimum wage
leads to a drop in employment of cognitively routine occupations, there is no signi...cant employment
on manual occupations. Similarly, Lordan and Neumark (2018) estimates that a rise in minimum
wage decreases signi...cantly the employment share of automatable jobs, which are mostly routine
in nature.
   Now, with a ...xed potential labor pool, the increase in the nl market unemployment directly
translates into a 3:49 percentage point drop in its employment and output. The large reinforc-
ing positive e¤ect of minimum wage in the nm market labor force together with a small rise in
its unemployment lead to a large 14:52 percentage point increase in its employment and output.
Through cross-adjacent market substitution, employment and output in the rm market fall by 1:99
percentage point and those in the rh market rise by 7:56 percentage point, largely driven by their
potential labor pool changes. With ...xed vacancies, the comparable changes in the a market are
negligible despite the presence of cross-adjacent market substitution e¤ects.
   Turning to other labor market measures, we note that federal minimum wage hike induces a
large 47:22 percentage point drop in vacancies in the nl market, substituted with a sizable 11:71
percentage point vacancy increase in the nm market. The sizes of vacancy creation in the rm and
rh markets are comparable to the respective labor force changes. These together lead to changes in
market tightness. We also note that ...rm pro...ts do not change much ­ even in the most direct nl
and nm markets, pro...t drop by less than 2 percentage points. Changes in average wages in each
market are even smaller. Nonetheless, the minimum wage e¤ects on wage inequalities measured
by variances of log wages are nonnegligible. In particular, a higher minimum wage lowers wage
inequality in the nl market; it also suppresses wage inequality in the nm market when the minimum
wage becomes binding. While wage inequality in the nl market falls by 36.57 percentage point, that
in the nm market drops by 6:60 percentage point. Comparable changes in other markets purely
through cross-adjacent market substitution are negative, though being generally small. Autor et
al. (2016) estimate that minimum wage reduces income inequality for both low and high income
earners, suggesting there is spillover e¤ect on inequality which is consistent with our ...ndings. Cengiz


                                                   22
et al. (2019) also ...nd spillover e¤ects up to $3 above the minimum wage.
   Overall, in the entire economy, the o¤setting e¤ects of federal minimum wage hike only raise the
unemployment rate by 0:41 percentage point and lowers employment and output by 0:46 percentage
point. The negative e¤ect on overall employment is also estimated by Aaronson and French (2007).
As a result of overall tighter nl and nm markets, the average wage of the economy drops slightly
by 0:25 percentage point. While overall wage inequality reduces by 0:73 percentage point, overall
productivity remains essentially unchanged. The e¤ect on inequality is consistent with Lee (1999)
and Autor et al. (2016), who ...nds that the falling federal minimum wage in the 1980s is responsible
to the rising income inequality during the same time.
   To this end, we would like to apply our model to a recent discussion on linking minimum wage
to markdown via labor market power (see, e.g., Berger, Herkenho¤ and Mongey 2019). Speci...cally,
an increase in the minimum wage may induce some ...rms to compress their markdowns and raise
wages while expanding employment along workers'labor supply curves. Thus, in a market featuring
a greater density of workers at the minimum wage, one would expect ...rms to earn lower pro...ts
whereas the market'
                  s average wage is expected to be higher (See Figure 4 and Table 7). The
predictions on pro...ts and average wages are consistent with our partial equilibrium e¤ects shown
in Propositions 2(ii) (pro...ts) and 2(i) (wage distribution).
   However, as stressed in our model, we have a cross-adjacent market substitution e¤ect on the
...rm side. In response to a minimum wage hike, ...rms switch job postings from the nl to the nm
markets, implying an improved threat point for ...rms posting in the nl market and a deteriorated
threat point in the nm market. Thus, in general equilibrium, the average wage in the nl market
tends to fall whereas that in the nm market tends to rise. Our quantitative results indicate that
the general equilibrium e¤ect dominates the partial equilibrium e¤ect. As a consequence, the
general equilibrium average wage in the two lower markets turn out to be lower. Nonetheless, the
employment in the two lower markets is found to increase in response to the minimum wage hike,
because the positive employment response in the nm market outweighs the negative employment
e¤ect in the nl market. Quantitatively, a Federal minimum wage hike at the scale speci...ed above
raises the total employment in the two lower markets (the nl to the nm markets) by 3:255% and
but suppresses their average wage by 0:031%. Concerning the fall in the average wage in the two
lower markets, we identify a partial equilibrium positive e¤ect at 0:636%, which is dominated by
the general equilibrium e¤ect at 0:667%.




                                                   23
          0.18

          0.16

          0.14

          0.12
                                                                              a
           0.1                                                                rh
                                                                              rm
          0.08                                                                nm
                                                                              nl

          0.06

          0.04

          0.02

             0
                 4.6   4.8   5        5.2        5.4     5.6        5.8   6        6.2
                                               wmin

Figure 4: Density of workers at the minimum wage (federal minimum wage increase)




                             Market    D(density)      D(pro...t)
                                 a          0.00000    -0.00004
                                 rh         0.00000    -0.00007
                              rm            0.00000    -0.00007
                              nm            0.04912    -0.00092
                                 nl         0.07209    -0.00092

Table 7: Change in the density of workers at the minimum wage vs. change in the
pro...t (federal minimum wage increase)




                                               24
4.4   Local minimum wage increase (2017 - 2021)

While the federal minimum wage has been stagnant since 2009, a number of states and municipals
have been implementing and raising their local minimum wage to a much higher level. For example,
the state of California had a minimum wage of $11 in 2018 and is set to increase it to $15 in 2022.
Similarly, Massachusetts also plans to raise its local minimum wage from $11 in 2018 to $15 in 2023.
   Here we are considering the similar case of Seattle, where the minimum wage will be increasing
from $11 in 2017 to $15 in 2021. To evaluate its consequences, we convert these ...gures into 2003
dollars and project an annual price increase of 2:07% from 2017 to 2021, which is the annual ination
rate from 2003 to 2017. This translates to the increase of minimum wage from $8:26 to $10:37 in
2003 dollars. We then project the annual growth rate of the baseline productivity from 2017 to
2021 to be roughly the same as the annual growth rate in real wage for the nl group from 2003 to
2017, which is about 1:00%:
   As we have seen in the previous section, the minimum wage starts to bind in the nm market
when it is above $5:95: In fact, we can see below that the minimum wage is e¤ective also in the rm
market when it reaches $8:59: In this case, the cross-adjacent market substitution e¤ect can spill
over to both higher and lower markets, which, when coupled with the direct e¤ects on all three
binding markets, complicates the analysis for evaluating the overall e¤ects. As we will see in a
moment, however, in most of the cases the e¤ects of minimum wage are ampli...ed once it becomes
binding in rm market.
   Figure 5 and 6 show the e¤ects of local minimum wage change on the potential labor pool and
unemployment. We can see clearly that for the e¤ects on a and rh markets, there is a kink at $8:59;
which corresponds to the point when the minimum wage is also blinding in the rm market.
   Since the minimum wage is not binding in those two highest markets, we conclude the ampli...-
cation is purely due to the additional cross-adjacent market substitution e¤ect spilled over from the
rm market. As with the federal case, the large increase in local minimum wage would cause labor
ows from the a market to rh market, and from the rm market to the nm market. It is perhaps
surprising that the direct binding e¤ect in the rm market does not have much mitigating impact
on the falling of nrm : This shows that the indirect cross-adjacent market substitution e¤ects from
the lower binding market (i.e. nm and nl) are much stronger than the direct e¤ect in this case.
The unemployment rate, however, tells a di¤erent story. We can see that while unm and unl are
increasing due to the fact that the minimum wage is binding in these markets, urm initially falls
mildly due to the spillover of the matching externality e¤ects from the lower markets. Nevertheless,



                                                 25
 0.5

0.45

 0.4

0.35

 0.3

0.25
                         a
 0.2                     rh
                         rm
0.15                     nm


 0.1

0.05

  0
       8.4   8.6   8.8   9    9.2   9.4   9.6   9.8   10   10.2
                                wmin

 Figure 5: Potential labor pool (local minimum wage increase)




                               26
0.35


 0.3


0.25

                                                           a
 0.2                                                       rh
                                                           rm
                                                           nm
0.15                                                       nl
                                                           agg.

 0.1


0.05


  0
       8.4   8.6   8.8   9   9.2    9.4   9.6   9.8   10   10.2
                               wmin

 Figure 6: Unemployment rate (local minimum wage increase)




                               27
                           At wmin                                                  At wmin
       Measure           8.26    10.37    Change              Measure         8.26      10.37     Change
 Potential labor pool                                    Vacancy allocation
          na            -0.030   -0.243    -0.213                va             0         0         0
          nrh            0.760   3.056     2.296                vrh           0.802     3.391     2.590
         nrm            -0.259   -0.932    -0.673               vrm           -0.216    -2.526    -2.310
         nnm             1.262   2.699     1.437                vnm           0.260     0.211     -0.049
          nnl              0        0        0                  vnl           -4.153    -18.697   -14.543
 Unemployment rate                                   Employment or Output
          ua            -0.015   -0.119    -0.104             ea or Ya        -0.030    -0.241    -0.211
          urh           -0.020   -0.162    -0.141            erh or Yrh       0.761     3.061     2.301
         urm            -0.020   0.760     0.780            erm or Yrm        -0.258    -0.971    -0.714
         unm             0.463   1.132     0.669            enm or Ynm        1.224     2.588     1.364
          unl            1.745   6.547     4.802             enl or Ynl       -0.340    -2.932    -2.592

           Table 8: Minimum wage elasticities (local minimum wage increase)


once the minimum wage becomes binding in the rm market, the own matching externality e¤ect
dominates and hence leads to an increase in the unemployment rate, similar to what we have seen
in the federal case.
   Again we can also look at the minimum wage elasticity to understand the mechanism and to
evaluate the quantitative signi...cance of the impact of the local minimum wage change. Table 8
shows the minimum wage elasticity with respect to the local minimum wage before and after the
kink (i.e., at $8:26 and $10:37 respectively).
   First, we see that in general the minimum wage elasticity for the a and rh markets becomes
much larger after the rm market becomes binding. For example, the elasticity for vrh after kink
becomes four times as high as that before the kink. The elasticity for the unemployment in the a
market becomes eight times as high. Similar pattern can be observed for other variables such as the
aggregate output. This shows that the spillover e¤ects from the lower markets become much stronger
with the addition of rm market binding e¤ects. This is mainly due to the strong substitution e¤ects
on the ...rm side for the routine tasks. Second, we also observe that the elasticity for nnm ; the
potential labor pool in the nm market, becomes signi...cantly larger. This is a consequence of the
strong substitution from the worker's side. Interestingly, the direct binding e¤ect of the minimum

                                                    28
       Measure                                         Percentage Change (%)
 Potential labor pool        na              nrh              nrm              nnm             nnl
                            -3.65           91.08            -10.42            50.84            0
 Vacancy allocation          va              vrh              vrm              vnm             vnl
                             0              101.08           -27.24            5.08          -81.05
 Unemployment rate           ua              urh              urm              unm             unl
                           -0.032           -0.081            0.467            1.364         14.619
    Average wage          wmean;a         wmean;rh          wmean;rm        wmean;nm        wmean;nl
                           0.018            0.047             0.036            0.231         -0.707
   Employment or          ea or Ya        erh or Yrh       erm or Yrm      enm or Ynm      enl or Ynl
  Aggregate output          -3.62           91.24            -10.86            48.62         -17.47
  Income inequality      2 (log(w ))      2 (log(w ))      2 (log(w ))     2 (log(w ))     2 (log(w ))
                                    a                rh               rm              nm              nl

                            -1.78           -2.34            -19.52           -35.37         -59.59
 Aggregate measures         uagg             wagg             Yagg         Yproductivity   2 (log(w ))
                                                                                                      agg

                            2.33            -1.39             -2.77            -0.31          -1.68

  Table 9: Percentage change of economic variables (local minimum wage increase)


wage on the rm market does not induce middle-skilled workers to switch from nm to rm market.
In fact, they increasingly substitute away from the rm market. Third, as discussed before, the
existence of the direct minimum wage impact also induces a sign change of the elasticity of urm
from negative to positive. Finally, the binding e¤ects of the rm market induce a larger reduction of
the income inequality. This is especially true for the nl market, where the wage dispersion becomes
twice as large as that before the kink.
   To evaluate the overall impact of the policy change, Table 9 shows the percentage change of the
labor market variables under the local minimum wage change.
   Compared to the federal minimum wage change, we can see that the percentage changes are
much larger in this case, though the qualitative e¤ects are essentially alike. A noticeable exception
is the unemployment rate in the rm market, where the hike in the minimum wage now leads to
an increase in urm instead of a decrease as in the federal minimum wage case. The reversal of the
sign contributes to a much larger negative impact on aggregate output in the rm market, where the
production decreases by more than 10%. As in the case of the federal minimum wage change, the



                                                     29
                                 Market    D(density)    D(pro...t)
                                    a        0.0000       -0.0005
                                    rh       0.0000       -0.0010
                                   rm        0.0283       -0.0010
                                   nm        0.0327       -0.0038
                                    nl       0.8547       -0.0038

Table 10: Change in the density of workers at the minimum wage vs. change in the
pro...t (local minimum wage increase)


e¤ects on employment and aggregate output are dominated by the e¤ects on the potential labor pool
n. Hence, we observe that the percentage change in employment is similar to that in the potential
labor pool, exception for the nl market, where the change is purely induced by the unemployment
rate. Overall, the quantitative impact on average wage in each market remains relatively small.
    On the aggregate level, the local minimum wage leads to a 2:33 percentage point increase in
overall unemployment and 2:77% drop in aggregate production, both of which are quantitatively
signi...cant. This is consistent with Meer and West (2016), who ...nd signi...cant negative e¤ect of
local minimum wage on overall employment. The aggregate e¤ects on aggregate wages and income
inequality, however, remain relatively small. The local minimum wage change leads to a decrease
of 1:68% in the overall wage dispersion. Compared to the much larger reduction in each individual
market, we can see that the substitution of labor among these markets partly mitigate the impact
on inequality. The composition change of labor toward lower market also leads to a slight drop in
aggregate wages.
    As in the Federal case, we also identify a negative relationship between the density of workers
at the minimum wage and ...rm pro...ts across di¤erent markets (See Figure 7 and Table 10). Also
similarly, a local minimum wage hike now increases total employment in the three lower markets
where minimum wage is binding after the change, whereas average wage over these market turns
out to be lower due again to a dominating general equilibrium e¤ect.


5    Concluding Remarks

In this paper, we have constructed a general equilibrium search and matching framework incor-
porating multi-tier labor markets with workers of di¤erent skills. With di¤erent combinations of


                                                30
        1.2



          1



        0.8
                                                                    a
                                                                    rh
        0.6                                                         rm
                                                                    nm
                                                                    nl

        0.4



        0.2



          0
              8.4   8.6   8.8   9   9.2    9.4   9.6   9.8   10   10.2
                                      wmin

Figure 7: Density of workers at the minimum wage (local minimum wage increase)




                                      31
tasks and workers, we have characterized equilibrium outcomes in ...ve segmented labor markets,
abstract, routine high-skilled, routine middle-skilled, manual middle-skilled and manual low-skilled,
where ...rms may post the same type of tasks in di¤erent markets featuring di¤erent productiv-
ities (routine high-skilled versus routine middle-skilled, or manual middle-skilled versus manual
low-skilled) and workers of the same skill may choose enter into di¤erent markets (abstract versus
routine high-skilled, or routine middle-skilled versus manual middle-skilled). Thus, this general
structure has allowed for compositional changes in various markets where the minimum wage may
or may not bind and rich spillovers through cross-adjacent market substitution from both the ...rm
and the worker sides. With these in hand, we have established that when minimum wage rises,
(i) while the unemployment rate at the minimum wage binding market is higher, all other markets
enjoy a lower unemployment rate, (ii) while employment in the manual low-skilled jobs is lower,
employment in the routine high-skilled and manual middle-skilled markets is higher due to cross-
adjacent market substitutions, and (iii) employment in other markets has ambiguous responses due
to conicting e¤ects on the potential labor pool and the unemployment rate.
   We have also conducted quantitative analysis in a calibrated economy ...tting the U.S. labor
market, which is subsequently used to evaluate the impacts of the federal minimum wage increase
during the great recession (2007-2009) and the ongoing local minimum wage increase in Seattle
(2017-2021). We have discovered that the minimum wage becomes binding not only in the manual
low-skilled as well as the manual middle-skilled markets with the 2007-2009 federal minimum wage
hikes, while in all three lower markets the minimum wage becomes binding with the local minimum
wage hike. We have found that the minimum wage elasticities are larger in absolute value when
the minimum wage binds beyond the lowest market, as a result of the amplifying cross-adjacent
market substitution e¤ects from the ...rm and the worker sides, whereas the minimum wage e¤ects
on employment on the binding markets depend crucially on not only the magnitudes of these cross-
adjacent market substitution e¤ects but also the compositional e¤ects as a result of endogenous
changes in the size of each relevant market. We have also identi...ed that the employment e¤ects
may be weak in a nonbinding market that is positioned away from along the chain from the binding
market, especially when the required skill is less substitutable. Because there are more markets
with binding minimum wage, the local minimum wage policy has been found to yield larger e¤ects
than the federal minimum wage hike. We ...nd, however, that the e¤ect of both federal and local
minimum wage changes on the aggregate output is negative. We have also quanti...ed the minimum
wage e¤ects on submarket average and overall average wages as well as wage inequality, generally
pointing to small aggregate e¤ects due to conicting compositional e¤ects in various markets. We


                                                 32
have further obtained a positive correlation between the density of workers at the minimum wage in
the binding markets and the ...rm'
                                 s pro...t in these markets, consistent with the literature on labor
power.
   Our paper has thus provided a systematic evaluation of the two minimum wage policies within a
uni...ed search and matching framework, highlighting that the compositional changes in binding and
nonbinding markets and cross-adjacent market substitution e¤ects from the ...rm and the worker
sides together may serve to better understand the conicting empirical observations and to ensure
better assessment of the such minimum wage hikes.
   Along these lines, there are two avenues of extensions that are particularly interesting. On
the one hand, one may consider "worker exibility" in the sense that the hours at work may be
adjusted in response to a minimum wage hike. That is, by reducing the hours at work, the potentially
detrimental e¤ect on employment could be mitigated. On the other hand, one may allow for "...rm
exibility"in the sense that the capital intensity of some tasks may be adjusted upward to substitute
away from low pay jobs. In this, a minimum wage hike may lead to a reinforcing negative e¤ect on
employment. Thus, by incorporating these two dimensions of exibilities, whether minimum wage
hikes may hinder employment by more or by less would be yet another quantitative question for
future studies.




                                                33
References

Aaronson, D. and French, E. (2007). Product Market Evidence on the Employment E¤ects of the
  Minimum Wage. Journal of Labor Economics, 25(1):167­200.

Aaronson, D. and Phelan, B. J. (2019). Wage Shocks and the Technological Substitution of Low-
  wage Jobs. The Economic Journal, 129(617):1­34.

Autor, D. H., Manning, A., and Smith, C. L. (2016). The Contribution of the Minimum Wage to
  US Wage Inequality over Three Decades: A Reassessment. American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, 8(1):58­99.

Berger, D., Herkenho¤, K., and Mongey, S. (2019). Labor Market Power. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Blanchard, O. J., Diamond, P., Hall, R. E., and Murphy, K. (1990). The Cyclical Behavior of the
  Gross Flows of U.S. Workers. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1990(2):85.

Brochu, P. and Green, D. A. (2013). The Impact of Minimum Wages on Labour Market Transitions.
  The Economic Journal, 123(573):1203­1235.

Brown, C. (1999). Minimum wages, employment, and the distribution of income. In Ashenfelter, O.
  and Card, D., editors, Handbook of Labor Economics, volume 3, pages 2101­2163. North-Holland,
  Amsterdam.

Burdett, K. and Mortensen, D. T. (1998). Wage Di¤erentials, Employer Size, and Unemployment.
  International Economic Review, 39(2):257.

Card, D. and Krueger, A. B. (1995). Time-Series Minimum-Wage Studies: A Meta-analysis. Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 85(2):238­243.

Cengiz, D., Dube, A., Lindner, A., and Zipperer, B. (2019). The E¤ect of Minimum Wages on
  Low-Wage Jobs. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(3):1405­1454.

Davis, D. R. (1998). Technology, unemployment, and relative wages in a global economy. European
  Economic Review, 42(9):1613­1633.

Dube, A., Lester, T. W., and Reich, M. (2010). Minimum Wage E¤ects Across State Borders:
  Estimates Using Contiguous Counties. Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(4):945­964.


                                              34
Fitoussi, J.-P. (1994). Wage distribution and unemployment: the French experience. American
  Economic Review, 84(2):59­64.

Foote, C. L. and Ryan, R. W. (2015). Labor-Market Polarization over the Business Cycle. NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual, 29(1):371­413.

Jaimovich, N. and Siu, H. (2018). Job Polarization and Jobless Recoveries. Review of Economics
  and Statistics, (forthcoming).

Kumar, A. (2008). Capital tax, minimum wage, and labor market outcomes. Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 11(1):133­154.

Lee, D. S. (1999). Wage Inequality in the United States During the 1980s: Rising Dispersion or
  Falling Minimum Wage? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(3):977­1023.

Lordan, G. and Neumark, D. (2018). People versus machines: The impact of minimum wages on
  automatable jobs. Labour Economics, 52(August 2017):40­53.

MaCurdy, T. (2015). How E¤ective Is the Minimum Wage at Supporting the Poor? Journal of
  Political Economy, 123(2):497­545.

Meer, J. and West, J. (2016). E¤ects of the Minimum Wage on Employment Dynamics. Journal of
  Human Resources, 51(2):500­522.

Mortensen, D. (2003). Wage dispersion : why are similar workers paid di¤ erently? Zeuthen lecture
  book series. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Moscarini, G. and Postel-Vinay, F. (2016). Wage posting and business cycles: A quantitative
  exploration. Review of Economic Dynamics, 19:135­160.

Petrongolo, B. and Pissarides, C. A. (2001). Looking into the Black Box: A Survey of the Matching
  Function. Journal of Economic Literature, 39(2):390­431.

Postel-Vinay, F. and Robin, J.-m. (2002).     The Distribution of Earnings in an Equilibrium
  Search Model with State-Dependent O¤ers and Countero¤ers. International Economic Review,
  43(4):989­1016.

Shimer, R. (2005). The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies. American
  Economic Review, 95(1):25­49.



                                               35
Stewart, M. B. (2004). The Employment E¤ects of the National Minimum Wage. The Economic
  Journal, 114(494):C110­C116.

Stigler, G. J. (1946). The Economics of Minimum Wage Legislation. The American Economic
  Review.

Strobl, E. and Walsh, F. (2011). The ambiguous e¤ect of minimum wages on hours. Labour
  Economics, 18(2):218­228.




                                          36
                                           Appendix
               A major portion of the appendix is not intended for publication.


A       Solving the model

As is standard, the steady state unemployment rate in the market                        is given by

                                               u =
                                                          t   + ( )

Let G (w) be the cumulative distribution of employed workers earning a wage less than or equal
to w in the     market: In the steady state, the inow and the outow of the workers would be the
same, i.e.
                         ( ) F (w) u = (           + ( ) (1                F (w))) (1   u ) G (w)

and hence
                                                        F (w)
                                     G (w) =
                                                     + ( ) (1 F (w))
Therefore, the density of workers per ...rm earning wage w is given by
                                                           ( )
                                     l (w) =
                                               [    + ( ) (1 F (w))]2

Putting into the pro...t function and let w = w ; the lower limit of the wage distribution, we have

                                                                         ( )
                                          = (p        w )                                             (A.1)
                                                                  (    + ( ))2

Finally, by setting the pro...t be the same for all wages in the support of F (w) ; we have the wage
distribution
                                       ( )                                       ( )
                    (p     w )               = (p                     w)
                                 (   + ( ))2                            [ + ( ) (1 F (w))]2
                                              "                             1#
                                                                      p   w 2
                    ) F (w) =        1+               1                                               (A.2)
                                           ( )                        p   w

where
                                          w = max fR ; wmin g

The upper limit w of the wage distribution can be obtain by setting F (w ) = 1 :
                                               "                    #
                                                                                        2
                              w = w + (p             w ) 1
                                                                             ( )+




                                                              i
B     Derivations

B.1    Proof of Proposition 1

By di¤erentiating         with respect to                ; we have
            @       ( )                         (       + ( ))2          0(       )    2  ( )(       + ( ))   0(   )
                          = (p            w )
                @                                                             (       + ( ))4
                                     0(    ) (p w )
                          =                         (                    ( ))
                                 (        + ( ))3
                                     @
Hence, if   <       ( ) ; then       @     < 0:
    By di¤erentiating F (w) with respect to                     ; we have
                                                                     "                           1   #
                              @F (w;            )             0( )                       p   w   2
                                                    =                 1                                  <0
                                 @                         ( ( ))2                       p   w

for all w is the support of F (w) :


B.2    Proof of Proposition 2

If the minimum wage is e¤ective in the                     market, then

                                                               w = wmin

It is clear from (A.1) and (A.2) that the pro...t and wage distribution function are decreasing in w ;
given the same       ; hence we have
                                                           @  ( ; wmin )
                                                                         <0
                                                              @wmin
                                                         @F (w; ; wmin )
                                                                         <0
                                                             @wmin
for all w is the support of F (w) :


B.3    Proof of Proposition 3

(a) By substituting marketing clearing conditions (7), the system of indi¤erence conditions (8) can
be written as
                                                         vrh                      r vrvrh
                                                    rh          =    rm
                                                         nrh                      nrm
                                          vnm                                 n vn    vnm
                                      nm                        =    nl                   ; wmin
                                      nm nrm                                       nl
                                            a va                              vrh
                                   Ua                           = Urh
                                       nh nrh                                 nrh
                                       r vr    vrh                                vnm
                                 Urm                            = Unm
                                          nrm                                  nm nrm


                                                                    ii
Implicitly di¤erentiating the system with respect to wmin ;

               @  @ rh @ rm @ rm
                   rh                 @vrh   @ rh @ rh @nrh                             @ rm @ rm @nrm    @ rm
                                           +                                          =                 +
               @
               rh @vrh   @ rm @vrh @wmin     @ rh @nrh @wmin                            @ rm @nrm @wmin @wmin
  @ nm @ nm @ nl @ nl      @vnm     @ nm @ nm @nrm     @ nm                              @ nl
                                 +                   +                                =
  @ nm @vnm     @ nl @vnm @wmin     @ nm @nrm @wmin @wmin                               @wmin
                               @Ua @ a     @Urh @ rh    @nrh                            @Urh @ rh @vrh
                                                                                      =
                                @ a @nrh   @ rh @nrh @wmin                              @ rh @vrh @wmin
@Urm @ rm @vrh       @Urm @ rm   @Unm @ nm @nrm        @Urm                             @Unm @ nm @vnm    @Unm
                 +                                   +                                =                 +
@ rm @vrh @wmin      @ rm @nrm    @ nm @nrm @wmin @wmin                                 @ nm @vnm @wmin @wmin

Simplifying and using Proposition 1 and 2, we have
                               @nrm               @vrh                  @ nl
                                            = k2          = k2 k4            <0
                               @wmin             @wmin                 @wmin
                                @vrh              @ nl
                                            = k4          >0
                               @wmin             @wmin
                                @nrh              @vrh             @ nl
                                            = k1          = k1 k4       >0
                               @wmin             @wmin            @wmin
                               @vnm               @vrh             @ nl
                                            = k3          = k3 k4       >0
                               @wmin             @wmin            @wmin
where
                                         @Ua a
                                         @ a na
                            k0 =   @Ua a     @Urh rh
                                                      >        0
                                   @ a na +  @ rh nrh
                                        @Urh 1
                                        @ rh nrh
                            k1 =   @Ua a     @Urh rh
                                                      >        0
                                   @ a na + @ rh nrh
                                    k0 @ rh    @ rm @ rm
                                   nrh @ rh    @ rm @vrh
                            k2 =         @ rm @ rm
                                                               <0
                                         @ rm @nrm
                                   @   rh
                                   @        k0 @Urm       @Unm @ nm
                                                          @ nm @nrm k2
                                       rh
                                   @   rm   nrh @ rm
                                   @   rm
                            k3 =                   @Unm @ nm
                                                                               >0
                                                   @ nm @vnm
                                                         1
                            k4 =               @   nm @Urm
                                                                                      <0
                                   k0 @     rh @   nm @ rm         @        @ nl
                                                                            @vnm k3
                                                                       nl
                                   nrh @       @   rm @Unm         @
                                            rh                         nl
                                               @   rm @ nm


   (b) By (a), we have

                                    @ a           @    1
                                         = a va                               >0
                                   @wmin        @wmin na
                                    @ nl   1 @vnl
                                         =          <0
                                   @wmin   nl @wmin




                                                        iii
Now given the system

                                         rh ( rh )   =        rm ( rm )


                                        nm ( nm )    =        nl   (   nl ; wmin )

                                         Ua ( a ) = Urh (              rh )

                                    Urm (    rm )    = Unm (            nm )


By implicitly di¤erentiating, we have
                                                     @Ua
                                      @ rh            @ a  @ a
                                           =         @Urh @w
                                                                 >0
                                     @wmin           @ rh   min
                                                     @ rh
                                     @ rm            @ rh @ rh
                                           =         @ rm @w
                                                                 >0
                                     @wmin           @ rm    min
                                                     @Urm
                                     @ nm            @ rm @ rm
                                           =         @Unm @w
                                                                 >0
                                     @wmin           @ nm    min


   (c) The steady state unemployment rate is given by

                                            u =
                                                      t   + ( )

which is decreasing in   : Hence, the results follow from (b).




                                                         iv
C   Additional ...gures

         0.45

          0.4

         0.35

          0.3

         0.25

          0.2                                                     rh
                                                                  rm
                                                                  nm
         0.15
                                                                  nl

          0.1

         0.05

           0
                4.6   4.8   5    5.2       5.4   5.6   5.8    6        6.2
                                       wmin

    Figure C.1: Vacancy positing allocations (federal minimum wage increase)




                                       v
0.055



 0.05



0.045



 0.04



0.035
                                                          a
                                                          rh
 0.03                                                     rm
                                                          nm
                                                          nl

0.025
        4.6   4.8   5    5.2        5.4   5.6   5.8   6        6.2
                                wmin

  Figure C.2: Firm's pro...t (federal minimum wage increase)




                               vi
  6



  5



  4
                                                          a
                                                          rh
  3                                                       rm
                                                          nm
                                                          nl

  2



  1



  0
      4.6   4.8    5     5.2    5.4    5.6    5.8     6        6.2
                               wmin

Figure C.3: Labor market tightness (federal minimum wage increase)




                               vii
2.8
                                                       a
2.6                                                    rh
                                                       rm
2.4                                                    nm
                                                       nl
                                                       agg.
2.2

 2

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

 1

0.8
      4.6   4.8   5    5.2     5.4   5.6   5.8     6          6.2
                             wmin

  Figure C.4: Average wage (federal minimum wage increase)




                             viii
 2
                                                       a
1.8                                                    rh
                                                       rm
1.6                                                    nm
                                                       nl
                                                       agg.
1.4

1.2

 1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

 0
      4.6   4.8   5    5.2    5.4   5.6    5.8     6          6.2
                             wmin

Figure C.5: Aggregate output (federal minimum wage increase)




                             ix
0.14


0.12


 0.1

                                                       a
0.08                                                   rh
                                                       rm
                                                       nm
0.06                                                   nl
                                                       agg.

0.04


0.02


  0
       4.6   4.8   5   5.2       5.4   5.6   5.8   6          6.2
                             wmin

Figure C.6: Wage inequality (federal minimum wage increase)




                             x
     0.5

    0.45

     0.4

    0.35                                                         rh
                                                                 rm
     0.3                                                         nm
                                                                 nl
    0.25

     0.2

    0.15

     0.1

    0.05

      0
           8.4   8.6   8.8   9   9.2    9.4   9.6   9.8   10   10.2
                                   wmin

Figure C.7: Vacancy positing allocations (local minimum wage increase)




                                   xi
0.046

0.044

0.042

 0.04
                                                              a
0.038                                                         rh
                                                              rm
0.036                                                         nm
                                                              nl

0.034

0.032

 0.03

0.028
        8.4   8.6   8.8   9   9.2    9.4   9.6   9.8   10   10.2
                                wmin

    Figure C.8: Firm's pro...t (local minimum wage increase)




                               xii
 6



 5



 4
            a
            rh
 3          rm
            nm
            nl

 2



 1



 0
      8.4   8.6   8.8   9   9.2          9.4   9.6   9.8   10   10.2
                              wmin

Figure C.9: Labor market tightness (local minimum wage increase)




                                  xiii
2.8
                                                           a
2.6                                                        rh
                                                           rm
2.4                                                        nm
                                                           nl
                                                           agg.
2.2

 2

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

 1

0.8
      8.4   8.6   8.8   9   9.2     9.4   9.6   9.8   10   10.2
                              wmin

  Figure C.10: Average wage (local minimum wage increase)




                              xiv
 2
                                                          a
1.8                                                       rh
                                                          rm
1.6                                                       nm
                                                          nl
                                                          agg.
1.4

1.2

 1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

 0
      8.4   8.6   8.8   9   9.2    9.4   9.6   9.8   10   10.2
                              wmin

Figure C.11: Aggregate output (local minimum wage increase)




                              xv
0.14


0.12


 0.1

                                                           a
0.08                                                       rh
                                                           rm
                                                           nm
0.06                                                       nl
                                                           agg.

0.04


0.02


  0
       8.4   8.6   8.8   9   9.2    9.4   9.6   9.8   10   10.2
                               wmin

 Figure C.12: Wage inequality (local minimum wage increase)




                              xvi
D        Sensitivity Analysis

In this section, we perform robustness check. In particular, we check our ...ndings when we alter
each of the following preset parameters case-by-case: (i) set the worker matching elasticity                                    as 0:4
(Blanchard and Diamond 1990); (ii) set the worker matching elasticity                                 as 0:72 (Shimer 2005);
(iii) set the labor intensity as ( a ;            r ; n)   = (0:6; 0:4; 0:6). To be brief, we focus only on the key
indicators, namely, unemployment, employment/output, mean wage, and wage dispersion. Table
D.1 shows the results.
      First, when matching elasticity of workers                  rises, there is a sizable employment switch from the
rh and nm markets to the rm-market, while mean wages do not change much. From (9), we have
ln      = ln A + (1           ) ln   , so the job ...nding rate is increasing (resp. decreasing) in                        whenever
      < 1 (resp.        > 1). Under one-for-one matching, our baseline results of                         rm     < 1,    rh   > 1 and
 nm    > 1 imply that vrm , nrh and nnm are on the short side of the respective market. Thus, for
given       , higher        translates into a higher job ...nding rate            rm   but lower job ...nding rates            rh   and
 nm .    The direct e¤ect of a higher job ...nding rate                  rm    is to encourage more potential workers to
enter into the rm-market, whereas that of lower job ...nding rates                        rh   and   nm   is to discourage their
entry into the rh- and the nm-markets.
                                                        nm (
      Given the workers'indi¤erence boundary condition Urm                                   nm (
                                                                                   rm )   = Unm      nm ),   the above argument
implies      nm
            Urm   is higher but       nm
                                     Unm   is lower. To restore the equilibrium thereby requires                         to drop and
                                                                                                                   rm

 nm    to rise. Now look at the ...rms'indi¤erence boundary condition                           rm ( rm )    =    rh ( rh ).   Higher
 rm     but lower      rh   imply    rm    is lower but      rh   is higher. Recalling that            is decreasing in             , so
it requires     rm   to decrease but        rh   to increase in order to restore the equilibrium. Combining both
and applying similar arguments to the                  a   and the       nl   markets, we obtain a lower            rm   but higher
 rh   and    nm   in general equilibrium. Should these general equilibrium e¤ects be outweighed by the
direct e¤ects mentioned above (which is the case in our quantitative analysis), we would expect to
see the ow of employment from the rh and nm markets to the rm-market. This is yet another
illustration of the important mechanism, namely, cross-adjacent market substitution e¤ ect on both
the worker (when comparing the rm- and the rh-markets) and the ...rm side (when comparing the
rm- and the nm-markets).
      Next, when routine tasks (r) are more capital intensive but abstract (a) and manual (n) tasks
are less, there is a sizable switch from the rh to the a market and from the rm to nm market,
Intuitively, when routine task is more capital intensive, there is less potential vacancies available
for workers. On the other hand, there are more vacancies in the abstract and manual tasks. As a
result, it becomes relatively easier to ...nd jobs for abstract and manual tasks. This motivates high
skilled workers to switch from the rh to the a market, and middle skilled workers from the rm to
the nm market.
      Finally, when matching elasticity of workers increases, the aggregate income inequality drops,

                                                                  xvii
while the income inequality in each individual market barely changes. This is due only to changes
in employment shares. Particularly, the employment share of the rm market rises sharply whereas
that of the nm market drops substantively.




                                              xviii
 Measure         Baseline   = 0:4         = 0:72   ( a;   r ; n)   = (0:6; 0:4; 0:6)
    ua            0.018     0.018     0.018                        0.017
    urh           0.033     0.034     0.032                        0.034
    urm           0.045     0.046     0.044                        0.046
   unm            0.069     0.071     0.067                        0.065
    unl           0.096     0.098     0.093                        0.090
   uagg           0.045     0.046     0.043                        0.044
    Ya            0.785     0.786     0.794                        0.812
    Yrh           0.021     0.020     0.014                        0.000
    Yrm           0.846     0.804     0.935                        0.839
   Ynm            0.086     0.117     0.021                        0.092
    Ynl           0.109     0.109     0.110                        0.110
   Yagg           1.847     1.836     1.873                        1.852
 wmean;a          2.771     2.771     2.771                        2.773
 wmean;rh         2.266     2.265     2.267                        2.265
wmean;rm          1.681     1.681     1.682                        1.681
wmean;nm          1.266     1.265     1.268                        1.270
 wmean;nl         0.946     0.945     0.948                        0.950
   wagg           1.880     1.869     1.905                        1.884
 2 (log(w ))      0.003     0.003     0.003                        0.003
            a
2 (log(w ))       0.006     0.006     0.006                        0.006
           rh
2 (log(w ))       0.008     0.008     0.008                        0.008
           rm
2 (log(w ))       0.012     0.012     0.012                        0.011
           nm
2 (log(w ))       0.015     0.015     0.015                        0.014
           nl
2 (log(w ))       0.122     0.125     0.115                        0.123
           agg


                    Table D.1: Sensitivity analysis




                                    xix
