                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




UNIT VALUES FOR IMPORT AND EXPORT PRICE INDEXES ­ A PROOF OF CONCEPT

                                           Don Fast
                                          Susan Fleck

                                      Working Paper 26373
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26373


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




Don A. Fast is a Senior Economist and Susan E. Fleck is the Assistant Commissioner of the
International Price Program at the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). We thank Christina Qiu
and Daryl Slusher for their extensive contributions to the final chapter. We recognize and thank
these BLS staff for their research and data support: Jeff Blaha, Antonio Caraballo, Jenny
Fitzgerald, David Friedman, Michael Havlin, Ara Khatchadourian, Laurence Lang, Robert
Martin, Helen McCulley, Steven Paben, Sudha Polumatla, Tamar Schmidt, Aric Schneider, Ilmo
Sung, and Praveenkumar Yerramareddy. We gratefully acknowledge the CRIW conference
organizers and Jon Samuels for feedback and advice. We have benefited from comments by Ana
Aizcorbe, Alejandro Cavallo, John Haltiwanger, Marshall Reinsdorf, and our discussants, Carol
Corrado and Susan Housman on earlier versions of this research. Use of the export trade data are
subject to Agreement No. 2067-2018-001, Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the
U.S. Census Bureau and the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The BLS has received prior
approval from the U.S. Census Bureau, which affirms that the research results do not present
disclosure risks and approve the publication of the results. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Don Fast and Susan Fleck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Unit Values for Import and Export Price Indexes ­ A Proof of Concept
Don Fast and Susan Fleck
NBER Working Paper No. 26373
October 2019
JEL No. E3,E31,F0,F1,F3

                                          ABSTRACT

The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics' import and export price indexes (MXPI) are published from
an ever decreasing sample relative to the size of trade. The Principal Federal Economic Indicator
has an opportunity to retain and regain detailed MXPI using unit values calculated from
comprehensive administrative trade data. Unit values are known to be biased, although bias is
less prevalent among homogeneous products. This research presents a new methodological and
statistical approach to blend unit values into official price indexes. First, a proof of concept for
identifying homogeneous items is based on an analysis of two export products ­ dairy and
vegetables ­ for 2015-16. The results provide a prototype and a roadmap for a consistent and
testable approach that aligns with the concepts in official MXPI measures, maximizes the use of
high-frequency data, and mitigates unit value bias. Applying the prototype, 52 of 142 import and
50 of 129 export 5-digit BEA End Use categories are identified as homogeneous using
administrative data. This coverage accounts for 35 and 39 percent of the 2016 value of imports
and exports, respectively. Incorporating unit values has the potential to deepen coverage and
expand publication of detailed import and export price indexes.


Don Fast
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
International Price Program
Suite 3955 Postal Square Bdg
2 Massachusetts Ave, NE
Washington, DC
fast.don@bls.gov

Susan Fleck
US Bureau of Labor Statistics
International Price Program
Suite 3955 Postal Square Bdg
2 Massachusetts Ave., NE
Washington, DC
Fleck.Susan@bls.gov
   1. INTRODUCTION

  BLS Import and Export Price Indexes (MXPI) track price changes in internationally traded

merchandise goods. The indexes underpin inflation adjustment of U.S. net exports and trade

balances from current to constant dollars. The quality of the indexes is founded on the matched

model and implemented through an establishment survey. The matched model records same-

good price differences at the item level and aggregates price changes weighted by product,

company, and trade dollar value shares to all-goods import and export price indexes. For the past

twenty years, 20 to 25 thousand prices of unique items from thousands of companies have been

collected monthly to calculate detailed and all-goods price indexes. Trade has grown and sample

size has been constant and ­ more recently ­ reduced. Both trends result in thinner item

coverage, directly reducing the number of detailed indexes of publishable quality. While the top-

level MXPI ­ principal federal economic indicators ­ are of consistently high quality, measures

for detailed price indexes are at risk. Symptomatic of this trend is the fact that BLS publishes

only one-third of the most detailed BEA End Use goods price indexes for both imports and

exports.

  There exists an extensive source of administrative trade data that ­ up until now ­ has been

used only as the sample frame for the international price establishment survey. The price and

quantity information from these administrative records results in an average price or unit value,

i.e., the total dollar value of the shipment divided by the quantity shipped. The 2.9 million

monthly export records dwarf the approximately 24,000 export and import items currently in the

directly collected international price survey. The question analyzed here is whether unit values


                                                                                                    2
can be used on a large scale to track price change to bolster the number and improve the quality

of published detailed price indexes and, by extension, the top-level indexes.

  Incorporating unit values on a large scale into a BLS price index is a major methodological

change to existing practices, given that the BLS program was founded in response to critiques of

unit value measures. The BLS established the international price program to directly collect price

data, following significant research conducted by the National Bureau of Economic Research in

the 1960s. The Stigler Commission (Price Statistics Review Committee 1961), a historical series

of import and export price indexes for 11 commodity groups (Lipsey 1963), and an extensive

study on the measurement and calculation of price measures for international trade (Kravis and

Lipsey 1971) described how unit values captured compositional effects of changes in product

mix and different quality of goods and did not mimic price changes. Unit value indexes at that

time were calculated as aggregate average values for customs declarations that included value

and quantity. The records were often incomplete, and thus unit values covered no more than a

third of finished manufactured trade and slightly more than half of commodity trade (Kravis and

Lipsey 1971). The ability to determine U.S. competitiveness was hampered because of the poor

quality of these measures. The Census monthly unit value export and import indexes, published

from July 1933 through 1990, were calculated for five broad economic commodity categories

(crude materials, crude food-stuffs, manufactured foodstuffs and beverages, semimanufactures,

and finished manufactures). The first BLS import and export price indexes based on an

establishment survey were published in 1973 as a consequence of this high-profile research to

replace the Census unit value indexes, which BLS also deemed as having substantial unit-value

bias due to lack of detail and the inclusion of heterogeneous products (Alterman 1991).




                                                                                                   3
  Since that time, some have proposed that unit values for homogeneous goods may track prices

(Mead 2014, Nakamura et. al. 2015, Silver 2010). But there is consensus that unit values are

biased measures of heterogeneous or differentiated product prices. The first question at the heart

of this research is whether the unit values of much improved trade data can replicate price

movements of homogeneous goods. Beginning in the 1990s, detailed import and export

transactions of 10-digit harmonized system (HS) product categories are recorded for nearly all

traded goods with improving accuracy over time. Twenty years ago, Feenstra and Diewert

(1997) proposed that BLS analyze detailed trade data, but at that time BLS had less capacity than

today to address the complexity of and lag in the receipt of data, and so BLS did not pursue the

project.

  The second question is how to define homogeneous unit values with the trade data. Unit

values are calculated for cross country comparisons, despite the known bias (Feenstra et.al. 2009,

Feenstra and Romalis 2014). For the United States, recent research effectively treats all 10-digit

HS product categories as homogeneous across the board, but also add one or two data

characteristics to differentiate unit values. For example, Broda and Weinstein (2006) estimate the

impact of variety changes on prices and welfares by including country of origin in their import

indexes. Kamal and Monarch (2017) analyze the reliability of the trade data in the context of

U.S.-foreign supplier relations. Hottman and Monarch (2018) create an import price index that

includes the foreign supplier ID and map out the welfare impacts of import price changes on

select consumer profiles. However, there is no proof that all product areas are homogeneous, as

many 10-digit HS product categories are composed of differentiated goods. Consequently, there

is no evidence that unit values at the 10-digit HS product category level track price trends.




                                                                                                     4
    Crude petroleum imports are currently calculated using unit values from the detailed

administrative data, forming a precedent in the International Price Program. 1 These unit values

are deemed to be the most reliable source in the face of low response rates and the price volatility

of this heavily traded product. Furthermore, crude petroleum product information is fairly

detailed. This detail stands in contrast to the type of detail and level of homogeneity reported in

the administrative trade data. The administrative trade data are rich in transaction details but

have only one product description ­ the 10-digit HS product category. More significantly, the

regulatory nature of trade has created unintended differences in degrees of homogeneity and

product detail across 10-digit HS category. Is it possible to move beyond a `special case' use of

unit values, such as in crude petroleum, to a comprehensive approach?

    Key to the decision of whether to use unit values from the administrative trade data is when

and how to use unit values. BLS requires a consistent and transparent approach to evaluate

1)whether a product category is homogeneous and 2)to what degree unit value bias exists in the

entry level item and the published index level. The potential to use unit values for the MXPI

statistics faces two hurdles. The first ­ evaluating and establishing a proof of concept to select

homogeneous categories and calculate indexes accurately ­ is the focus of this paper. The second

­ whether there is a way to integrate the lagged administrative data into official monthly

production ­ will not be addressed here, but is not insignificant.

    The chapter is organized as follows. The research approach outlines both item- and index-

specific concepts and methods. The objective is to create a unit value index that can be compared

with the BLS price indexes published by BEA End Use product classification at the most



1
  Import crude petroleum prices are derived from the administrative records of crude petroleum imports collected by
the U.S. Department of Energy. Detailed product categories are grouped by product and transaction characteristics
(i.e. gravity, crude stream, and country of origin) and average weighted prices are incorporated into the price index.

                                                                                                                     5
disaggregated level. The 2015-16 export transaction records for homogeneous product categories

dairy and vegetables are the data used for this pilot. Six variations for grouping characteristics in

the administrative records into entry level items (ELIs) and calculating the unit values of ELIs

are described and analyzed. Prices and price changes (short term ratios, or STRs) are tested for

unit value bias within and across months to identify the optimal groupings, which we call item

keys, that result in the least bias. ELI prices are then aggregated to 10-digit HS price indexes--

applying Tornqvist index formulas and addressing imputation, outliers and consistency of trade,

for all six ELI variations. These results are then statistically compared to BLS price indexes as

benchmarks for quality. Based on the analysis, a prototype unit value and index approach is

proposed. All 5-digit BEA End Use import and export product categories are evaluated to

establish the set of potential homogeneous categories. From this list, a couple of export indexes

of homogeneous goods are compared against their benchmark BLS indexes to gauge how well

the prototype fits. These promising first results provide a road map to comprehensively evaluate

all homogeneous import and export price indexes.


   2. THE RESEARCH APPROACH
  Maintaining the standard for Principal Federal Economic Indicators when considering new

concepts or methodology requires thoughtful and thorough review. This research evaluates

which 10-digit HS levels are homogeneous and whether a more detailed unit value than the 10-

digit HS level is necessary to mitigate compositional effects on the value. The most general case

is one in which all or some 10-digit HS unit values are as good a measure of price change as the

published import and export price indexes.

  The research develops and evaluates new methods to calculate unit value prices and indexes

with administrative trade data, using a small subset of export data for two years (2015-2016) for

                                                                                                     6
two product areas ­ dairy and eggs (BEA End Use Classification 00310), and vegetables,

vegetable preparations, and juices (BEA End Use Classification 00330). 2 Indeed, the two

product categories were selected because of their homogeneity as judged by the product

substitutability at the BEA End Use and 10-digit HS strata, which was evaluated by the number

and homogeneity of the 10-digit HS product categories (see Table A) ­ and also because the two

5-digit indexes were not of sufficient quality to be published. The first assumption is shown to be

a reasonable premise for selection, but the second created difficulties in validating the

consistency and quality of the pilot measures for the two selected product areas; comparisons

with additional product areas validates this approach.

Table A. Characteristics of Select BEA End Use Export Products, 2015-2016
 BEA End Use Export             Average number of monthly      Number of 10-digit HS
 Classification                     Customs transactions         product categories
 Dairy products & eggs                     6,839                         41
 Vegetables and vegetable                 32,430                        161
 preparations and juices

    Three principles guide the methodological approaches in this research ­ to approximate the

matched model, to evaluate characteristics of homogeneity, and to improve the measurement of

the index where possible. The nature of trade is such that the price as well as non-price

characteristics in the administrative records provide rich information to define unique products.

Unlike consumer goods, wholesale goods require contracts and financing in place for a

transaction to occur. Wholesale trade depends on business-to-business long-term relations;

business characteristics reveal these relations. International trade transactions are more

logistically complex and depend on well-defined sales contracts in order to be backed by a letter




2
 The administrative trade data are collected through an electronic interface that exporters and importers use to
directly enter data on trade transactions. The U.S. Census Bureau collects and cleans the export data to calculate
official international trade measures, after which the data are transferred to the BLS.

                                                                                                                     7
of credit from a financial institution (Amiti and Weinstein 2009). Thus, transaction

characteristics that define a sale are expected to signal similarity of products and purchasers

when transaction characteristics are similar.

  Approximating the Matched Model. A matched model links the same item across time. For

our research, transactions that are similar along multiple dimensions are assumed to be more

likely to have the same composition of goods, since cross-border trade depends on long-term

contracts between firms, and products are expected to have the same non-price characteristics

across time. The detail level of each item key used to break out the administrative data into more

dimensions is expected to test the compositional bias of unit values.

  Characteristics of Homogeneous Goods. Approximating the matched model, homogeneous

unit values could track close substitutes over time, as long as transactions can be grouped in such

a way as to minimize compositional effects and to maximize substitutability. Establishing

conditions of substitutability helps to define homogeneity, and vice versa. Research on price-

setting informs the notion of substitutability, beginning with Rauch (2001) who separates goods

into homogeneous and differentiated product categories, where homogeneous goods are

reference-priced. In studies of exchange rate pass-through spanning nearly 100,000 goods in the

international price survey from 1994 to 2005, Gopinath and Itskhoki (2010) and Gopinath and

Rigobon (2008) demonstrate that homogeneous goods experience both more frequent and larger

price changes than differentiated goods. These differences are attributed to larger elasticities of

demand by consumers contributing to greater costs of price stickiness for producers. Both

characteristics point to greater levels of substitution among homogeneous goods, suggesting that

large fluctuations of homogeneous item prices do not consistently translate to large fluctuations

in consumer spending. Thus, in the case of homogeneous goods, unit values may more



                                                                                                      8
accurately represent import and export prices by accounting for intra-item substitutability.

Additionally, the unit value indexes calculated from the unit values are expected to not

demonstrate the "product replacement bias" of matched models delineated in Nakamura et al.

(2012), where frequent product turnover results in no price changes for 40% of imported items.

  Rauch (2001) notes that business networks linking country of origin and country of

destination play an important role in market share, price, and trade volume of goods.

Furthermore, Clausing (2003) describes how intra-firm trade and country impact price-setting.

This research leads us to assume that 10-digit HS product categories on their own are too broad

to see sufficient levels of intra-item substitutability for which unit value indexes demonstrate the

above benefits. Matching transactions to a greater level of specificity than the 10-digit HS

product categories takes into account price and non-price trade characteristics that separate goods

into unique bins of substitutable items. Given the high frequency of transactions in trade data,

each bin is likely to have more than one transaction. In other words, we aim to increase intra-

item substitutability by enforcing stricter category inclusion criteria. This approach mirrors the

quality-adjustment method of Feenstra and Romalis (2014) for industry-level World

Development Indicators that displays less sensitivity to assumptions on the extensive margin of

firms.

  Addressing Criticisms and Improving Measures. Mismeasurement of trade impacts other

indicators such as real GDP and productivity. The matched model has been criticized for

measuring price changes of the same good only, and missing prices for new goods and different

quality goods (Feldstein 2017). Nakamura et al. (2015) and Bridgman (2015) also describe

sourcing substitution and trade cost biases, especially for MPIs. The focus of this criticism has

been on an expected upward bias of price indexes for differentiated goods. Even though quality



                                                                                                     9
adjustments are not characteristic of homogeneous goods, the proposed method potentially

accounts for consumer substitution related to quality change because all items and transactions

are weighted using their current trade share.

  The ability to account for new products and disappearing products and product varieties is a

benefit of the new method because the current values for all items are available and can be

integrated into a superlative unit value index. Particularly, the Tornqvist index is known to

adequately address substitution bias and can be implemented with the proposed unit value

indexes (Moulton 2018). It is important to note that the lag in collection of new goods and the

lack of current weights to account for changing tastes and trading patterns are not inherent in the

matched model method, but are related instead to the resources available for timely data

collection. The administrative data expands the ability to account for new goods, to exclude

products that are no longer traded, and to use current weights in a superlative index to account

for substitution. Furthermore, the use of multiple transactions at multiple prices addresses the

criticism that Nakamura et al. (2015) have for single items not being representative of a product

when multiple prices are present in a population.

  The prices and indexes calculated and presented here are based on the three principles

described above. They are tested and evaluated for the degree of homogeneity and the existence

of unit value bias. Basic parameters are established as a result of this research to 1)define a

homogeneous unit value and item, 2)test homogeneity of an item, 3)identify appropriate BLS

price indexes as benchmarks for comparison, and 4)propose the concepts and methods to use for

survey production. These parameters provide the roadmap to systemically evaluate homogeneity

at the item and index levels.




                                                                                                   10
    3. UNIT VALUES and UNIT VALUE BIAS
    Defining Unit Values. The point of departure for the research is to establish the 10-digit HS

product category as the general case for evaluating unit values. This level of detail is naturally

occurring in the administrative trade data ­ as records are HS-specific. 3 Given the fact that 10-

digit HS is also the stratum from which MXPI indexes are sampled and calculated, this level of

detail provides the most convenient entry point to blend the unit values into the statistical

production process. By beginning with the general case, the BLS research tests the premise that

the 10-digit HS product categories are homogeneous, and proceeds with testing unit values of

items that add more dimensions to approach the matched model. To align with the entry point for

blending data, these unique items are considered to be entry level items that comprise a 10-digit

HS stratum.

    Whereas the general case occurs when the item key contains only the 10-digit HS code (H),

all other item key specifications include dimensions that have been determined to be similar to

price-determining characteristics in the survey. The variables used for the item keys include: HS

commodity classification, EIN (establishment ID number) for the exporting company, zip code,

state of origin, domestic port of export, country of destination, related or arms-length trade 4 and

unit of measure. The data fields ­ HS, EIN, and zip code­ correspond with the sampling unit

and the method of collection. Sampling for the directly collected international price survey is

carried out at the 10-digit HS product category and at the establishment and company level by

location of exporter. The data fields ­ state of origin, port of export, country of destination,

related or arms-length transaction ­ correspond to production and/or market relations between


3
  For a given shipment, each company must submit an individual record for each product as defined by the 10-digit
harmonized schedule classification (Schedule B for exports, and HTSUSA for imports). Thus, each record pertains
to only one Employer Identification Numbers (EIN) and one shipment. The record includes total dollar value,
quantity, company, transportation, and geographic information on provenance and destination of goods and shipper.
4
  Related trade is an intra-firm transaction that takes place between a parent and an affiliate.

                                                                                                               11
exporter and foreign consumer. Most of these descriptors are also collected in the survey as

price-determining characteristics. For measurement consistency, the unit of measure, e.g. gross,

piece, ton, is also included. Each item key specification results in a different set of unique items,

or ELIs, with the same dimensions grouped by the same shared characteristics. A total of six

variations of item keys are tested.

   The unit value is calculated at the level of the transaction. The unit value can be represented as

a transaction i of a unique item j in month t, where j is composed of a 10-digit HS code H, and is

further defined by an array of price characteristics, item key K. Transaction i involves the trade

of z actual items, where |z| is the number of actual items traded in transaction i. The unit value

price of a transaction i is the average of prices for actual items traded in I, or

                              (,),
                      z 
          ( ,),                ,
   (i)            =                  ,
                          ||

                                                      ( ,),
   where |z| can alternatively be represented as              .
                                                       


   For all like-transactions of a given K that comprise the unique item j, the price of item j is

represented as a geometric mean of unit value transaction prices which yields:

                                 (,),     (,),
                                               
   (ii)   ( ,)   =                
                                      (,),
                                           
                                                   
                                  
                                       


   Where normalized transaction-level weights are represented as

         ( ,),        ,   (    ),
                 = z ,               .

   The quantity of item j is represented as a sum of transaction quantities:

                               ( , ),
   (iii) ( ,) =                          .




                                                                                                     12
  Taking this experimental approach to test different specifications of items supports the

objective to identify the best unit value measure. The price changes of actual transactions based

on dimensions for six item key specifications are used for the unit value tests.

  Testing Unit Value Bias. To test for unit value bias, one must consider the price

characteristics of a homogeneous item. Homogeneous items are close, if not perfect, substitutes.

Thus, in a competitive market, they would be expected to have similar price levels and be

affected by the same market conditions over time. For multiple transactions of one product, we

call this condition intra-item substitutability. If there is no supply or demand shock or large

exchange rate fluctuation, one would expect a homogeneous product's within-month prices to

group close to a mean, and its cross-month prices to show smoothness. For an item which faces a

market shock, prices may cluster around more than one mean price. Although some HS 10-digit

product categories experience more variable prices both within and across months, the large

majority of items display little price change between months. Efforts to define homogeneity in a

consistent way lead us to apply three tests to the prices and price changes of items for the six

item key specifications. Of these tests ­ the price dispersion test, an across month item

percentage change test, and price clustering tests ­ the first shows promise.

  The price dispersion test was conducted on the actual unit values for dairy and vegetables

transactions. The coefficient of variation is the ratio of the weighted standard deviation to the

weighted mean; lower percentages indicate less variability in the ELI. The greater the variability

of prices within a month, the lower the level of intra-item substitutability and the less likely a

good is homogeneous. This test fits with the trade literature that states that similar products from

a producer are priced similarly (Hottman and Monarch 2018, Feenstra and Romalis 2014). The

intra-month intra-item unit values for each of the six item keys were evaluated for all 24 months.



                                                                                                     13
Results are shown for dairy unit values only, as vegetables trend similarly. In Figure 1 bins

specify ranges of C.V.s. The least detailed item keys that exclude the company identifier (E)

result in a concave cumulative distribution, in which the vast majority of ELIs present with high

variability of within-month prices, which implies poor intra-item substitutability. About 60

percent of dairy products had a C.V. of less than 52.5 percent for the two item keys that exclude

E. When the company identifier is added to the ELI specification, prices cluster closer to the

mean ­ 60 percent of the ELIs that include the company identifier had a C.V. less than 12.5

percent. Furthermore, the most detailed item key, which includes company identifier and country

of destination, experiences the least price dispersion for each good. The wide dispersion and

variability shown in the item keys that exclude the EIN demonstrate more unit value bias than

those that include that characteristic.




                                            Figure 1. Coefficient of Variation Test
                                              Dairy Products and Eggs, 2015-16
                             100
                              90
     Cumulative Percentage




                              80
                              70
                              60
                              50
                              40
                              30
                              20
                              10
                               0




                                   10-digit HS   HQR     E-HQR    E-HQRS   E-HQRSZ    E-HQRSZCD

    NOTE: Letters correspond to these non-price transaction characteristics: EIN (E), 10-digit HS (H),
    Unit of Measure (Q), Related Transaction (R), State of Origin (S), Zip Code of shipper (Z),
    Country of Destination(C), Domestic Port Code (D)


                                                                                                         14
  Another test of homogeneity looks at the month over month percentage change. Monthly price

changes are grouped into price variability bins for all months. Following on past price-setting

research that price variability across months is not expected to be large, any such price change

across months for item keys could indicate that the ELI may not represent the same good.

Looking at the cumulative results for dairy and vegetables, both show 75-85 percent of ELIs with

less than 22.5 percent monthly price changes. These results do not reveal intra-item

substitutability improvements with additional item key dimensions and are not informative for

item key selection or unit value bias.

  Two types of price cluster tests are applied to the price data for the ELIs--the first method

minimizes the variance in the price cluster created (Ward Minimum Variance Method) and the

second method minimizes the distance in the price clusters created (SAS Clustering Method 1).

Assuming no price shocks and no unit value bias, the optimal number of clusters for each ELI

should be one, as the item's price should reflect intra-item substitutability. Ward Minimum

Variance Method was applied to price clusters for all ELI that had 100 or more transactions

during the two year period. The clustering results show that all item keys for both vegetables and

dairy saw around 80 percent of their ELIs falling within one cluster. However, results are

sensitive to price cluster distance when using SAS Clustering Method 1. When EIN is included

in the item key, the ELIs fall in one cluster around 60-63 percent of the time, compared to 31-40

percent of the time when it is excluded. These results suggest that including EIN in the item key

increases intra-item substitutability. Yet when outliers are removed at the second standard

deviation from the mean, ELIs had one cluster around 78-91 percent of the time, demonstrating

no definitive difference from the most general case of the 10-digit HS unit values.




                                                                                                   15
   The results of the coefficient of variation test align with the expectations of intra-item

substitutability, showing that the more detailed ELIs have similar within month unit values. This

test has strong explanatory power and is used to evaluate item homogeneity.


    4. BENCHMARKING UNIT VALUE INDEXES WITH BLS PRICE INDEXES
   In addition to establishing an approach to identify the best ELIs with the least biased unit

values, we consider the options for calculating the least biased unit value indexes, and then

compare them to BLS price indexes. Given the voluminous data and the existence of current

prices and quantities, we are interested in implementing improvements to the index where

feasible. Precisely because the data are so voluminous and the options for ELIs are broad, the

options for index calculation, imputations, and outliers can have widely different results.

Comparing the BEA 5-digit unit value indexes is first, an important step in validating the

difference between directly collected survey data and administrative data, and second, a

necessary step to evaluate how and whether the unit value indexes will impact the top-level

indexes if incorporated. As the international price survey samples items and weights prices

based on patterns of trade, published XPI indexes most accurately reflect trade prices, but the

initial conditions in selecting pilot product areas with inadequate coverage make this comparison

tentative at best.

   Unit Value Index Calculation Methods. Unit value indexes are calculated at the level of 10-

digit HS strata. This procedure provides an opportunity to incorporate current weights. The

problem of missing prices is addressed both for the regular continuation of an ELI in the index

and also as it relates to consistency of establishments' trade. The likely problem of outliers that

arises with high-frequency low-detail data is also addressed.



                                                                                                  16
    Tornqvist index formula. The long term relative (LTR) of the 10-digit stratum is the entry

point for blending data. For official indexes, company weights are used to aggregate ELI price

changes to the 10-digit HS product category, and then trade dollar weights - lagged two years -

for 10-digit categories are used to aggregate the LTRs and map them into the BEA End Use price

index and other classifications. Because current period weights are available, the unit value ELIs

can be aggregated into their corresponding 10-digit strata. The 10-digit HS unit value Tornqvist

indexes are then aggregated into the BEA 5-digit index using official estimation procedures. The

Tornqvist index is superior to Laspeyeres because it accounts for the introduction of new goods,

disappearing goods, and trade volumes (Diewert 1976, Triplett 1992). The general case is to use

the 10-digit HS stratum unit value as the entry level item.

    Using the current period weights, the 10-digit HS stratum is represented by a Tornqvist index

comprising all unique items j:

                                            (       
                                             ,-1) +(,)
                               (,)
                                                2
    (iv) , =                             
                               (,-1)


                           
                       (,) (,)
    where ( ,) =                     .
                       (,) (,)


    These calculations differ from existing methodology, not only for the use of unit values, but

also for the use of current weights to account for item turnover. The opportunity to apply the

Tornqvist index to the unit values addresses a common criticism of the official indexes ­ that

they do not sufficiently account for substitution of new items 5.




5
 BLS research has previously proposed using the Tornqvist index to blend secondary data sources with the matched
model where current period weights are available (Fitzgerald 2017).

                                                                                                             17
    Missing prices, consistency of trade and outliers. In order to evaluate the unit value indexes,

more advanced methodological issues must be addressed to treat missing prices, consistency of

trade and outliers.

    Two months of actual prices establish an item in the index. Imputation fills in the gaps when

an item is not traded and an item's price is of questionable quality. 6 Even though 80 percent of

the dairy and vegetable establishments in the two-year dataset are traded every month at the 5-

digit BEA product level, the items traded each month vary considerably, resulting in missing

prices. Missing prices were even more prevalent as dimensions were added to the item key,

because each ELI had fewer transactions and experienced more turnover. Imputation is used to

maintain items in the index, but there is a point at which imputation negatively impacts index

quality. To minimize the negative impact that continuing imputed prices over time has on the

index for the 10-digit HS stratum, imputation ­ and thus items ­ are eliminated from the

calculation if no transaction is recorded after three months. Beyond that point, the price

imputations overwhelmed the count of unit values calculated from transaction records by more

than two to one.

    The decision whether or not to include inconsistently traded items affects the number of ELIs

used in unit value index calculation. Including inconsistently traded items increase the use of

imputation. However, excluding items that are not consistently traded because item keys have

more dimensions could bias unit values by excluding too many items. Thus, two variations of

unit value calculation are tested: retaining all items regardless of consistency of trade and




6
  Missing item price values are imputed by applying the percent change of the item's parent 10-digit stratum to the
item's price in the previous month. However, the actual month-to-month price percent change for an item may not
be the same as the month-to-month price percent change for its parent classification level, which is an estimation
error associated with imputation.

                                                                                                                  18
truncating items that are traded less than half the year. Both approaches preserve the 3-month

imputation rule set above.

  The decision whether or not to eliminate outliers is of particular importance for unit value

index calculation. In the official MXPI, an outlier price is flagged to evaluate the validity of price

change. However, an outlier in the unit value of the transaction cannot be evaluated in the same

way and may represent an error, another product, or a better product. Three unit value index

calculations are considered: retaining the outlier, and recalculating the unit value with an

imputed price when the price change falls outside both the weighted 2nd and 3rd standard

deviations (note that the 2nd SD is more restrictive than the 3rd SD).

  We nest outlier treatment within the two conditions of restrictions on consistent trade.

Combined, these variations create six alternatives to calculating unit value indexes. Table 1

shows the index calculation methods from the least constrained to most constrained options

regarding truncation of ELIs, and the statistical comparison of these alternative indexes against

BLS price indexes. All methods use the Tornqvist index formula and impute missing prices for

up to three months. The first three calculation methods include all items, and the last three

calculation methods truncate items that are not consistently traded.

  Benchmark Comparisons. The comparison of the unit value indexes against a benchmark of

BLS price indexes helps narrow down the proof of concept ­ of six different item keys that

define the ELI and six different methodological approaches to calculate the unit value indexes ­

to a prototype. The 5-digit BEA End Use unit value indexes for dairy and vegetables are

calculated from the 10-digit HS strata with the methods used for the official MXPI, and these

indexes are then compared with a BLS price index as a benchmark. Holding all else equal, the

company identifier significantly improves the correlation and reduces the root mean squared



                                                                                                   19
error. More detailed item keys show a closer fit than the general case of the 10-digit HS ELI. The

differences between the index calculation methods of including or excluding consistent trade and

treatment of outliers are not as clear-cut.

   As MXPI samples and weights items based on patterns of trade, we expect published XPI to

most accurately reflect trade prices. However, since the two product groups were chosen due to

quality concerns, the XPI for dairy and vegetables for this time period were respectively

unpublished and had low coverage. Additionally, for vegetables, fixed annual weights on XPI do

not account for volumes of trade of the 140 10-digit HS strata in that index, almost all of which

change seasonally. Export Price Indexes (XPI), spot prices, Consumer Price Indexes (CPI) (U.S.

city average, all urban consumers, not seasonally adjusted), and Producer Price Indexes (PPI)

were considered as possible benchmarks for unit value indexes. Whereas the unpublished XPI

was chosen as a benchmark for dairy, the CPI was chosen for vegetables due to seasonal

weighting concerns of the vegetable XPI. Although the CPI makes a better benchmark than the

XPI for the vegetable unit value index in this situation, the CPI is generally a second-best

comparative benchmark, since consumer prices systematically vary from export prices.

   Correlation coefficient comparison. Correlation coefficients assess how closely the first

degree difference ­ the monthly percent changes (STRs) ­ align between administrative data

track changes in benchmark price indexes, where an estimate of 1 suggests perfect alignment.

We apply the six variations of unit value index calculations for the six selected item keys. The

benefits of unit value indexes are realized at higher-dimensional item key specifications than the

10-digit HS level, but there is a possibility that item key specifications with too much detail may

be "over-fitted" ­ understating intra-item substitution and missing price changes of high-volume




                                                                                                   20
or price-variable products. Additionally, truncating outliers may introduce bias if outliers

represent real price shocks.

  Generally, correlation coefficients for dairy are higher than correlation coefficients for

vegetables, i.e. the dairy unit value does a better job of tracking the monthly price changes of the

benchmark index over time. For dairy, correlation coefficients remain consistent across different

treatments of outliers and consistent trade. Correlation coefficients vary more for vegetables,

pointing to greater sensitivity to methodology and item key selection. Dairy correlation

coefficients significantly improve after including company identifier into item keys. Dairy

correlation coefficients including EIN for E-HQR item keys are on average 0.090 higher than

correlation coefficients for HQR item keys ­ contrasting to correlation coefficients lowering by

0.002 on average after inclusion of a non-EIN dimension into item keys. The large increase in

dairy correlation coefficients after inclusion of EIN in item keys implies that product

differentiation may occur at the firm-level for items in the dairy category. This pattern, however,

is not reflected for vegetables. Using the same HQR and E-HQR item key comparison, the

inclusion of EIN into vegetable item keys results in correlation coefficients that are on average

0.012 lower than HQR correlation coefficients. This statistic is a smaller magnitude than the

average 0.020 correlation coefficient increase for the inclusion of all other non-EIN dimension

into vegetable item keys.

  The impact of index calculation methods on the correlation coefficient is less informative. The

dairy correlation coefficient is largest at 0.61 using the most detailed item key with the least

constrained index calculation method. The vegetable correlation coefficient is largest at 0.48

using the HQR item key with the least constrained index calculation method. However, the

vegetable correlation coefficient also reaches consistent comparable levels for item keys that



                                                                                                    21
include EIN with the most constrained index calculation method. EIN inclusion into item keys

improves dairy unit values' mirroring of the unpublished XPI benchmark, no matter the index

calculation method, whereas ­ except for the case mentioned above ­ vegetable unit value

indexes track the CPI benchmark most closely with EIN inclusion and for index calculation

treatment of imputations and outliers.

  Root mean squared error/mean absolute error comparison. Root mean squared error and

mean absolute error measure differences between calculated and benchmark price indexes,

indicating accuracy. Large differences are more heavily weighted in root mean squared error

than in mean absolute error. An error value of 0 implies perfect similarity between unit value and

benchmark price indexes. As can be seen in Table 1, across index calculation variations, the

dairy unit value index displays larger error than the vegetable unit value index compared to their

respective benchmarks. For both indexes, error measures trend downwards as item keys become

more detailed, implying that accuracy increases with higher-dimensional identification regardless

of index calculation methods.




                                                                                                22
Table 1. Statistical Comparison of Unit Value and BLS Price Indexes, First Degree
Difference (STRs), Dairy and Vegetables, 2015-2016

                                    Exclude Company Identifier              Include Company Identifier (EIN)
                                                + transfer                                                              + country of
                                                             + company                  + state of       + zip code
                                    10-digit HS price + unit                                                            destination +
                                                             identifier                 origin           of shipper
                                                measure                                                                 U.S. port
Dairy U.V.Index                                                                Correlation Coefficient
Tornqvist index w/ 4 month
                                           0.48                    0.5           0.58            0.6             0.59            0.61
 imputation
+ exclude outliers 3rd Std.                    0.5             0.51              0.6            0.62              0.6            0.59
+ exclude outliers 2nd Std.                    0.5             0.52              0.57           0.6               0.6            0.57
Tornqvist index w/ 4 month
                                           0.48                    0.5           0.61            0.6             0.58            0.59
 imputation + consistent trade
+ exclude outliers 3rd Std.                    0.5             0.53              0.62           0.58             0.57            0.57
+ exclude outliers 2nd Std.                    0.5             0.52              0.64           0.6              0.53            0.57

                                                          Root Mean Squared Errors / Mean Absolute Errors
Tornqvist index w/ 4 month
                                    2.71 / 2.16        2.61 / 2.07       2.00 / 1.57    1.91 / 1.45      1.90 / 1.35    1.82 / 1.44
 imputation
+ exclude outliers 3rd Std.         2.61 / 2.10        2.55 / 2.06       2.02 / 1.50    1.90 / 1.43      1.96 / 1.50    1.88 / 1.50
+ exclude outliers 2nd Std.         2.61 / 2.10        2.58 / 2.09       2.07 / 1.53    2.00 / 1.47      1.97 / 1.50    1.96 / 1.60
Tornqvist index w/ 4 month
                                    2.72 / 2.18        2.59 / 2.10       1.99 / 1.53    2.04 / 1.52      2.03 / 1.48    1.96 / 1.54
 imputation + consistent trade
+ exclude outliers 3rd Std.         2.61 / 2.11        2.56 / 2.11       2.05 / 1.53    2.08 / 1.63      2.08 / 1.67    2.07 / 1.58
+ exclude outliers 2nd Std.         2.61 / 2.11        2.56 / 2.10       1.99 / 1.52    2.07 / 1.52      2.22 / 1.65    2.04 / 1.57
                                                                               Correlation Coefficient
 Vegetable U.V.Index
 Tornqvist index w/ 4 month
                                          0.37                0.48               0.24           0.23             0.29            0.35
 imputation
  + exclude outliers 3rd Std.             0.32                0.30               0.35           0.34             0.40            0.39
  + exclude outliers 2nd Std.             0.32                0.31               0.35           0.37             0.35            0.39
 Tornqvist index w/ 4 month
                                          0.26                0.37               0.32           0.35             0.37            0.33
 imputation + consistent trade
  + exclude outliers 3rd Std.             0.33                0.32               0.38           0.38             0.43            0.41
  + exclude outliers 2nd Std.             0.33                0.33               0.40           0.45             0.46            0.47

                                                              Root Mean Squared Errors / Mean Absolute Errors
 Tornqvist index w/ 4 month
                                 2.37 / 1.94         1.92 / 1.51         2.07 / 1.67    2.13 / 1.68      2.02 / 1.60    1.86 / 1.34
 imputation
  + exclude outliers 3rd Std.    2.02 / 1.56         2.02 / 1.49         1.82 / 1.41    1.86 / 1.49      1.79 / 1.42    1.82 / 1.39
  + exclude outliers 2nd Std.    2.02 / 1.56         2.03 / 1.50         1.82 / 1.45    1.82 / 1.45      1.84 / 1.41    1.79 / 1.34
 Tornqvist index w/ 4 month
                                 2.50 / 2.04         2.07 / 1.57         1.92 / 1.53    1.84 / 1.40      1.79 / 1.41    1.92 / 1.43
 imputation + consistent trade
  + exclude outliers 3rd Std.    2.00 / 1.55         1.98 / 1.46         1.83 / 1.45    1.82 / 1.42      1.75 / 1.42    1.84 / 1.44
  + exclude outliers 2nd Std.    2.00 / 1.55         1.99 / 1.47         1.79 / 1.44    1.73 / 1.40      1.67 / 1.31    1.69 / 1.33



   Similar to correlation coefficient trends, mean errors decrease most significantly for dairy

when EIN is added into the item key, a trend that is not observed for vegetables. Mirroring

previous analysis on correlation coefficients, root mean squared error decreases by 0.555 points

                                                                                                                                  23
on average after inclusion of EIN into the dairy item key while decreasing by 0.029 points on

average after inclusion of non-EIN characteristics into dairy item keys. For vegetables, root

mean squared error decreases on average by 0.126 points after EIN inclusion into item keys

while decreasing by 0.047 points on average after the item key inclusion of a non-EIN

characteristic. For dairy, the lowest level of error is found using the most detailed item key in the

most general index calculation method; for vegetables, the lowest level of error is found using

the most detailed key with the most constrained index calculation method. Both findings

corroborate those based on the correlation coefficient analyses.

  Although the unit value dairy index captures the direction of change compared to the

benchmark index better than that of the unit value vegetable index, the second better captures the

magnitude of inflation. To capture both direction and magnitude of change, both correlation

coefficient and error analysis point to similar methodologies to optimize accuracy and mirroring

of benchmarks, such as EIN item key inclusion for both indexes and stronger treatment of

outliers for the vegetable index.




   5. AN INITIAL PROTOTYPE FOR UNIT VALUES and UNIT VALUE INDEXES

  Coefficient of variation, correlation coefficient, and error analysis yield a prototype for unit

value specification and unit value index calculation. Regarding the best specification for the ELI,

the most prominent result is the importance of company identifier in the item key. Furthermore,

the most detailed item key shows the most intra-item substitutability at the item level and solid

results compared to benchmark indexes. Results were robust across correlation coefficient, root

mean squared error, and mean absolute error analyses.



                                                                                                     24
   Regarding the index calculation methods, results are not as clear-cut. Given initial selection

of product categories without reliable benchmark indexes, it comes as no surprise that index

calculation methods do not produce consistent results when unit value indexes are compared to

the benchmarks. Whereas the least constrained index method calculation - retaining outliers and

not truncating ELIs that are inconsistently traded ­ provides a best fit for dairy, vegetables

require a more rigorous treatment of outliers and consistency in trade. There exists a possibility

that the different methods belie divergent market forces rather than poor benchmark selection. In

particular, price and quantity changes are more variable with seasonal items like vegetables,

making price outliers less informative of general price trends.

   To proceed with a prototype index calculation method, we make a couple of strong

assumptions to test other BEA 5-digit export indexes composed of homogeneous products that

also have published XPI benchmarks. First, we determine that the three-month imputation rule

sufficiently addresses any inconsistencies in trade, and thus, do not impose limits on ELIs that

are inconsistently traded. Second, though dairy unit value indexes are most accurate without

elimination of outliers, we determine that it is prudent to treat price outliers, as they are likely

due to compositional abnormalities or incorrect transaction records. Thus, we apply the

Tornqvist index with no more than three months imputation for missing prices and additionally

replace outlier prices outside the third standard deviation with imputed values.

   We apply the prototype ELI--the most detailed item key--to evaluate homogeneity of all 5-

digit BEA End Use categories, based on the homogeneity of their ELIs. We then calculate select

unit value indexes with the prototype calculation method and compare then with published XPI

benchmarks. Homogeneity is evaluated as the level of intra-item substitutability, where less

price-dispersion indicates more homogeneity. Price dispersion is calculated through the



                                                                                                       25
coefficient of variation test. Using the coefficient of variation for prototype vegetable unit values

as an upper bound to limit the presence of non-impactful outliers, we identify 50 export and 52

import 5-digit BEA End Use unit value indexes as homogeneous by ranking categories with

lower coefficients of variation than the vegetables estimate. Calculating three 5-digit BEA end

use export indexes based on the prototype and evaluating results against published XPIs with

extensive price quotes ­ meat, soybeans, and animal feed ­ soybeans and animal feeds show a

high degree of accuracy with correlation coefficients, and meat and animal feeds strongly track

published XPI benchmark indexes.

Table B. Statistical Comparison of Unit Value and Published BLS Export Price Indexes,
First Degree Difference (STRs), 2016
 BEA End Use                   Correlation                 RMSE                      MAE
 Export                        Coefficient
 Classification
 Meat, poultry, and               0.1657                    1.677                    1.128
  other edible animal
  products
 Soybeans and                     0.9116                    2.927                    2.349
  soybean by-
  products
 Animal feeds                     0.9519                    0.918                    0.744

   6. CONCLUSION

  This research shows promise that unit value indexes may be blended with directly collected

survey data to calculate MXPI. Addressing unit value bias is essential to this approach. We

determine the prevalence of unit value bias by assuming that items of similar price levels may

rank more similarly in consumer preferences by minimizing income effects, and thus, we assume

that less price dispersion within an ELI defines a more homogeneous item. We incorporate

current quantities using a Tornqvist index to address substitution bias. The three tests we conduct

to determine unit value index accuracy and tracking of benchmarks with 36 variations of item


                                                                                                   26
key and index calculation method show that EIN and other non-price characteristics more

precisely define a homogeneous good. The most detailed item key shows the least price

dispersion, most accuracy, and best tracking of benchmarks.

   As a result of this research, the unit value indexes offer a promising supplement to current

price index methodologies. Future research will assess unit value indexes from 2012 to 2017 for

all 50 export and 52 import homogeneous 5-digit BEA End Use categories to validate a

prototype for ELI specification and index calculation that consistently provides strong results. As

part of this research, options for systematically identifying over-fitted and under-fitted indexes

will be explored. Indexes' impact on net trade and GDP as well as on top-level price indexes also

will be evaluated. The path to be taken is not yet clearly defined, and the road to implementation

is not expected to be easy, but the first steps are solid.



Bibliography

Alterman, W. (1991). Price Trends in U.S. Trade, New Data, New Insights. In Hooper, P.,
 Richardson, J.D. (Eds.), International Economic Transactions: Issues in Measurement and
 Empirical. National Bureau of Economic Research, Studies in Income and Wealth. Volume 55.
 University of Chicago Press 109-143 (January).
Amiti, M.,and Weinstein, D.E. (2009). Exports and Financial Shocks. Working Paper 15556.
 National Bureau Of Economic Research. Cambridge, MA. December. Retrieved from
 http://www.nber.org/papers/w15556
Bridgman, B. (2015). Specific Trade Costs, Quality, and Import Prices. In Houseman, S. N.,
 Mandel, M. J. (Eds.), Measuring Globalization: Better Trade Statistics for Better Policy ­
 Volume 1. Biases to Price, Output, and Productivity Statistics from Trade (pp. 121-148),
 Retrieved from https://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctvh4zfcn.7?seq=1#metadata_info_tab_contents
Broda, C. and Weinstein, D. (2006). Globalization and the Gains from Variety. Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, May. 121(2). Retrieved from
 https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.2006.121.2.541
Clausing, K. A. (2003). Tax-motivated transfer pricing and US intrafirm trade prices. Journal of
 Public Economics. Volume 87, Issues 9-10, 2207-2223 (September). Retrieved from
 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0047-2727(02)00015-4
Diewert, W.E. (1976). Exact and Superlative Index Numbers. Journal of Econometrics Volume
 4, Issue 2. North-Holland Publishing Company (May).

                                                                                                     27
Feenstra, R.C. and Diewert W.E. (1997). Contract Report on the Methodology for the U.S.
  Export and Import Price Indexes. Unpublished.
Feenstra, R.C., Heston, A., Timmer, P.M and Deng, H. (2009). Estimating real production and
  expenditures across nations: A proposal for improving the Penn World tables, The Review of
  Economics and Statistics, MIT Press, vol. 91(1): 201-212. Retrieved from
  http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/rest.91.1.201
Feenstra, R., and Romalis, J. (2014). International prices and endogenous quality. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 129 (2): 477­527. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/qje/qju001
Feldstein, M. (2017). Underestimating the Real Growth of GDP, Personal Income, and
  Productivity. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31 (2): 145-64. DOI: 10.1257/jep.31.2.145
Fitzgerald, J. (2017). Assessing Product Downsizing, Upsizing, and Product Churn using Nielsen
  Scanner Data, Presented at the 2017 Joint Statistical Meetings, Session on Measuring the
  Economy: Economic and Workforce Statistics, Government Statistics Section.
Gopinath, G., and Itskhoki, O. (2010). Frequency Of Price Adjustment And Pass-Through. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(2), 675-727. Retrieved from
  http://www.jstor.org/stable/27867493
Gopinath, G., and Rigobon, R. (2008). Sticky Borders. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  Vol. 123, No. 2 (May, 2008), pp. 531-575. Retrieved from:
  https://www.jstor.org/stable/25098909
Government Price Statistics Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Economic Statistics Of the
  Joint Economic Committee Congress of the United States Eighty-Seventh Congress First
  Session Pursuant to Sec. 5(a) of Public Law 304 (79th Congress) Part 1 January 24, 1961
Hottman, C. J. and Monarch, R. (2018). Estimating Unequal Gains across US Consumers with
  Supplier Trade Data. Federal Reserve Issue Paper 1220. January 17, 2018. Retrieved from
  https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/ifdp/files/ifdp1220.pdf
Kamal, Fariha & Monarch, Ryan. (2017). Identifying Foreign Suppliers in U.S. Import Data.
  International Finance Discussion Paper 1142r https://doi.org/10.17016/IFDP.2017.1142r
Kravis, I.B., Lipsey, R.E. (1971). Wholesale Prices and Unit Values as Measures of International
  Price Competiveness In Price Competitiveness in World Trade. National Bureau of Economic
  Research. Columbia University Press. New York.
Lipsey, R.E. (1963). Price and Quantity Trends in the Foreign Trade of the United States.
  National Bureau of Economic Research. Princeton University Press. Retrieved From
  https://www.nber.org/books/lips63-1
Mead, D. (2014). Analyzing alternatives to export price indexes, Beyond the Numbers: Global
  Economy, vol. 3, no. 27. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, November, Retrieved from
  https://www.bls.gov/opub/btn/volume-3/analyzing-alternatives-to-export-price-indexes.htm
Moulton, B. (2018). The Measurement of Output, Prices, and Productivity: What's Changed
  Since the Boskin Commission? Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, Brookings
  Institute. July. Retrieved from https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
  content/uploads/2018/07/Moulton-report-v2.pdf
Nakamura, E., and Steinsson, J. (2012). Lost in Transit: Product Replacement Bias and Pricing to
  Market. American Economic Review, 102 (7): 3277-3316. DOI: 10.1257/aer.102.7.3277


                                                                                             28
Price Statistics Review Committee. (1961). The Price Statistics of the Federal Government.
  National Bureau of Economic Research. Cambridge, MA. Appendix A. Retrieved from
  https://www.nber.org/chapters/c6487
Rauch, J. E. (2001). Business and Social Networks in International Trade. Journal of Economic
  Literature, 39(4):1177-1203.
Silver, M. (2010). The Wrongs and Rights of Unit Value Indices. Review of Income and Wealth.
  Series 56, Special Issue 1, 206-223 (June). Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-
  4991.2010.00391.x
Triplett, J.E. (1992). Economic Theory and BEA's Alternative Quantity and Price Indexes.
  Survey of Current Business. 49-52 (April).
  https://www.bea.gov/scb/pdf/national/nipa/1992/0492trip.pdf




                                                                                           29
