                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        DEFINING OPPORTUNITY VERSUS NECESSITY ENTREPRENEURSHIP:
                  TWO COMPONENTS OF BUSINESS CREATION

                                       Robert W. Fairlie
                                       Frank M. Fossen

                                      Working Paper 26377
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26377


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




We thank Marco Caliendo, Emilio Congregado, Marie Mora, Jeremy Moulton, Barbara Robles,
Herbert J. Schuetze, André van Stel, Ting Zhang, and participants at the 2017 ASSA/AEA
Annual Meeting in Chicago, IL, for helpful comments and suggestions. Fairlie also thanks
Stanford University (SIEPR) for support as a visiting scholar while working on the project. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Robert W. Fairlie and Frank M. Fossen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Defining Opportunity versus Necessity Entrepreneurship: Two Components of Business Creation
Robert W. Fairlie and Frank M. Fossen
NBER Working Paper No. 26377
October 2019
JEL No. J23,J64,L26

                                           ABSTRACT

A proposed explanation for why business creation is often found to increase in recessions is that
there are two components to entrepreneurship ­ "opportunity" and "necessity" ­ the latter of
which is mostly counter-cyclical. Although there is some agreement on the conceptual distinction
between these two factors driving entrepreneurship, there is little consensus in the literature on
empirical definitions. The goal of this paper is to propose an operational definition of opportunity
versus necessity entrepreneurship based on the entrepreneur's prior work status (i.e. based on
previous unemployment) that is straightforward, based on objective information, and empirically
feasible using many large, nationally representative datasets. We then explore the validity of the
definitions with theory and empirical evidence. Using datasets from the United States and
Germany we find that 80-90 percent of entrepreneurs are opportunity entrepreneurs. Applying our
proposed definitions, we document that opportunity entrepreneurship is generally pro-cyclical
and necessity entrepreneurship is strongly counter-cyclical both at the national levels and across
local economic conditions. We also find that opportunity vs. necessity entrepreneurship is
associated with the creation of more growth-oriented businesses. The operational definitions of
opportunity and necessity entrepreneurship proposed here may be useful for distinguishing
between the two types of entrepreneurship in future research.


Robert W. Fairlie
Department of Economics
Engineering 2 Building
University of California at Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
rfairlie@ucsc.edu

Frank M. Fossen
Department of Economics
University of Nevada, Reno
1664 N. Virginia Street
Reno, NV 89557-0030
ffossen@unr.edu
1. Introduction

         Although the Great Recession is generally considered the worst contraction since the Great

Depression business creation actually increased during this period (Fairlie 2013; Bell and

Blanchflower 2011). Findings on the general relationship between unemployment and

entrepreneurship are mixed with many previous studies showing positive relationships, negative

relationships, and zero relationships (Parker 2018). 1 One potential reason for the lack of finding

an unambiguous relationship between economic conditions and entrepreneurship is that there are

two underlying components to business creation: one that is generally pro-cyclical and one that is

generally counter-cyclical. Indeed, one topic of research in entrepreneurship that has drawn a

substantial amount of attention in recent years is identifying two different motivations for starting

a business: "opportunity" entrepreneurship and "necessity" entrepreneurship. The basic distinction

is that some entrepreneurs create businesses when they see a business opportunity whereas other

entrepreneurs are forced into starting a business out of necessity because of the lack of other

options in the labor market. 2

         There is no consensus in the empirical literature, however, on the operational definitions

of "necessity" and "opportunity" entrepreneurship. Numerous recent papers note the distinction,

but ultimately use a wide range of empirical definitions. 3 Perhaps the most notable working


1
  Using a cross-country panel of 22 OECD countries from 1972 to 2007 Koellinger and Thurik (2012) find that the
entrepreneurial cycle is positively affected by the national unemployment cycle. Congregado et al. (2012), Parker et
al. (2012), Fritsch et al. (2015), and Konon et al. (2018) report evidence of overall counter-cyclical entrepreneurship
rates in Spain, the U.K., and Germany.
2
   The terms "pull" vs "push" entrepreneurship (e.g., Storey 1991; Ritsilä and Tervo 2002), "disadvantaged"
entrepreneurship, and "innovative" entrepreneurship have also been used in the previous literature to express roughly
similar ideas.
3
  For recent examples of this voluminous literature, see for example Wennekers et al. (2005), Bergmann and Sternberg
(2007), Ho and Wong (2007), Van Stel et al. (2007), Acs and Amorós (2008), Bjørnskov and Foss (2008), McMullen
et al. (2008), Block and Koellinger (2009), Block and Sandner (2009), Caliendo and Kritikos (2009, 2010), Koellinger
and Minniti (2009), Stephen et al. (2009), Block and Wagner (2010), Kautonen and Palmroos (2010), Stephan and
Uhlaner (2010), Terjesen and Amorós (2010), Giacomin et al. (2011), Pinillos and Reyes (2011), Serida and Morales
(2011), Dawson and Henley (2012), Nissan et al. (2012), Fossen and Buettner (2013), Van der Zwang et al. (2016),
and Calderon et al. (2017).

                                                          1
definition of opportunity vs. necessity entrepreneurship is provided by the Global

Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM). The distinction is based on the following question in the GEM

survey: "Are you involved in this start-up to take advantage of a business opportunity or because

you have no better choices for work?" This definition, however, is not readily available in large,

nationally representative datasets, and is based on somewhat subjective information. Survey

respondents might be influenced by the post-realized success of the business launch instead of pre-

launch motivations. The lack of consensus and array of different definitions of opportunity and

necessity entrepreneurship applied in the entrepreneurship literature is confusing and limits

comparisons of results across studies.

       Thus, the primary goal of this paper is to propose definitions of opportunity and necessity

entrepreneurship that can be used in future empirical research and perhaps provide some consensus

over definitions. Another goal is to validate our definitions by exploring their consistency with the

classic theoretical economic model of entrepreneurship, macroeconomic trends, variation in local

economic conditions, and association with growth-oriented types of businesses.

       Our operational definitions of opportunity and necessity entrepreneurship meet four key

criteria. First, the distinction is consistent with the standard theoretical economic model of

entrepreneurship (i.e. the Evans and Jovanovic 1989 model). Second, the distinction is defined ex

ante and not ex post. Third, the distinction is readily available in many large, nationally

representative datasets already used to study entrepreneurship. Finally, the definitions are based

on objective information and not open to interpretation by survey respondents.

       To satisfy these four criteria for classifying entrepreneurs into opportunity versus necessity

entrepreneurship, we propose using initial unemployment status. Individuals who are initially

unemployed before starting businesses are defined as "necessity" entrepreneurs, and individuals



                                                 2
who are wage/salary workers, enrolled in school or college, or are not actively seeking a job are

defined as "opportunity" entrepreneurs. Although it is difficult to cleanly dichotomize the two

types of entrepreneurship, the proposed distinction closely matches the theoretical concepts, is

determined ex ante (i.e., before starting the business), and is based on objective information. Prior

unemployment status is also often available in both panel and cross-sectional datasets. 4

         In addition to discussing the proposed operational definitions of opportunity and necessity

entrepreneurship in detail, we demonstrate how these definitions are motivated by the classic

theoretical economic model of entrepreneurship. We next measure necessity and opportunity

entrepreneurship using large, nationally-representative and widely-used datasets for the United

States and Germany, two countries for which an extensive amount of research on entrepreneurship

has been conducted. Using these definitions, we find that roughly 80 percent of entrepreneurship

is out of opportunity vs necessity in the United States, and roughly 90 percent in Germany. Using

these datasets and the proposed definitions we then explore whether the definitions are consistent

with the business cycle. We find that opportunity entrepreneurship generally moves pro-cyclically

and necessity entrepreneurship clearly moves counter-cyclically. These patterns hold at the

national and local labor market levels for both the United States and Germany. Finally, we present

findings indicating that opportunity vs. necessity entrepreneurship is positively associated with the

creation of more growth-oriented businesses. These findings suggest that the proposed working

definitions of opportunity and necessity entrepreneurship capture the essence of the intended

meanings of the terms in the previous literature. The proposed operational definition may be useful

for future research on entrepreneurship.



4
  Panel datasets will typically have month-to-month or year-to-year information on unemployment, wage/salary work
and business ownership. Cross-sectional datasets sometimes provide information on the labor force state just prior to
the current labor force state.

                                                         3
2. Empirically Defining Necessity and Opportunity Entrepreneurship

         To distinguish between opportunity versus necessity entrepreneurship, we use initial

unemployment status prior to starting the business. Individuals who are initially registered as

unemployed before starting businesses are defined as being necessity entrepreneurs, whereas

individuals who are wage/salary workers, enrolled in school or college, or are not actively seeking

a job before starting businesses are defined as being opportunity entrepreneurs. Individuals who

register as unemployed are, by definition, looking for employment. In contrast, business creation

occurring out of the other three prior labor market states is viewed as an "opportunity."

         This operationalization has advantages. First, the classification criterion is objectively and

unambiguously defined by survey respondents. Every entrepreneur can be classified if the

employment status before starting the business is known. Second, the data requirements are

relatively light, so the approach can be applied to a broad set of available databases. In contrast,

an approach that requires asking for specific motives to become an entrepreneur, for example, rules

out the use of many available databases. Although specific survey questions can be designed and

new survey populations can be used, this will often be costly and requires compromises on sample

size and representativeness.

         Panel data sets with at least two time-series observations typically satisfy the requirements

for our classification approach. A new entrant into entrepreneurship, who is an entrepreneur in

period t, but not in period t-1, is labeled as a necessity entrepreneur in period t if he or she was

unemployed in t-1. Individuals who are not unemployed in period t-1, but become entrepreneurs

in period t are defined as opportunity entrepreneurs. 5


5
 One potential problem is that the definition does not work for individuals who are already entrepreneurs in the first
period of observation in the panel. Some panel surveys (e.g. the German Socio-economic Panel) elicit the retrospective

                                                          4
        The classification approach using the employment status in two subsequent waves of panel

data will be sufficiently accurate for most analyses if the period between two interviews is not too

long (less than a year if possible). The longer the period between two interviews, the higher the

risk of multiple employment transitions between them, which are not captured using this method.

For example, somebody may be a paid employee at the time of the interview in t-1, then become

unemployed, and then become an entrepreneur before the interview in t. In this case, the

information on temporary unemployment would be missed, and the entrepreneur would be

classified as an opportunity entrepreneur instead of as a necessity entrepreneur. Some panel

surveys elicit calendar style information for the time between two interviews. For example, in each

of the annual interviews, the respondents may be asked for their employment states in each month

between the last and the current interviews. This would prevent missing any intermediate

employment spells. Other panel surveys include questions such as "Were you ever unemployed

within the previous year" or "How many months did you receive unemployment benefits in the

previous year", this would also be sufficient for our classification purpose.

        Our classification approach is possible with not only panel data, but also with many cross-

sectional databases if they include a retrospective question on previous unemployment. Some

cross-sectional surveys not only ask for the current employment status, but also the previous one

before the current employment spell. For example, surveys of business owners often ask whether

the respondent was unemployed just prior to starting the business, which is sufficient for our

classification. However, recall bias might be an important limitation, especially if the business was

started many years ago. A second limitation is that only surviving businesses at the time of the

interview are included in the analysis. This potentially implies survival bias, a common limitation


employment history in the first interview with a new respondent, which allows recovering the employment status
before starting the current business and classification even in these cases.

                                                      5
to cross-sectional analyses. Other cross-sectional questionnaires such as the German Micro Census

ask for the current employment status as well as the employment status 12 months (or some other

fixed period) ago. This allows classification of all new entrants into entrepreneurship into necessity

or opportunity entrepreneurship, while those who were already entrepreneurs 12 months ago

cannot be classified. This is sufficient for analyses that focus on entry into entrepreneurship. For

many research questions, the dynamics of entrepreneurship are of more interest than the stock of

entrepreneurs, especially if the intention is causal inference. However, if the retrospective question

refers to a longer time ago, the same limitations occur as discussed before, namely recall bias and

the danger of missing intermediate, multiple transitions between employment states.

        Not only survey data, but also administrative data often include information allowing our

classification approach, as long as at least minimal information on the employment history is

included or can be reconstructed. One common problem, however, with administrative data is that

it is often focused on total earnings and does not provide information on unemployment or hours

worked. Only employment vs. non-employment can be determined from positive earnings vs. zero

earnings in the data (e.g. quarterly earnings data collected by state agencies).



Quits

        In some cases panel or retrospective data provide more detail on the reason for

unemployment. For example, the Current Population Survey (CPS) includes information on how

workers who are currently unemployed lost their job. One possible response is that they "quit"

their job. Unemployed workers who quit their jobs might be classified as opportunity instead of

necessity entrepreneurs or classified as a left out indeterminate group of entrepreneurs. Block and

Sandner (2009) and Block and Wagner (2010) provide an example of this approach using German



                                                  6
data by using information on how the person who becomes an entrepreneur exited from the

previous wage and salary job. Entrepreneurs are classified as necessity entrepreneurs if they were

dismissed or the firm that employed them closed down. If they voluntarily quit their previous job,

they are classified as opportunity entrepreneurs.

         Using recent years of the CPS data, we calculate what percent of entrepreneurs who were

unemployed in the previous month quit their prior job. We find that this classification represents

only 8 percent of necessity entrepreneurs. A drawback of separating quits from the unemployed

group is that many datasets do not provide this information, and even if they do, only those

entrepreneurs who were observed as wage/salary employees then unemployment before becoming

an entrepreneur can be classified. Another potential drawback is that there might be some

misrepresentation by workers who were fired from their jobs into quits. In fact, "fired" is not an

option on the CPS question. Based on these concerns, we do not remove "quits" from the necessity

entrepreneur group. 6



Previous Definitions

         To be sure, the idea of distinguishing between business creation out of unemployment and

other labor force states is not new. Evans and Leighton (1989, 1990) were among the first to

document the high rate of self-employment coming out of unemployment. Farber (1999) also

showed high rates of self-employment among displaced workers. Ritsilä and Tervo (2002) report

that individual unemployment increases the probability of becoming an entrepreneur, although




6
  Block and Sandner (2009) and Block and Wagner (2010) also exclude those entrepreneurs from the sample whose
former wage job was terminated because a limited time contract expired as well as those who lost their last wage/salary
job more than two years ago because classification would be too ambiguous in these cases. The consequence of these
restrictions is that less than one third of the self-employed can be classified into opportunity and necessity
entrepreneurs using this approach based on German Socio-economic Panel data.

                                                          7
controlling for this, times of low unemployment favor firm formation in Finland. Other studies

have shown that prior unemployment is important for understanding the impact of liquidity

constraints and risk attitude on entrepreneurship and measuring the effects of human capital on

earnings and success of entrepreneurs (see, for a few examples, Fairlie and Krashinsky 2012;

Caliendo et al. 2009; Fossen and Buettner 2013; Baptista et al. 2014).

        As noted above, an early working definition of opportunity vs. necessity entrepreneurship

was provided by the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM). 7 GEM uses responses to the

following question: "Are you involved in this start-up to take advantage of a business opportunity

or because you have no better choices for work?" The GEM has been used extensively in the

entrepreneurship literature for a wide range of topics; Bosma (2013) provides an overview of

GEM-based academic publications. 8 Other surveys adopted the same question to distinguish

between opportunity and necessity entrepreneurship from the GEM. For example, the definition

has been used in an online survey in Germany (Block and Koellinger 2009), a survey of recently

established Finnish micro enterprises (Kautonen and Palmroos 2010), and the Flash

Eurobarometer Survey on Entrepreneurship (Van der Zwang et al. 2016).

        However, we are concerned about this distinction between opportunity and necessity

entrepreneurship for several reasons. The primary concern is that this information is available only

in a handful of existing datasets. Second, the GEM-type survey question is based on subjective

information provided by survey respondents. How one person interprets this question could be

different than how another person interprets the question. Another concern is that the same person



7
 See Reynolds et al. (2001, 2005) for a description and discussion of the survey.
8
  For examples of studies using the GEM and its definition of opportunity versus necessity entrepreneurship see
Wennekers et al. (2005), Bergmann and Sternberg (2007), Ho and Wong (2007), Van Stel et al. (2007), Acs and
Amorós (2008), Bjørnskov and Foss (2008), McMullen et al. (2008), Koellinger and Minniti (2009), Stephen et al.
(2009), Stephan and Uhlaner (2010), Terjesen and Amorós (2010), Pinillos and Reyes (2011), Serida and Morales
(2011), and Nissan et al. (2012).

                                                      8
could differ in how they interpret the question over time (i.e. as they get older or at different parts

of the business cycle). Fourth, entrepreneurs may base their responses to this question on how

successful their business launch is going and not on pre-launch goals (although this is less of a

concern for nascent entrepreneurship than actual business creation).

        Another approach is to ask entrepreneurs for various motivational factors for their decision

to become an entrepreneur. For example, the 2010 wave of the German Socio-economic Panel

(SOEP) asks those who newly became self-employed in the survey year how much they agree with

eight statements, including "I have always wanted to be my own boss", "I had an idea that I really

wanted to implement", "I did not want to be unemployed anymore", and "I did not find

employment (anymore)." Similar approaches to distinguish between opportunity and necessity

entrepreneurs are used, for example, in a sample of entrepreneurs in Belgium (Giacomin et al.

2011), the UK Quarterly Labour Force Survey (Dawson and Henley 2012), a sample of female

entrepreneurs in Mexico (Calderon et al. 2017), and an alternative survey for Germany (Caliendo

and Kritikos 2009, 2010).

       To be sure, there exists some overlap between the previous unemployment distinction and

motivation questions, but it is far from perfect. Fossen and Buettner (2013) compare entrepreneurs

who started their businesses out of unemployment with those who started out of employment with

respect to the motivations they indicate in the 2010 wave of the SOEP. The authors find that for

those who were initially employed, the wish to be their own boss is more important, while for

those who were initially unemployed, escaping unemployment and being unable to find

employment are more important reasons for becoming entrepreneurs. Interestingly, Caliendo and

Kritikos (2009, 2010) find that many formerly unemployed entrepreneurs simultaneously indicate

pull as well as push motives, making it difficult to categorize them into necessity or opportunity



                                                  9
entrepreneurs. Giacomin et al. (2011) also highlight situations where the necessity/opportunity

classification may not be sufficiently nuanced. For example, new venture creation based on family

influence may convey both a necessity and an opportunity dimension, and hobby entrepreneurship

may be another type that is not easy to classify.

       Although we do not claim that our approach of using prior unemployment status provides

a perfect dichotomy between opportunity and necessity entrepreneurship, we are concerned about

using statements on the motives for entrepreneurship to define opportunity and necessity

entrepreneurship. In particular, this approach does not meet three of the requirements that we

specify above. Information on startup motivations is not available in most large, nationally

representative datasets. This approach also might have potential inconsistency across individuals

and time. Motivations are asked after start-up and answers might depend on the ex-post success of

the business. Our definition does not suffer from these weaknesses, but certainly is not perfect as

some unemployed individuals might find great opportunities for starting businesses and some

wage/salary workers might face barriers leading to necessity entrepreneurship.



3. Consistency with the Theoretical Model

       Although we propose a definition of opportunity vs. necessity entrepreneurship that can be

measured empirically, is it consistent with implications of the standard theoretical economic model

of entrepreneurship? Theoretical models of the choice to become self-employed in economics are

generally based on a comparison of potential income from business ownership and wage and salary

work. In the classic economic model by Evans and Jovanovic (1989) individuals can obtain the

following income, YW, from the wage and salary sector:

(2.1) YW = w + rA,



                                                    10
where w is the wage earned (earnings) in the market, r is the interest rate, and A represents the

consumer's assets. Income in the self-employment sector, YSE, is defined as:

(2.2) YSE = f(k) + r(A-k),

where  is entrepreneurial ability, f(.) is a production function whose only input is capital,  is a

random component to the production process, and k is the amount of capital employed in the

business. Individuals choose to become self-employed if the potential earnings from self-

employment and investing remaining personal wealth after using it for startup capital is higher

than the potential income from wage and salary work and investing personal wealth.

       Two clarifications are needed in the model to facilitate the discussion of opportunity vs.

necessity entrepreneurship. First, in (2.1) it is important to note that w is total earnings of which

employment is a major component. Second, f(k) in (2.2) captures production measured in profits

and not in the quantity produced. Thus, for example,  might capture a random demand shock

instead of, or in addition to, a random shock to production. Note that in both cases, all components

of income are measured in monetary units.

       This simple theoretical model is useful for identifying the two components of business

creation. Necessity entrepreneurship is generally thought of as business creation in the face of

limited alternative opportunities. In this model, this would imply that YW is low or suffered an

adverse shock. Given that there is downward wage rigidity in the labor market, the primary cause

of low earnings in the wage and salary sector will more commonly be through unemployment and

not a reduction in wages. In this way, we can associate unemployment with necessity

entrepreneurship. Additionally, it is very difficult to directly measure a wage reduction or adverse

shock to potential earnings. Prior unemployment is much easier to measure.




                                                 11
        Opportunity entrepreneurship is generally thought of as business creation when there is an

entrepreneurial opportunity. In this case, YSE is high or experienced a positive shock. In examining

(2.2) there are several possible factors resulting in opportunity entrepreneurship. First, there could

be a positive random shock to production (measured in profits). Consumer and firm demand for

products and services provided by startups might increase resulting in higher . Another possibility

is that an entrepreneur might discover a better production method resulting in a larger f(k) for any

value of k. Third, entrepreneurial ability may be high or change. Some individuals might take

advantage of higher or increased entrepreneurial ability. Finally, capital may become more

available or cheaper resulting in expanded opportunities for business creation. All of these cases

are forms of opportunity entrepreneurship. Given that there are so many possibilities for positive

shocks it is useful to include entrepreneurship from various labor force states other than

unemployment.

        It is important to note, however, that this discussion holds everything constant, which is

difficult to find in the real world. It is rare that one factor affecting either necessity or opportunity

entrepreneurship will change in isolation. For example, factors that lead to high levels of

unemployment such as recessions also often lead to limited entrepreneurial opportunities. For

example, one of the main effects of recessions is that they reduce consumer and firm demand for

products and services provided by startups, thus decreasing potential entrepreneurial earnings, YSE.

Recessions may also reduce total wealth, A, and access to financial capital more generally, which

in turn would lower opportunities for entrepreneurship. On the other hand, the costs of production

are lower in a recession, especially rent and labor, increasing YSE, which could be viewed as

providing an opportunity for business creation. On the necessity side, an important factor having

a positive effect on the entrepreneurial decision is that compensation in the wage/salary sector



                                                   12
decreases in economic contractions. Thus, there are many factors leading to opportunity and

necessity entrepreneurship, but in general we expect that the number of new opportunity

entrepreneurs relative to new necessity entrepreneurs is higher in economic growth periods and

lower in recessions. 9



4. Exploring the Empirical Validity of the Definitions

         In this section, we use data from three nationally-representative and widely used sources

of data to illustrate patterns in opportunity and necessity entrepreneurship based on our proposed

empirical definitions. Data from the United States and Germany are used because these countries

are extremely well represented in the previous literature on entrepreneurship. After describing

the datasets and exact definitions, we examine time-series patterns and correlated outcomes with

the goal of determining if our definitions of opportunity vs. necessity entrepreneurship line up

with concepts.



Data

         We use data from three nationally-representative and widely used sources of data ­ the

matched U.S. Current Population Survey (CPS), the German Micro Census, and the German

Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP). With more than 1 million observations per year, the matched CPS

is one of the largest household survey panel datasets in the world. 10 The CPS is used to estimate



9
   Opportunity entrepreneurship might be less strongly associated with the business cycle, because ideas for
entrepreneurship might come stochastically, or at least relatively constantly, even if the resources and demand needed
for implementation might not.
10
   The underlying datasets that are used to create the matched longitudinal data are the basic monthly files to the
Current Population Survey (CPS). Households in the CPS are interviewed each month over a 4-month period. Eight
months later they are re-interviewed in each month of a second 4-month period. Thus, individuals who are interviewed
in January, February, March and April of one year are interviewed again in January, February, March and April of the
following year. The rotation pattern of the CPS, thus allows for matching information on individuals monthly for 75

                                                         13
the widely reported and analyzed national unemployment rate in the monthly "Jobs Report"

produced by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. The German Micro Census is an official annual

cross-sectional household survey provided by the German Federal Statistical Office. It consists of

a 1% sample of the population in Germany, i.e. about 370,000 households per year. Most questions

are subject to compulsory response, which ensures a low rate of non-response and that

entrepreneurs are adequately represented. For additional analyses, we also use the SOEP, an annual

household panel survey, which is provided by the German Institute for Economic Research, and

which is similar to the U.S. Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). It offers a very rich set of

socio-demographic variables, but with about 22,000 individuals in 12,000 households, it covers a

smaller sample size in comparison to the Micro Census. To add regional data such as the local

unemployment rate, we merge local characteristics of Germany's 96 Spatial Planning Regions to

our panel data. 11



Definition of Entrepreneurship in the CPS

        Using the matched CPS data over time, we create a measure of business formation that

captures all new business owners including those who own incorporated or unincorporated

businesses, and those who are employers or non-employers. To estimate the business formation

rate in the matched CPS data, we first identify all individuals who do not own a business as their

main job in the initial survey month in the two-month pair. By matching CPS files, we then identify

whether they own a business as their main job with 15 or more usual weekly hours worked in the




percent of all respondents to each survey because the fourth month in the rotation cannot be matched to a subsequent
month. We focus on two-month matches across subsequent months. For more details on matching see Fairlie (2013).
11
   We obtain the regional data from the INKAR database provided by Germany's Federal Institute for Research on
Building, Urban Affairs and Spatial Development (http://www.inkar.de). Spatial Planning Regions in Germany are
used for statistical reporting and do not have administrative functions on their own.

                                                        14
subsequent survey month. The entrepreneurship rate is thus defined as the percentage of the

population of non-business owners that start a business each month. To identify whether

individuals are business owners in each month we use information on their main job defined as the

one with the most hours worked. Thus, individuals who start side businesses will not be counted

if they are working more hours on a wage and salary job. The 15 or more hours per week (or

roughly 2 or more days per week) criterion is chosen to guarantee a reasonable work commitment

to the new business venture.



Definition of Entrepreneurship in the German Micro Census and SOEP

       In the German Micro Census and SOEP, we define entrepreneurship analogously to our

definition using the CPS (i.e., we define those as entrepreneurs who report that self-employment

is their main job and working 15 or more hours a week). Again this definition includes employers

and non-employers. In both German data bases, we can identify business formation. Although the

German Micro Census is cross-sectional, it not only asks for the current employment state, but

also includes a retrospective question on a respondent's employment state in the year prior to the

survey. This allows us to identify necessity entrepreneurs, who were unemployed in t-1 and

entrepreneurs in t, and new opportunity entrepreneurs, who were in another labor force state in t-

1 and entrepreneurs in t. The main advantage of the Micro Census is its large sample size and

representativeness, which makes it possible to analyze time trends with high precision.

       The main advantages of the SOEP are the availability of a rich set of socio-demographic

variables and its panel structure (see Goebel et al. 2019). When using the SOEP, we exploit the

panel structure and identify necessity (opportunity) entrepreneurs as those who are observed in

unemployment (all other labor market states, respectively) in year t-1 and entrepreneurs in year t.



                                                15
We thus do not need to rely on retrospective information for determining opportunity and necessity

entrepreneurship.



National Trends in the United States

           In this section, we show how our definitions of overall entrepreneurship, opportunity

entrepreneurship and necessity entrepreneurship track the business cycle. The goal here is not to

establish causation between economic conditions and entrepreneurship (which is a tall task), but

to instead explore whether our definitions are consistent with expectations about movements with

economic conditions. Figure 1 displays the total number of new entrepreneurs vs. the national

unemployment rate from 1996 to 2015 using the CPS. 12 The number of new entrepreneurs captures

the adult (ages 20-64), non-business owner population that starts a business each month. 13 Thus,

it is a flow measure and not a stock measure. We focus on the period starting in 1996 because it

captures the start of the strong economic growth period of the 1990s reasonably well and because

of data limitations in matching the CPS in immediately preceding years. The period from the

beginning of 1996 to 2015 captures two downturns and three growth periods. The NBER officially

dates the end of the strong economic growth period of the late 1990s as March 2001 and the

subsequent contraction period as ending in November 2001. The next peak of the business cycle

was December 2007 and the official end of the "Great Recession" was June 2009, although

unemployment remained very high over the next few years.

           The number of entrepreneurs shows a somewhat counter-cyclical pattern generally moving

with the national unemployment rate. Both entrepreneurship and unemployment were high in 1996

then declined steadily in the strong economic growth period of the late 1990s. Both measures


12
     The unemployment rate is from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).
13
     Sampling weights provided in the CPS are used to scale up to population numbers.

                                                          16
increased in the early 2000s corresponding with the recession. In the mid-2000s both measures

declined at first but only the unemployment rate continued to decline until the start of the recession

in 2007. The unemployment rate rose very rapidly over the next two years during the Great

Recession (see Fairlie 2013 for more details). In the few years immediately following the Great

Recession the number of entrepreneurs and unemployment rate fell, but as the unemployment rate

continued to fall the number of entrepreneurs changed course and has been increasing since 2013. 14

        Figure 2 displays the number of entrepreneurs and real GDP growth rates. Entrepreneurship

displays a relatively weak counter-cyclical pattern when using real GDP growth rates to track

economic conditions. One problem is that real GDP growth rates fluctuate making it difficult to

see a more continuous measure of business cycle conditions. But, these results generally paint the

same picture as those displayed in Figure 1 for the relationship between entrepreneurship and the

national unemployment rate.

        The finding that total entrepreneurship does not follow a strong cyclical trend is consistent

with findings in previous studies and might be due to the opposing forces of opportunity and

necessity entrepreneurship. To investigate we separately examine trends in opportunity and

necessity entrepreneurship. Figures 3 and 4 display the number of new opportunity and necessity

entrepreneurs over the business cycle, respectively. The number of opportunity entrepreneurs

shows somewhat of a cyclical pattern. The number of opportunity entrepreneurs rose in the late

1990s, in the mid-2000s, and in the past few years. It declined during the early 2000s and around

the Great Recession. The number of necessity entrepreneurs shows a strong counter-cyclical trend

moving strongly with the unemployment rate, which is what is expected based on the definition.




14
  Sedlacek and Sterk (2017) and Siemer (2019) document the fall in employer firm entries during the Great Recession
based on the Business Dynamics Statistics.

                                                        17
        To combine and simplify these patterns, Figure 5 displays the opportunity share of new

entrepreneurs (defined as the number of new opportunity entrepreneurs as a share of the total

number of new entrepreneurs). Over the past two decades, the share of new business creation from

opportunity entrepreneurship increased when economic conditions were improving and decreased

when economic conditions were worsening. The largest share of opportunity entrepreneurship

occurred at the height of the "Roaring 90s," and the smallest share was in 2009 at the end of the

Great Recession. The share of opportunity business creation also decreased in the recession of the

early 2000s and increased in the following growth period in the mid-2000s. The opportunity share

of new entrepreneurs is clearly pro-cyclical. 15

        Figures 1-4 display the number of entrepreneurs over the business cycle. The patterns do

not change when we implicitly adjust for trends in population size by focusing on entrepreneurship

rates (which capture the percentage of the adult, non-business owner population that starts a

business each month). Figure 6 displays the entrepreneurship rate over the business cycle. As

expected the patterns do not differ substantially from patterns for the number of entrepreneurs.

Appendix Figures 1 and 2 display trends for similar rate measures for opportunity and necessity

entrepreneurship. These also follow similar time series patterns. Opportunity entrepreneurship

displays a weak pro-cyclical pattern and necessity entrepreneurship follows a strong counter-

cyclical pattern.

        Returning to trends in the number of entrepreneurs displayed in Figure 1, it is possible to

explain changes over time. For example, from 2006 before the Great Recession to 2010 when the

Great Recession ended the number of new entrepreneurs increased by 85,370 per month. Most of

the increase in business creation from the start to end of the Great Recession came from necessity


15
 We find a similar pattern of clear pro-cyclicality in the opportunity share when we exclude new entrepreneurs who
were initially not in the labor force.

                                                       18
entrepreneurship. The number of new necessity entrepreneurs increased by 53,886 (63 percent).

In contrast, the recent increase in the total number of new entrepreneurs of 103,990 from 2013 to

2015 was entirely driven by the increase in the number of opportunity entrepreneurs.



National Trends in Germany

        We next examine trends in Germany using the German Micro Census. Figure 7 plots the

total number of new entrepreneurs and the unemployment rate, which is obtained from Germany's

Federal Employment Agency (2017). Similar to the United States, the number of new

entrepreneurs exhibits a weak counter-cyclical pattern moving mostly with the unemployment rate.

Figure 8 shows the relationship between entrepreneurship and the real GDP growth rate, which is

provided by German Federal Statistical Office (2016). No clear pattern emerges due to the erratic

nature of GDP growth. In Figure 9, we look at new opportunity entrepreneurs separately. Similar

to the total number of new entrepreneurs, the number of new opportunity entrepreneurs moves

somewhat with the unemployment rate. A clear relationship becomes apparent, however, between

the number of new necessity entrepreneurs and the unemployment rate (Figure 10). As expected,

and as seen in the United States, the two trends move together indicating that necessity

entrepreneurship is counter-cyclical. 16 Focusing on the percentage of opportunity vs. necessity

entrepreneurship, we find that the opportunity share of new entrepreneurs is strongly cyclical

(Figure 11). In 2003-2005, when unemployment is at its peak, the share of opportunity

entrepreneurs out of all new entrepreneurs falls from 90% to 80% and rises back to 90% thereafter.

Finally, when we plot new entrepreneurship rates instead of numbers, very similar patterns emerge




16
  Startup subsidies that became available to unemployed individuals in Germany in 2003 facilitated entrepreneurship
out of unemployment.

                                                        19
(Figure 12 and Appendix Figures 3 and 4), which is in line with our earlier observation from the

U.S. data. 17



West and East Germany

           We also examine differences between former West and East Germany that has persisted

after reunification in 1990. In particular, the regional economy has remained weaker in the east.

While the total new entrepreneurship rate is almost the same in both parts of the country,

distinguishing between opportunity and necessity entrepreneurship reveals important differences

in the expected direction. The new necessity entrepreneurship rate in the east is double the rate in

the west (0.20% versus 0.10% in our SOEP sample), whereas the opportunity entrepreneurship

rate is lower in the east (0.62% versus 0.74%). Thus, exclusively considering the total new

entrepreneurship rate hides substantial differences between the two types of entrepreneurship.



Regression Results Using National Unemployment Rates

           We next examine the relationship between entrepreneurship and the business cycle in a

regression framework. The regressions allow us to control for trends in demographic factors,

regional population shifts, and long-term trends that might be correlated with business cycle

dynamics. We first examine entrepreneurship in the United States using the matched CPS from

1996-2015.

           Table 1 reports estimates from linear probability regressions for the probability of total

new entrepreneurship, new opportunity entrepreneurship, and new necessity entrepreneurship. 18

The sample for all three models includes the adult, non-business owner population in the initial


17
     The results also remain similar when we exclude those initially not in the labor force from the sample.
18
     Marginal effects for probit and logit models are similar and not reported.

                                                            20
survey month of the two-month pairs. Total entrepreneurship captures individuals starting a

business in the second survey month. Specifications 1 and 2 report estimates for the regression of

total new entrepreneurship on the national unemployment rate with and without controls,

respectively. The entrepreneurship probability has a positive association with the national

unemployment rate indicating a counter-cyclical pattern. Controlling for demographic, regional

and long-term factors does not change the estimate of the association between entrepreneurship

and the unemployment rate.

       We also estimate regressions for the probability of opportunity and necessity

entrepreneurship. Specifications 3 and 4 report estimates for regressions for the probability of

opportunity entrepreneurship, and Specifications 5 and 6 report estimates for regressions for the

probability of necessity entrepreneurship. The probability of opportunity entrepreneurship is not

strongly associated with the national unemployment rate. The point estimate is negative, as

expected, but it is not statistically significant. The necessity entrepreneurship probability, however,

is positively associated with the national unemployment rate.

       The regression estimates confirm the trends displayed in the figures. Necessity

entrepreneurship is counter-cyclical whereas opportunity entrepreneurship is weakly pro-cyclical.

Also, demographic, regional and long-term trends are not responsible for the relationships with

the business cycle.

       The results from analogous regressions using the German SOEP appear in Table 2. Using

the annual panel data and the sample of adult non-entrepreneurs, the dependent variable is 1 if an

individual reports entrepreneurship in the subsequent year. Those who are unemployed before the

transition are classified as necessity entrepreneurs and all other new entrepreneurs are classified

as opportunity entrepreneurs. The national unemployment rate is positively associated with the



                                                  21
total new entrepreneurship rate. This is statistically significant only when including control

variables. There is no significant association of the unemployment rate with opportunity

entrepreneurship. In contrast, necessity entrepreneurship is positively and significantly related to

the unemployment rate. Thus, in Germany similar to the United States, the counter-cyclical

movement of necessity entrepreneurship drives the counter-cyclicality of the total

entrepreneurship rate. 19

         In general our analysis of national trends over the business cycle is consistent with agreed-

upon concepts of opportunity vs. necessity entrepreneurship. Our empirical definitions meet

expectations regarding the strong counter-cyclicality of necessity entrepreneurship and weak pro-

cyclicality of opportunity entrepreneurship. 20



Local Economic Conditions in the United States

         We turn to examining the relationship between opportunity and necessity entrepreneurship

and local economic conditions. In case of the United States, we focus on metropolitan areas which

capture local labor markets. Figure 13 displays average new total, opportunity and necessity

entrepreneurship rates across several ranges of local unemployment rates. Variation across local

labor markets and over time are used to generate the relationships displayed in the figure. There is


19
   If opportunity entrepreneurship is positively correlated with innovation, our results are largely consistent with the
findings of Konon et al. (2018). Based on start-up rates in 38 German regions from 1995-2008, these authors find a
positive association between unemployment rates and the start-up rates of non-innovative businesses (their Table 6),
but no significant association with the start-up rates of innovative small-scale businesses. They do find a significant
positive association with start-up rates in innovative large-scale industries (high-tech manufacturing), but we do not
observe a sufficient number of entries in these industries in our household survey data for a comparison.
20
   We also estimate specifications additionally including lagged unemployment rates (minus one year). For necessity
entrepreneurship in the United States, we find a positive and similarly sized coefficient on the contemporaneous
unemployment rate and essentially no relationship with the lagged unemployment rate. For total entrepreneurship the
coefficient on current unemployment becomes larger as lagged unemployment enters with a negative coefficient. For
opportunity entrepreneurship lagged unemployment has a negative relationship. For Germany, all the coefficients on
the lagged unemployment rate are insignificant. On the contemporaneous unemployment rate, we again find positive
and significant coefficients for necessity and total entrepreneurship. Overall, the lag structures suggest that the
contemporaneous associations are strongest. Estimates are available by request from the authors.

                                                          22
a positive relationship between total new entrepreneurship rates and local unemployment rates.

The distinction between opportunity and necessity entrepreneurship shows that this is driven by

the even stronger association of necessity entrepreneurship with local unemployment rates.

Necessity entrepreneurship rates increase substantially and monotonically from the lowest local

unemployment rates to the highest local unemployment rates. In contrast to the clear results for

necessity entrepreneurship we do not find a clear relationship between opportunity

entrepreneurship and local unemployment rates.

        Figure 14 displays the opportunity share of entrepreneurship across local unemployment

rates. The relationship between the opportunity share of entrepreneurship and local unemployment

rates is strongly negative. Higher local unemployment rates are associated with lower opportunity

shares, consistent with the patterns found for opportunity and necessity entrepreneurship.



Regression Results Using Local Unemployment Rates in the United States

        We also estimate regression models that replace the national unemployment rate with the

MSA unemployment rate. 21 Table 3 reports estimates from linear probability regressions for the

probability of total new entrepreneurship, new opportunity entrepreneurship, and new necessity

entrepreneurship including the local unemployment rate. Some of the regressions control for

demographic trends and differences across metropolitan areas that might confound the estimated

relationship between entrepreneurship and local unemployment rates. Regional and urbanicity

trends and differences, and long-term macro trends are also controlled for in these regressions.

        Total entrepreneurship has a positive association with local unemployment rates. Necessity

entrepreneurship, as expected also has a positive association with local unemployment rates. On


21
  Observations from rural areas or not-identified MSAs are not included in the sample. These observations represent
less than 25 percent of the total sample.

                                                        23
the other hand, we do not find evidence of a negative association with opportunity

entrepreneurship. These results generally confirm the patterns displayed in the figures and are

consistent with the findings using the national unemployment rate as the measure of business cycle

conditions.



Results Using Local Unemployment Rates in Germany

        Entrepreneurship patterns by local unemployment rates in Germany (based on Spatial

Planning Regions) are similar to those in the United States. In particular, the new necessity

entrepreneurship rate generally increases with the local unemployment rate (Figure 15) whereas

the opportunity share decreases (Figure 16). There is no clear trend in the total new

entrepreneurship rate, however, which highlights again that this statistic alone disguises the

important difference between the two types.

        Table 4 shows linear probability regressions for Germany based on the SOEP. The main

regressor of interest is the local unemployment rate. The association between total new

entrepreneurship and the local unemployment rate is positive, indicating counter-cyclicality,

similar to the United States. The association between opportunity entrepreneurship and the

unemployment rate is negative, indicating pro-cyclicality. However, the point estimates for total

and opportunity entrepreneurship are not statistically significant. In contrast, necessity

entrepreneurship is positively associated with the unemployment rate and the coefficient is

statistically significant. This result confirms the counter-cyclical pattern of necessity

entrepreneurship. 22



22
  For both the United States and Germany, the additional inclusion of lagged unemployment rates (minus one year)
does not change the main finding that necessity entrepreneurship and total entrepreneurship are positively correlated
with current unemployment rates. The coefficients on the contemporaneous unemployment rate for necessity and total

                                                         24
5. Business Types Associated with Opportunity vs. Necessity Entrepreneurship

        Do our definitions of opportunity and necessity entrepreneurship line up with the creation

of more growth-oriented businesses? In other words, based on our definitions do opportunity

entrepreneurs start businesses with more growth-oriented characteristics than do necessity

entrepreneurs? We explore this question next. Table 5 reports estimates for several measures of

the businesses created by new opportunity and necessity entrepreneurs based on the CPS. We find

that new opportunity entrepreneurs are more likely to create incorporated businesses and are more

likely to create employer businesses. 23 These two factors are especially associated with the

seriousness of the business venture (e.g., Astebro and Tag 2015). 24

        Incorporation status might represent another method of distinguishing between opportunity

and necessity entrepreneurship. 25 We explore this possibility by plotting trends in the incorporation

share of new entrepreneurs vs. the unemployment rate using the CPS (Figure 17). One pattern that

is extremely clear is that incorporation status has been steadily increasing in the United States over

the past two decades. The share of new entrepreneurs starting incorporated businesses increased

from 28 percent in 1996 to 36 percent in 2015. The incorporation share increased steadily from

1996 to 2008. It decreased slightly in the Great Recession, but did not decrease during the recession

in the early 2000s. The dominant trend in the incorporation share of new entrepreneurs is a long-

term upward trend and not one that closely follows the business cycle. A perhaps more important



entrepreneurship become larger as lagged unemployment enters with a negative sign, especially in Germany.
Estimates are available by request from the authors.
23
   Employer status of business owners is only available in the CPS starting in 2014.
24
   In fact, Congregado et al. (2012) report that employer rates move pro-cyclically whereas non-employer rates move
counter-cyclically in Spain, which is consistent with our findings for opportunity and necessity entrepreneurship in
the United States.
25
   Levine and Rubinstein (2017) use incorporation status to distinguish self-employed between "entrepreneurs" and
other business owners.

                                                        25
concern, however, is that incorporation status can be thought of as an ex-post business outcome.

It might depend on the early success of the business venture. An important criterion in

distinguishing between opportunity and necessity entrepreneurship noted above is that it is pre-

determined. But, incorporation status is defined simultaneously with the business creation decision

in many cases (or thereafter when the legal form is changed) signaling more serious business

formation but not whether it was created out of necessity.

       Table 5 also reports the industry distributions for businesses created by new opportunity

and necessity entrepreneurs. Opportunity entrepreneurs are more likely to start businesses than

necessity entrepreneurs in agriculture, wholesale/retail trade, and education/health. Necessity

entrepreneurs are more likely to start businesses in construction. These differences generally line

up with opportunity entrepreneurs starting businesses in industries with higher barriers to entry.

But, overall we find that both opportunity and necessity entrepreneurs are fairly spread across

industries.

       Table 5 also reports personal characteristics of opportunity and necessity entrepreneurs.

We focus on education, race and immigrant status which are correlated with advantaged vs.

disadvantaged status. We find that opportunity entrepreneurs are less likely than necessity

entrepreneurs to have low levels of education and are more likely to have high levels of education.

This is in line with prior literature reporting higher education levels among opportunity

entrepreneurs (Fossen and Buettner 2013; Stephan et al. 2015), although Block and Wagner (2010)

and Van der Zwang et al. (2016) do not find significant differences. Formal education is a relevant

characteristic because it has been found to be a predictor of entrepreneurial success (Van Praag et

al. 2013; Kolstad and Wiig 2015). Opportunity entrepreneurs are less likely to be African-

American and LatinX, but are more likely to be white and Asian. These patterns are consistent



                                                26
with business success patterns by race and ethnicity (Fairlie and Robb 2008; Fairlie 2018).

Opportunity vs. necessity entrepreneurship is found to be only weakly correlated with immigrant

status.

          Using the SOEP, we find that opportunity entrepreneurship is related to indicators of

growth-oriented businesses in Germany as well (Table 6). New opportunity entrepreneurs are more

likely to hire workers: Three quarters of new necessity entrepreneurs are solo-entrepreneurs, but

only 53% of new opportunity entrepreneurs. New opportunity entrepreneurs also earn substantially

more per month than necessity entrepreneurs. The difference is even larger with regard to business

assets. New opportunity entrepreneurs are more likely to work in public and personal services in

Germany, which includes education and health, like in the United States. Unfortunately, neither

the SOEP nor the Micro Census provide information on incorporation status. Looking at the

personal characteristics of opportunity and necessity entrepreneurs in Germany, we find that a

higher share of opportunity than necessity entrepreneurs have university degrees, which is

consistent with our finding for the United States. Necessity entrepreneurs are also more likely to

have a direct migration background, 26 and they more often live in the east of Germany where

unemployment rates are high, as expected.



6. Conclusions

          In this paper, we create straightforward operational definitions of necessity and opportunity

entrepreneurship that satisfy four criteria: i) consistent with theory, ii) based on objective

information, iii) empirically measurable ex-ante, and iv) available in many large, nationally



26
  A person is defined to have a direct migration background if born outside Germany and an indirect migration
background if he or she was born in Germany but does not have German citizenship, or at least one parent was not
born in Germany or does not have German citizenship.

                                                      27
representative datasets. Using panel data or retrospective information we define individuals who

are initially unemployed before starting businesses as "necessity" entrepreneurs, and define

individuals who are not unemployed (i.e. wage/salary workers, enrolled in school or college, or

are not actively seeking a job) before starting businesses as "opportunity" entrepreneurs. We show

that our empirical definitions are consistent with the standard theoretical economic model of

entrepreneurship.

       Taking our proposed definition to the data, we find that roughly 80 percent of entrepreneurs

in the United States are opportunity entrepreneurs, and 90 percent of entrepreneurs in Germany

are opportunity entrepreneurs. We find that total entrepreneurship is somewhat counter-cyclical,

but once we distinguish between opportunity and necessity entrepreneurship associations with the

business cycle become clearer. Opportunity entrepreneurship is generally pro-cyclical and

necessity entrepreneurship is strongly counter-cyclical. Opportunity entrepreneurship is positively

associated with local economic conditions and necessity entrepreneurship is negatively associated

with local economic conditions. Opportunity entrepreneurship is also found to be associated with

more growth-oriented businesses than necessity entrepreneurship. These findings provide

validation that our definitions of opportunity and necessity entrepreneurship are capturing their

intended concepts.

       To be sure, it is impossible to create a perfectly clean dichotomy along the lines of

opportunity and necessity entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship or business ownership is more

broadly determined by both supply and demand factors. An outward shift in demand for the goods

and services typically produced by entrepreneurs or an outward shift in the availability of capital

could lead to more opportunity entrepreneurship, whereas an inward shift in demand for wage and

salary jobs could lead to more necessity entrepreneurship. Economic fluctuations, for example, are



                                                28
likely to affect all of these factors and not just one in isolation, thus making it difficult to cleanly

dichotomize the underlying motivations for starting a business. Furthermore, not all businesses

created from unemployment will be out of necessity as some unemployed workers might have

good opportunities in the wage/salary sector, and similarly, not all businesses created from

wage/salary work will be opportunity entrepreneurship as some wage/salary workers might be

receiving low pay or facing reduced work hours. The underlying problem is that one cannot

observe all of the internal and external factors influencing the decisions to start a business by the

individual. More research is needed on refinements to the definitions of necessity and opportunity

entrepreneurship especially in cases where panel data include measures of declining wages or

hours worked (i.e. components of earnings noted in Equation (2.1)) prior to when entrepreneurship

is measured. 27 More research could also focus on quits vs. other forms of job separation and the

role that the receipt of unemployment insurance plays. A data-related limitation of our approach

occurs when the time lag between the observed previous employment status and the current

employment status is too long, which might lead to measurement error because employment spells

in between could be missed; intra-annual data is therefore preferable.

        With these caveats in mind, the straightforward dichotomy between opportunity and

necessity entrepreneurship defined here could be valuable for future research on the determinants

and outcomes of entrepreneurship. For example, research focusing on the determinants of more

growth-oriented entrepreneurship (and not necessity entrepreneurship) might want to exclude the

previously unemployed in some specifications. On the other hand, an analysis of the reliance on

business ownership as a route out of poverty might want to focus on necessity entrepreneurship.



27
  One major difficultly along these lines is determining what level of decline in wages or hours and over what period
of time denotes "necessity." Additionally, earnings and hours measures are often very lumpy with many respondents
reporting round figures making it difficult to measure changes in subsequent survey periods.

                                                         29
Although researchers need to be careful about the potential for removing ultimately successful

"necessity" entrepreneurs or removing downtrodden "opportunity" entrepreneurs this approach

could tighten up estimates and provide clearer results.




                                                30
References

Acs, Z.J., and J.E. Amorós (2008): Entrepreneurship and Competitiveness in Latin America. Small
  Business Economics 31(3), 305-322.
Angrist, J.D., and J.-S. Pischke (2009): Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's
  Companion. Princeton University Press.
Astebro, T.B., and J. Tag (2015): Entrepreneurs and Job Creation. IFN Working Paper 1059,
  http://ssrn.com/abstract=2576044.
Baptista, R., M. Karaöz, and J. Mendonça (2014): The Impact of Human Capital on the Early
  Success of Necessity versus Opportunity-based Entrepreneurs. Small Business Economics 42,
  831-847.
Bell, D.N.F., and D.G. Blanchflower (2011): Underemployment in the UK in the Great Recession.
  National Institute Economic Review 215(1), R23-R33.
Bergmann, H., and R. Sternberg (2007): The Changing Face of Entrepreneurship in Germany.
  Small Business Economics 28(2-3), 205-221.
Bjørnskov, C., and N.J. Foss (2008): Economic Freedom and Entrepreneurial Activity: Some
  Cross-country Evidence. Public Choice 134(3-4), 307-328.
Block, J., and P. Koellinger (2009): I Can't Get No Satisfaction--Necessity Entrepreneurship and
  Procedural Utility. Kyklos 62(2), 191-209.
Block, J., and P. Sandner (2009): Necessity and Opportunity Entrepreneurs and Their Duration in
  Self-employment: Evidence from German Micro Data. Journal of Industry, Competition and
  Trade 9, 117-137.
Block, J., and M. Wagner (2010): Necessity and Opportunity Entrepreneurs in Germany:
  Characteristics and Earnings Differentials. Schmalenbach Business Review 62(2), 154­174.
Bosma, N. (2013): The Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) and Its Impact on
  Entrepreneurship Research. Foundations and Trends in Entrepreneurship 9(2), 143-248.
Calderon, G., L. Iacovone, and L. Juarez (2017): Opportunity versus Necessity: Understanding the
  Heterogeneity of Female Micro-Entrepreneurs. World Bank Economic Review 30(Suppl. 1),
  S86-S96.
Caliendo, M., F.M. Fossen, and A.S. Kritikos (2009): Risk Attitudes of Nascent Entrepreneurs­
  New Evidence from an Experimentally Validated Survey. Small Business Economics 32, 153-
  167.
Caliendo, M., and A.S. Kritikos (2009): "I Want to, But I also Need to": Start-Ups Resulting from
  Opportunity and Necessity. IZA Discussion Paper 4661.
Caliendo, M., and A.S. Kritikos (2010): Start-ups by the Unemployed: Characteristics, Survival
  and Direct Employment Effects. Small Business Economics 35, 71-92.
Congregado, E., A.A. Golpe, and S.C. Parker (2012): The Dynamics of Entrepreneurship:
  Hysteresis, Business Cycles and Government Policy. Empirical Economics 43, 1239-1261.
Dawson, C., and A. Henley (2012): 'Push' Versus `Pull' Entrepreneurship: An Ambiguous
  Distinction? International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour & Research 18(6), 697-71.
Evans, D.S., and B. Jovanovic (1989): An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice under
  Liquidity Constraints. Journal of Political Economy 97(4), 808­827.
Evans, D.S., and L.S. Leighton (1989): Some Empirical Aspects of Entrepreneurship. American
  Economic Review 79(3), 519-535.
Evans, D.S., and L.S. Leighton (1990): Small Business Formation by Unemployed and Employed
  Workers. Small Business Economics 2, 319-330.


                                               31
Fairlie, R.W. (2013): Entrepreneurship, Economic Conditions, and the Great Recession. Journal
   of Economics & Management Strategy 22(2), 207-231.
Fairlie, R.W. (2018): Racial Inequality in Business Ownership and Income. Oxford Review of
   Economic Policy 34(4): 597-614.
Fairlie, R.W., and H.A. Krashinsky (2012): Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and
   Entrepreneurship Revisited. Review of Income and Wealth 58(2), 279­306.
Fairlie, R.W., and A.M. Robb (2008): Race and Entrepreneurial Success: Black-, Asian-, and
   White-Owned Businesses in the United States. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Farber, H.S. (1999): Alternative and Part-time Employment Arrangements as a Response to Job
   Loss. Journal of Labor Economics 17(4), Part 2, S142­S169.
Federal Employment Agency (2017): Arbeitsmarkt in Zahlen, Monats-/Jahreszahlen,
   Arbeitslosigkeit im Zeitverlauf, November 2015, https://statistik.arbeitsagentur.de.
Fossen, F.M., and T.J.M. Buettner (2013): The Returns to Education for Opportunity
   Entrepreneurs, Necessity Entrepreneurs, and Paid Employees. Economics of Education Review
   37, 66-84.
Fritsch, M., A. Kritikos, and K. Pijnenburg (2015): Business Cycles, Unemployment and
   Entrepreneurial Entry­Evidence from Germany. International Entrepreneurship and
   Management Journal 11, 267-286.
German Federal Statistical Office (2016): Inlandsproduktsberechnung, Lange Reihen ab 1970.
   Fachserie 18 Reihe 1.5­2015.
Giacomin, O., F. Janssen, J.-L. Guyot, and O. Lohest (2011): Opportunity and/or Necessity
   Entrepreneurship? The Impact of the Socio-economic Characteristics of Entrepreneurs. MPRA
   (Munich Personal RePEc Archive) Working Paper 29506.
Goebel, J., M.M. Grabka, S. Liebig, M. Kroh, D. Richter, C. Schröder, and J. Schupp (2019): The
    German Socio-Economic Panel Study (SOEP). Journal of Economics and Statistics 239(2),
    345-360.
Ho, Y., and P. Wong (2007): Financing, Regulatory Costs and Entrepreneurial Propensity. Small
   Business Economics 28(2-3), 187-204.
Kautonen, T., and J. Palmroos (2010): The Impact of Necessity-based Start-up on Subsequent
   Entrepreneurial Satisfaction. International Entrepreneurship and Management Journal 6, 285-
   300.
Koellinger, P., and M. Minniti (2009): Unemployment Benefits Crowd Out Nascent
   Entrepreneurial Activity. Economics Letters 103(2), 96-98.
Koellinger, P.D., and A.R. Thurik (2012): Entrepreneurship and the Business Cycle. Review of
   Economics and Statistics 94(4), 1143-1156.
Kolstad, I., and A. Wiig (2015): Education and Entrepreneurial Success. Small Business
   Economics 44, 783-796.
Konon, A., M. Fritsch, and A.S. Kritikos (2018): Business Cycles and Start-ups across Industries:
   An Empirical Analysis of German Regions. Journal of Business Venturing 33, 742-761.
Levine, R., and Y. Rubinstein (2017): Smart and Illicit: Who Becomes an Entrepreneur and Do
   They Earn More? Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(2), 963-1018.
McMullen, J.S., R.D. Bagby, and L.E. Palich (2008): Economic Freedom and the Motivation to
   Engage in Entrepreneurial Action. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice 32(5), 875-895.
Nissan, E., M. Castano, and I. Carrasco (2012). Drivers of Non-profit Activity: A Cross-country
   Analysis. Small Business Economics 38(3), 303-320.
Parker, S.C. (2018): The Economics of Entrepreneurship, Second Edition. Cambridge, UK:
    Cambridge University Press.

                                               32
Parker, S.C., E. Congregado, and A.A. Golpe (2012): Is Entrepreneurship a Leading or Lagged
   Indicator of the Business Cycle? Evidence from UK Self-employment Data. International Small
   Business Journal 30(7), 736-753.
Pinillos, M., and L. Reyes (2011): Relationship Between Individualist-collectivist Culture and
   Entrepreneurial Activity: Evidence from Global Entrepreneurship Monitor Data. Small
   Business Economics 37(1), 23-37.
Reynolds, P.D., N. Bosma, E. Autio, S. Hunt, N. De Bono, I. Servais, P. Lopez-Garcia, and N.
   Chin (2005): Global Entrepreneurship Monitor: Data Collection Design and Implementation
   1998-2003. Small Business Economics 24, 205-231.
Reynolds, P.D., S.M. Camp, W.D. Bygrave, E. Autio, and M. Hay. (2001): Global
   Entrepreneurship Monitor 2001 Executive Report. Babson College and London Business
   School.
Ritsilä J., and H. Tervo (2002): Effects of Unemployment on New Firm Formation: Micro-level
   Panel Data Evidence from Finland. Small Business Economics 19, 31-40.
Sedlacek, P., and V. Sterk (2017): The Growth Potential of Startups over the Business Cycle.
   American Economic Review 107(10), 3182-3210.
Serida, J.N., and O.T. Morales (2011): Using the Theory of Planned Behavior to Predict Nascent
   Entrepreneurship. Academia, Revista Latinoamericana de Administración 46, 55-71.
Siemer, M. (2019): Employment Effects of Financial Constraints during the Great Recession.
   Review of Economics and Statistics 101(1), 16-29.
Stephan, U., M. Hart, T. Mickiewicz, and C.C. Drews (2015): Understanding Motivations for
   Entrepreneurship. BIS Research Paper 212, Department for Business Innovation and Skills,
   London.
Stephan, U., and L. Uhlaner (2010): Performance-based vs Socially Supportive Culture: A Cross-
   national Study of Descriptive Norms and Entrepreneurship. Journal of International Business
   Studies 41, 1347-1364.
Stephen, F., D. Urbano, and S. Van Hemmen (2009): The Responsiveness of Entrepreneurs to
   Working Time Regulations. Small Business Economics 32, 259-276.
Storey, D.J. (1991): The Birth of New Firms­Does Unemployment Matter? A Review of the
   Evidence. Small Business Economics 3, 167-178.
Terjesen, S., and J.E. Amorós (2010): Female Entrepreneurship in Latin America and the
   Caribbean: Characteristics, Drivers and Relationship to Economics Development. European
   Journal of Development Research 22(3), 313-330.
Van der Zwang, P., R. Thurik, I. Verheul, and J. Hessels (2016): Factors Influencing the
   Entrepreneurial Engagement of Opportunity and Necessity Entrepreneurs. Eurasian Business
   Review 6, 273-295.
Van Praag, M., A. Van Witteloostuijn, and J. Van der Sluis (2013): The Higher Returns to Formal
   Education for Entrepreneurs versus Employees. Small Business Economics 40(2), 375-396.
Van Stel, A., D.J. Storey, and A.R. Thurik (2007): The Effect of Business Regulation on Nascent
   and Young Business Entrepreneurship. Small Business Economics 28(2-3), 171-186.
Wennekers, S.A., A. van Stel, R. Thurik, and P. Reynolds (2005): Nascent Entrepreneurship and
   the Level of Economic Development. Small Business Economics 24(3), 293-309.




                                              33
                                                Figure 1
                     Number of New Entrepreneurs and Unemployment Rates (1996-2015)



600,000                                                                                                        0.11



                                                                                                               0.1
550,000


                                                                                                               0.09


500,000
                                                                                                               0.08



450,000                                                                                                        0.07



                                                                                                               0.06
400,000


                                                                                                               0.05


350,000
                                                                                                               0.04



300,000                                                                                                        0.03
       1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016


                                    Number of New Entrepreneurs"    Unemployment Rate




                                                 Figure 2
                     Number of New Entrepreneurs and Real GDP Growth Rates (1996-2015)



600,000                                                                                                        0.11

                                                                                                               0.1

                                                                                                               0.09
550,000
                                                                                                               0.08

                                                                                                               0.07

500,000                                                                                                        0.06

                                                                                                               0.05

                                                                                                               0.04
450,000
                                                                                                               0.03

                                                                                                               0.02

400,000                                                                                                        0.01

                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                               -0.01
350,000
                                                                                                               -0.02

                                                                                                               -0.03

300,000                                                                                                        -0.04
       1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016


                                   Number of New Entrepreneurs"    Real GDP Growth Rate




                                                                            34
                                                Figure 3
               Number of New Opportunity Entrepreneurs and Unemployment Rates (1996-2015)



500,000                                                                                                        0.11



                                                                                                               0.1
450,000


                                                                                                               0.09


400,000
                                                                                                               0.08



350,000                                                                                                        0.07



                                                                                                               0.06
300,000


                                                                                                               0.05


250,000
                                                                                                               0.04



200,000                                                                                                        0.03
       1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016


                                 Number of Opportunity Entrepreneurs"   Unemployment Rate




                                                 Figure 4
                 Number of New Necessity Entrepreneurs and Unemployment Rates (1996-2015)


200,000                                                                                                        0.11


180,000
                                                                                                               0.1

160,000
                                                                                                               0.09
140,000

                                                                                                               0.08
120,000


100,000                                                                                                        0.07


 80,000
                                                                                                               0.06

 60,000
                                                                                                               0.05
 40,000

                                                                                                               0.04
 20,000


     0                                                                                                        0.03
      1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016


                                  Number of Necessity Entrepreneurs"    Unemployment Rate




                                                                              35
                                                    Figure 5
                   Opportunity Share of New Entrepreneurs and Unemployment Rate (1996-2015)



100.0%                                                                                                       0.11



                                                                                                             0.1



90.0%                                                                                                        0.09



                                                                                                             0.08



80.0%                                                                                                        0.07



                                                                                                             0.06



70.0%                                                                                                        0.05



                                                                                                             0.04



60.0%                                                                                                   0.03
     1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015




                                                Figure 6
                      New Entrepreneurship Rate and Unemployment Rates (1996-2015)



 0.40%                                                                                                        0.11



                                                                                                              0.1



 0.35%                                                                                                        0.09



                                                                                                              0.08



 0.30%                                                                                                        0.07



                                                                                                              0.06



 0.25%                                                                                                        0.05



                                                                                                              0.04



 0.20%                                                                                                        0.03
      1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

                                       Entrepreneurship Rate    Unemployment Rate




                                                                           36
                                  Figure 7
 Number of New Entrepreneurs and Unemployment Rates in Germany (1996-2015)

 800.0                                                                                                                                                  14.0

 700.0                                                                                                                                                  12.0
 600.0
                                                                                                                                                        10.0
 500.0
                                                                                                                                                        8.0
 400.0
                                                                                                                                                        6.0
 300.0
                                                                                                                                                        4.0
 200.0

 100.0                                                                                                                                                  2.0

    .0                                                                                                                                                  0.0
         1996
                1997
                       1998
                              1999
                                     2000
                                            2001
                                                   2002
                                                          2003
                                                                  2004
                                                                         2005
                                                                                2006
                                                                                       2007
                                                                                              2008
                                                                                                     2009
                                                                                                            2010
                                                                                                                   2011
                                                                                                                          2012
                                                                                                                                  2013
                                                                                                                                         2014
                                                                                                                                                2015
                   Total number of new entrepreneurs (1000)                                                         Unemployment rate



                                  Figure 8
Number of New Entrepreneurs and Real GDP Growth Rates in Germany (1996-2015)

 800.0                                                                                                                                                 0.060

 700.0                                                                                                                                                 0.040
 600.0
                                                                                                                                                       0.020
 500.0
                                                                                                                                                       0.000
 400.0
                                                                                                                                                       -0.020
 300.0
                                                                                                                                                       -0.040
 200.0

 100.0                                                                                                                                                 -0.060

    .0                                                                                                                                                 -0.080
         1996
                1997
                       1998
                              1999
                                     2000
                                            2001
                                                   2002
                                                          2003
                                                                 2004
                                                                        2005
                                                                               2006
                                                                                      2007
                                                                                             2008
                                                                                                    2009
                                                                                                           2010
                                                                                                                  2011
                                                                                                                         2012
                                                                                                                                2013
                                                                                                                                       2014
                                                                                                                                              2015




                  Total number of new entrepreneurs (1000)                                                         Real GDP growth rate




                                                                           37
                                       Figure 9
Number of New Opportunity Entrepreneurs and Unemployment Rates in Germany (1996-2015)

     800                                                                                                                                               14

     700                                                                                                                                               12
     600
                                                                                                                                                       10
     500
                                                                                                                                                       8
     400
                                                                                                                                                       6
     300
                                                                                                                                                       4
     200

     100                                                                                                                                               2

       0                                                                                                                                               0
           1996
                  1997
                         1998
                                1999
                                       2000
                                              2001
                                                     2002
                                                            2003
                                                                   2004
                                                                          2005
                                                                                 2006
                                                                                        2007
                                                                                               2008
                                                                                                      2009
                                                                                                             2010
                                                                                                                    2011
                                                                                                                           2012
                                                                                                                                  2013
                                                                                                                                         2014
                                                                                                                                                2015
                   Number of new opportunity entrepreneurs (1000)                                                     Unemployment rate




                                      Figure 10
 Number of New Necessity Entrepreneurs and Unemployment Rates in Germany (1996-2015)

     120                                                                                                                                               14

     100                                                                                                                                               12

                                                                                                                                                       10
      80
                                                                                                                                                       8
      60
                                                                                                                                                       6
      40
                                                                                                                                                       4

      20                                                                                                                                               2

       0                                                                                                                                               0
           1996
                  1997
                         1998
                                1999
                                       2000
                                              2001
                                                     2002
                                                            2003
                                                                   2004
                                                                          2005
                                                                                 2006
                                                                                        2007
                                                                                               2008
                                                                                                      2009
                                                                                                             2010
                                                                                                                    2011
                                                                                                                           2012
                                                                                                                                  2013
                                                                                                                                         2014
                                                                                                                                                2015




                    Number of new necessity entrepreneurs (1000)                                                     Unemployment rate




                                                                            38
                                      Figure 11
Opportunity Share of New Entrepreneurs and Unemployment Rates in Germany (1996-2015)

    0.96                                                                                                                                                 14
    0.94
                                                                                                                                                         12
    0.92
    0.90                                                                                                                                                 10
    0.88
    0.86                                                                                                                                                 8
    0.84                                                                                                                                                 6
    0.82
    0.80                                                                                                                                                 4
    0.78
                                                                                                                                                         2
    0.76
    0.74                                                                                                                                                 0
            1996
                   1997
                          1998
                                 1999
                                        2000
                                               2001
                                                      2002
                                                              2003
                                                                     2004
                                                                            2005
                                                                                   2006
                                                                                          2007
                                                                                                 2008
                                                                                                        2009
                                                                                                               2010
                                                                                                                      2011
                                                                                                                             2012
                                                                                                                                    2013
                                                                                                                                           2014
                                                                                                                                                  2015
                          Opportunity share of new entrepreneurs                                                  Unemployment rate




                                     Figure 12
      New Entrepreneurship Rate and Unemployment Rates in Germany (1996-2015)

    0.010                                                                                                                                                14
    0.009
                                                                                                                                                         12
    0.008
    0.007                                                                                                                                                10
    0.006                                                                                                                                                8
    0.005
    0.004                                                                                                                                                6

    0.003                                                                                                                                                4
    0.002
                                                                                                                                                         2
    0.001
    0.000                                                                                                                                                0
             1996
                    1997
                           1998
                                  1999
                                         2000
                                                2001
                                                       2002
                                                              2003
                                                                     2004
                                                                            2005
                                                                                   2006
                                                                                          2007
                                                                                                 2008
                                                                                                        2009
                                                                                                               2010
                                                                                                                      2011
                                                                                                                             2012
                                                                                                                                    2013
                                                                                                                                           2014
                                                                                                                                                  2015




                                   Total entrepreneurship rate                                           Unemployment rate




                                                                             39
                                                              Figure 13: New Entrepreneurship Rates by Local Unemployment Rates
                                                                             Current Population Survey (1996-2016)


                                        0.40%


                                        0.35%


                                        0.30%
Entrepreneurship Rate




                                        0.25%


                                        0.20%


                                        0.15%


                                        0.10%


                                        0.05%


                                        0.00%
                                                Less than   2-3%         3-4%         4-5%        5-6%       6-7%       7-8%           8-9%          9-10%    10% or
                                                   2%                                  Local Labor Market Unemployment Rate                                   Higher
                                                                   Entrepreneurship     Opportunity Entrepreneurship    Necessity Entrepreneurship




                                                               Figure 14: Opportunity Share of New Entrepreneurs by Local Unemployment Rates
                                                                                    Current Population Survey (1996-2016)


        100.00%


                             95.00%              94.15%


                             90.00%                         87.83%

                             85.00%                                      84.18%
                                                                                      81.44%
Opportunity Share of Entrepreneurship




                             80.00%                                                               78.19%
                                                                                                               76.43%
                                                                                                                          75.34%
                             75.00%
                                                                                                                                       72.14%        72.47%

                             70.00%
                                                                                                                                                               66.92%

                             65.00%


                             60.00%


                             55.00%


                             50.00%
                                                Less than   2-3%          3-4%        4-5%         5-6%         6-7%       7-8%         8-9%          9-10%    10% or
                                                   2%                                                                                                          Higher

                                                                                        Local Labor Market Unemployment Rate




                                                                                                                   40
                                     Figure 15
              New Entrepreneurship Rates by Local Unemployment Rates
                     German Socio-economic Panel (1996-2015)

 0.01
0.009
0.008
0.007
0.006
0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.001
   0
          Less  4-6%      6-8%    8-10% 10-12% 12-14% 14-16% 16-18% 18-20% 20% or
        than 4%                                                            higher

          Entrepreneurship rate    Opportunity entrep. rate   Necessity entrep. rate




                                      Figure 16
        Opportunity Share of New Entrepreneurs by Local Unemployment Rates
                     German Socio-economic Panel (1996-2015)

   1
 0.9
 0.8
 0.7
 0.6
 0.5
 0.4
 0.3
 0.2
 0.1
   0
          Less    4-6%    6-8% 8-10% 10-12% 12-14% 14-16% 16-18% 18-20% 20% or
          than                                                          higher
           4%




                                            41
                                                   Figure 17
                  Incorporated Share of New Entrepreneurs and Unemployment Rate (1996-2015)



40.0%                                                                                                        0.11



                                                                                                             0.1



35.0%                                                                                                        0.09



                                                                                                             0.08



30.0%                                                                                                        0.07



                                                                                                             0.06



25.0%                                                                                                        0.05



                                                                                                             0.04



20.0%                                                                                                        0.03
     1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016




                                                                     42
                                                  Table 1
                             Regressions for Probability of Entrepreneurship Type
                                   Current Population Survey (1996-2016)


                                                        Opportunity    Opportunity     Necessity      Necessity
                     Total Entrep Total Entrep            Entrep         Entrep          Entrep         Entrep
Explanatory Variable      (1)          (2)                  (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
National unemployment 0.00574       0.00586              -0.00133       -0.00121        0.00707        0.00707
rate                  (0.00176)    (0.00175)            (0.00151)      (0.00150)       (0.00069)      (0.00069)

Demographic controls                         X                             X                             X
Regional controls                            X                             X                             X
Urbanicity controls                          X                             X                             X
Quadratic time trend                         X                             X                             X
Mean of dep. var.          0.00300        0.00300        0.00238        0.00238        0.00062        0.00062
Sample size               12,018,859     12,018,859     12,018,859     12,018,859     12,018,859     12,018,859
Notes: (1) The sample consists of individuals (ages 20-64) who do not own a business in the initial survey month of
the two-month panel. (2) Demographic controls include gender, race, ethnicity, immigrant, age, age squared,
education levels, and marital status dummies. (3) Standard errors are clustered at the monthly level.




                                                        43
                                                 Table 2
                            Regressions for Probability of Entrepreneurship Type
                               German Socio-economic Panel (1996-2013)

                           Total           Total       Opportunity      Opportunity    Necessity       Necessity
                          Entrep.         Entrep.         Entrep.          Entrep.       Entrep.         Entrep.
                            (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)           (5)             (6)
National unemploy-        0.0286          0.0810          0.0105           0.0516        0.0181          0.0294
  ment rate              (0.0182)        (0.0368)        (0.0159)         (0.0324)      (0.0058)        (0.0112)
Demog. Controls                              X                                X                             X
Regional controls                            X                                X                             X
Urbanicity controls                          X                                X                             X
Quadrat. time trend                          X                                X                             X
Mean of dep. var.         0.0098          0.0098          0.0083           0.0083        0.0015          0.0015
Sample size              203,853         203,853         203,853          203,853       203,853         203,853
Notes: The sample consists of individuals (ages 20-64) who do not own a business in the year of observation.
The dependent variable in the first two columns is one if the individual owns a business in the subsequent year
and zero otherwise (new entrepreneur). In columns (3) and (4), only those among the new entrepreneurs are
counted as new opportunity entrepreneur who are not unemployed in the initial year, and in (5) and (6), those
who are unemployed in the initial year are coded as new necessity entrepreneurs. Demographic controls
include gender, direct and indirect migration background, age, age squared, educational degrees, and a marital
status dummy. Urbanicity is accounted for by including the population density in the Spatial Planning Region.
The standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at the level of observation years. We obtain similar results
when we run regressions on data aggregated by year (without control variables due to a lack of degrees of
freedom), as recommended by Angrist and Pischke (2009) when the number of clusters is small.




                                                      44
                                                    Table 3
             Regressions for Probability of Entrepreneurship Type for Local Unemployment Rates
                                  Current Population Survey (1996-2016)


                                                           Opportunity     Opportunity      Necessity      Necessity
                           Total Entrep Total Entrep         Entrep          Entrep           Entrep         Entrep
Explanatory Variable            (1)          (2)               (3)             (4)              (5)            (6)
Local unemployment           0.00852      0.00682           0.00014         -0.00105         0.00838        0.00788
rate                        (0.00141)    (0.00100)         (0.00103)       (0.00075)        (0.00062)      (0.00053)

Demographic controls                            X                               X                              X
Regional controls                               X                               X                              X
Urbanicity controls                             X                               X                              X
Quadratic time trend                            X                               X                              X
Mean of dep. var.             0.00295        0.00300         0.00233         0.00233         0.00062        0.00062
Sample size                  8,772,816      8,772,816       8,772,816       8,772,816       8,772,816      8,772,816
Notes: (1) The sample consists of individuals (ages 20-64) who do not own a business in the initial survey month of the
two-month panel. (2) Demographic controls include gender, race, ethnicity, immigrant, age, age squared, education
levels, and marital status dummies. (3) Standard errors are clustered at the MSA level.




                                                          45
                                                   Table 4
            Regressions for Probability of Entrepreneurship Type for Local Unemployment Rates
                               German Socio-economic Panel (1998-2013)

                          Total            Total      Opportunity       Opportunity    Necessity      Necessity
                         Entrep.          Entrep.         Entrep.          Entrep.       Entrep.        Entrep.
                           (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)          (5)            (6)
Local unemploy-          0.0022           0.0011          -0.0120          -0.0141       0.0142         0.0153
  ment rate             (0.0099)         (0.0150)        (0.0088)         (0.0121)      (0.0022)       (0.0049)
Demog. controls                              X                                 X                           X
Regional controls                            X                                 X                           X
Urbanicity controls                          X                                 X                           X
Quadrat. time trend                          X                                 X                           X
Mean of dep. var.         0.0098          0.0098          0.0083           0.0083        0.0015         0.0015
Sample size              185,300         185,300         185,300          185,300       185,300        185,300
Notes: The sample consists of individuals (ages 20-64) who do not own a business in the year of observation.
The dependent variable in the first two columns is one if the individual owns a business in the subsequent year
and zero otherwise (new entrepreneur). In columns (3) and (4), only those among the new entrepreneurs are
counted as new opportunity entrepreneur who are not unemployed in the initial year, and in (5) and (6), those
who are unemployed in the initial year are coded as new necessity entrepreneurs. The local unemployment rate
is the unemployment rate in the Spatial Planning Region (SPR) where the individual lives. Demographic controls
include gender, direct and indirect migration background, age, age squared, educational degrees, and a marital
status dummy. Urbanicity is accounted for by including the population density in the SPR. The standard errors in
parenthesis are clustered at the SPR level.




                                                     46
                                      Table 5
            Mean Characteristics of New Entrepreneurs in their First Month
                      Current Population Survey (1996-2016)


                               New Opportunity             New Necessity
                                Entrepreneurs              Entrepreneurs Difference
Incorporated                        19.1%                      10.5%           8.6% ***
Employer                            14.9%                       4.6%         10.3% ***
Industry
Agriculture                           7.4%                       2.9%               4.5%   ***
Construction                         17.3%                      33.0%             -15.6%   ***
Manufacturing                         3.4%                       2.1%               1.3%   ***
Wholesale/Retail Trade               11.8%                       7.9%               3.9%   ***
Trans/Utilities                       3.9%                       4.0%              -0.1%
Information                           1.9%                       3.2%              -1.3%   ***
Financial Activities                  6.5%                       4.2%               2.3%   ***
Professional/Business                20.0%                      21.1%              -1.1%   **
Education/Health                     13.8%                       8.6%               5.2%   ***
Leisure/Hospitality                   6.7%                       5.6%               1.1%   ***
Other Services                        7.4%                       7.5%              -0.1%
Personal Characteristics
High School Dropout                 15.0%                       20.4%              -5.4%   ***
High School Graduate                29.7%                       31.4%              -1.7%   ***
Some College                        26.4%                       25.1%               1.3%   ***
College                             19.5%                       16.6%               2.9%   ***
Graduate School                      9.4%                        6.4%               2.9%   ***
African-American                     8.3%                       12.4%              -4.0%   ***
LatinX                              16.3%                       20.0%              -3.6%   ***
Asian                                5.4%                        3.4%               2.0%   ***
Immigrant                           22.1%                       23.0%              -0.9%   *
Sample size                         29,183                      7,055
Notes: (1) The sample consists of individuals (ages 20-64) who are new entrepreneurs in in
the second survey month of the two-month panel. (2) Employer status is only available starting
in 2014. (3) *, **, and *** denote statistical signifcance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels,
respectively.




                                                          47
                                                      Table 6
                            Mean Characteristics of New Entrepreneurs in their First Year
                                   German Socio-economic Panel (1996-2013)

                                            New Opportunity              New Necessity
                                             Entrepreneurs               Entrepreneurs               Difference
 Solo entrepreneur                              0.5315                      0.7516                   -0.2201***
 1-9 employees                                  0.2684                      0.1742                   0.0942***
 10 or more employees                           0.0601                      0.0097                   0.0504***
 Full-time                                      0.6657                      0.7645                   -0.0988***
 Monthly gross labor income in euro               2545                       1521                     1024***
 Business assets in euro                         50121                       6974                      43146
 Industry
 Agriculture                                     0.0309                      0.0290                    0.0019
 Mining and quarrying                            0.0006                      0.0000                    0.0006
 Energy and water                                0.0029                      0.0000                    0.0029
 Manufacturing                                   0.0379                      0.0355                    0.0024
 Construction                                    0.0729                      0.1000                   -0.0271
 Trade                                           0.1558                      0.1484                    0.0074
 Hotels and restaurants                          0.0408                      0.0419                   -0.0011
 Transport and communication                     0.0420                      0.0226                    0.0194
 Financial services                              0.0572                      0.0548                    0.0023
 Real estate                                     0.0023                      0.0000                    0.0023
 Business services                               0.1721                      0.2032                   -0.0311
 Public and personal services                    0.2135                      0.1645                   0.0490**
 Missing information on industry                 0.1173                      0.1581                  -0.0408**
  Personal characteristics
  High school degree                               0.4017                      0.3717                      0.0299
  Apprenticeship                                   0.4095                      0.4693                     -0.0598*
  Higher technical college or similar              0.2578                      0.2427                      0.0150
  University degree                                0.3363                      0.2880                     0.0482*
  Direct migration background                      0.1663                      0.2194                    -0.0531**
  Indirect migration background                    0.0665                      0.0903                      -0.0238
  Living in eastern Germany                        0.1896                      0.3613                   -0.1717***
Notes: Based on 1714 observations of new opportunity entrepreneurs and 310 observations of new necessity
entrepreneurs in their first year of business (ages 20-64). Gross labor income is based on 1359 (249) observations
for new opportunity (necessity) entrepreneurs and business assets on 257 (39) observations. Assets are only
observed in 2002, 2007 and 2012. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels,
respectively.




                                                          48
Appendix
                                               Appendix Figure 1
                    New Opportunity Entrepreneurship Rate and Unemployment Rates (1996-2015)



 0.30%                                                                                                        0.11



                                                                                                              0.1



                                                                                                              0.09



                                                                                                              0.08



 0.25%                                                                                                        0.07



                                                                                                              0.06



                                                                                                              0.05



                                                                                                              0.04



 0.20%                                                                                                        0.03
      1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

                                    Opportunity Entrepreneurship   Unemployment Rate




                                                Appendix Figure 2
                      New Necessity Entrepreneurship Rate and Unemployment Rates (1996-2015)



 0.12%                                                                                                         0.11

 0.11%
                                                                                                               0.1
 0.10%

 0.09%                                                                                                         0.09

 0.08%
                                                                                                               0.08
 0.07%

 0.06%                                                                                                         0.07

 0.05%
                                                                                                               0.06
 0.04%

 0.03%                                                                                                         0.05

 0.02%
                                                                                                               0.04
 0.01%

 0.00%                                                                                                        0.03
      1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016




                                                                             49
                                 Appendix Figure 3
New Opportunity Entrepreneurship Rate and Unemployment Rates in Germany (1996-2015)

    0.010                                                                                                                                               14
    0.009
                                                                                                                                                        12
    0.008
    0.007                                                                                                                                               10
    0.006                                                                                                                                               8
    0.005
    0.004                                                                                                                                               6

    0.003                                                                                                                                               4
    0.002
                                                                                                                                                        2
    0.001
    0.000                                                                                                                                               0
            1996
                   1997
                          1998
                                 1999
                                        2000
                                               2001
                                                      2002
                                                             2003
                                                                    2004
                                                                           2005
                                                                                  2006
                                                                                         2007
                                                                                                2008
                                                                                                       2009
                                                                                                              2010
                                                                                                                     2011
                                                                                                                            2012
                                                                                                                                   2013
                                                                                                                                          2014
                                                                                                                                                 2015
                           Opportunity entrepreneurship rate                                                  Unemployment rate



                                 Appendix Figure 4
 New Necessity Entrepreneurship Rate and Unemployment Rates in Germany (1996-2015)

    0.030                                                                                                                                               14

    0.025                                                                                                                                               12

                                                                                                                                                        10
    0.020
                                                                                                                                                        8
    0.015
                                                                                                                                                        6
    0.010
                                                                                                                                                        4

    0.005                                                                                                                                               2

    0.000                                                                                                                                               0
            1996
                   1997
                          1998
                                 1999
                                        2000
                                               2001
                                                      2002
                                                             2003
                                                                    2004
                                                                           2005
                                                                                  2006
                                                                                         2007
                                                                                                2008
                                                                                                       2009
                                                                                                              2010
                                                                                                                     2011
                                                                                                                            2012
                                                                                                                                   2013
                                                                                                                                          2014
                                                                                                                                                 2015




                            Necessity entrepreneurship rate                                               Unemployment rate




                                                                           50
