                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 MY BROTHER'S KEEPER? THE IMPACT OF TARGETED EDUCATIONAL SUPPORTS

                                        Thomas Dee
                                        Emily Penner

                                     Working Paper 26386
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26386


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2019




We gratefully acknowledge the generous support of Chris Chatmon and Gerald Williams in the
Oakland Unified School District, financial support from the Raikes Foundation and the Mindset
Scholars Network, and the comments from seminar participants at Harvard University, UC Davis,
and Stanford University. We also acknowledge the excellent research support of Miles Davison,
Lief Esbenshade, and Elizabeth Huffaker. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Thomas Dee and Emily Penner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
My Brother's Keeper? The Impact of Targeted Educational Supports
Thomas Dee and Emily Penner
NBER Working Paper No. 26386
October 2019
JEL No. I20,I24

                                         ABSTRACT

The My Brother's Keeper (MBK) Challenge developed by President Obama supports
communities that promote civic initiatives designed to improve the educational and economic
opportunities specifically for young men of color. In Oakland, California, the MBK educational
initiative features the African American Male Achievement (AAMA) program. The AAMA
focuses on regularly scheduled classes exclusively for Black, male students and taught by Black,
male teachers who focus on social-emotional training, African-American history, culturally
relevant pedagogy, and academic supports. In this study, we present quasi-experimental evidence
on the dropout effects of the AAMA by leveraging its staggered scale-up across high schools in
the Oakland Unified School District (OUSD). We find that AAMA availability led to a
significant reduction in the number of Black males who dropped out as well as smaller reductions
among Black females, particularly in 9th grade.


Thomas Dee
Stanford University
520 Galvez Mall, CERAS Building, 5th Floor
Stanford, CA 94305-3084
and NBER
tdee@stanford.edu

Emily Penner
University of California, Irvine
3200 Education, Mail Code: 5500
Irvine, CA 92697
pennere@uci.edu
                                                                                                                        1


INTRODUCTION
         Social policies across a broad set of domains (e.g., labor, housing, social services, health care,
urban development, and education) frequently rely on broad eligibility rules and generic design
features that are applied universally to the diverse population of participants. However, the "My
Brother's Keeper" (MBK) initiative introduced in 2014 by President Obama (and continuing under
the aegis of the Obama Foundation) embeds a different approach. The MBK initiative is a public-
private partnership that engages local communities in multi-faceted efforts specifically designed "to
address persistent opportunity gaps facing boys and young men of color" (My Brother's Keeper,
2016). The explicit focus of this initiative on Black males has been a source of controversy from
observers across the political spectrum. For example, critics have argued that this initiative is
discriminatory either because it singles out Black males for attention or because it deprioritizes equity-
related challenges among other demographic subgroups (Crenshaw, Ocen, & Nanda, 2015; Clegg,
2014; Jacobs & Fulwood III, 2014).

         In response, supporters of the MBK initiative (e.g., powell & Rockeymoore, 2014) have
appealed to "targeted universalism" as a salient conceptual framework. Advocates of targeted
universalism argue that targeted policies (e.g., affirmative action) often suffer from a lack of enduring
political support while universal policies can actually exacerbate inequity (powell, 2008; powell,
Menendian, & Reece, 2009).1 In contrast, targeted universalism calls for combining the clear
articulation of universal goals with targeted approaches for achieving them. powell, Menendian, &
Reece (2009) note that "this approach targets the varying needs of each group while reminding us that
we are all part of the same social fabric." From this perspective, the MBK initiative can be viewed as
a proof point for the kinds of differentiated strategies that could support other subgroups as well as
an approach that may generate unanticipated benefits.2

         The ongoing debate about the MBK initiative raises fundamental issues about both how we
engage diversity in pluralistic societies and how we can best design policies that support the universal
goals we have for all its members. Emerging evidence on the design, theoretical framing, and impact


1
  For example, powell, Menendian, & Reece (2009) note that the Social Security Act of 1935 initially excluded domestic
and agricultural workers to garner Southern support, effectively excluding 65% of Blacks from its benefits. Racial gaps in
Social Security benefits also exist currently, partly due to differential mortality. Veghte et al. (2016) note the median
White non-Hispanic household has over twice the Social Security wealth as the median Black household.
2
  Advocates of targeted universalism often point to the "curb cut effect" (Blackwell, 2017) as an example of such
unanticipated benefits. This refers to how the broad adoption of curb cuts, narrowly intended to support the mobility of
people with disabilities, soon came to be appreciated by most pedestrians.
                                                                                                                       2


of specific MBK initiatives may meaningfully inform the ongoing consideration of these issues. In this
study, we seek to provide such evidence by examining the African American Male Achievement
(AAMA) initiative in the Oakland Unified School District (OUSD). The AAMA is "an ambitious
project designed to dramatically improve academic and ultimately life outcomes for African American
male students in Oakland." As we describe in more detail below, the AAMA centers on regularly
scheduled classes taught by Black, male teachers and emphasizes social-emotional development,
African American history, and culturally relevant pedagogy. The AAMA also features academic and
social supports and enrichment activities. The City of Oakland's MBK plan prominently features the
AAMA as "a leading example of Oakland's willingness to confront racial equity locally, and be a
national model of change" (City of Oakland, 2016).3
         After describing the AAMA's programmatic features and the varied theoretical and empirical
literatures in which it is situated, we turn to examining its impact. Our panel-based approach
leverages the staggered expansion of the AAMA across grades and over time in different OUSD
high schools to examine the reduced-form effects of program access on counts of Black males who
dropped out of high school. Specifically, we examine "difference in difference" (DD) specifications
based on event dropout data at the school-grade and year level. We also examine contemporaneous
data on dropout counts among Black female students both to examine possible spillover effects and
to assess "difference in difference in differences" (DDD) specifications under the conservative
assumption of no spillover effects. We find that access to the AAMA significantly reduced the
number of Black male dropouts, particularly in 9th grade. Our main estimates imply that, in the
average pre-AAMA school-grade cohort of 61.3 Black males, AAMA access reduced the number
who dropped out over the next year from 5.2 to 3.0 (i.e., a 43 percent reduction). This implies that
AAMA access increased the one-year school-persistence rate of Black males by 3.6 percentage
points (i.e., from 91.5 percent to 95.1 percent).4 We also find evidence of smaller but statistically
significant reductions in the dropout counts of Black females.
         The AAMA program and these results have broader relevance for the theory, policy, and
practice of current efforts to improve the equity of educational outcomes in at least five distinct


3
  However, it should also be noted that the correspondence between the MBK initiative and the AAMA program is not
a complete one. The AAMA actually preceded the MBK initiative by several years. Furthermore, some observers of the
MBK initiative have strongly criticized the framing of young Black males as "problems" to be fixed (Dumas, 2016;
Johnson & Philoxene, 2018; Laymon, 2014) whereas the AAMA program prioritizes Black male empowerment and
critical engagement with larger structural inequities in society.
4 Alternatively, using the grade-transition rates of Black males during the pre-AAMA period, we estimate that AAMA

access in 9th and 10th grades would increase the implied rate of on-time high-school completion by 3.2 percentage points.
                                                                                                               3


ways. First, our study of the AAMA provides leading evidence on the impact of the Obama
Foundation's MBK initiative. Nearly 250 communities from all 50 states have committed to the
MBK Community Challenge and have received over $600 million in grants and in-kind resources as
well as $1 billion in low-interest financing (My Brother's Keeper ,2016). However, we know of no
prior evidence on the effectiveness of these recent investments. Second, our finding that the AAMA
had positive effects on Black males (and the suggestive evidence of its spillover benefits for Black
females) provides novel evidence consistent with the promise of "targeted universalism" as a
broader policy-design and political strategy.
        Third, we are in a period when federal education policies, including those related to equity,
are waning. In particular, civil-rights groups have argued (Klein, 2019) that some state accountability
plans under the federal Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) serve vulnerable students poorly (e.g.,
by not reporting performance data clearly). In this context, local innovations in educational practice
(i.e., such as the AAMA) have an enhanced relevance for guiding our current evidence-based school-
improvement strategies (e.g., Petrilli, 2019). Fourth, several recent studies (e.g., Whitehurst, 2009;
Jackson and Makarin, 2017) have motivated enthusiasm for high-quality curricula as a compellingly
low-cost and scalable reform strategy. Because the AAMA centers in part around an innovative
curriculum, this study adds to the evidence on the promise of highly effective curricula. However,
the real-world challenges of supporting teachers' capacity to deliver such curricula with fidelity and
at scale also need to be kept in mind (Blazar et al. 2019). Finally, our study of the AAMA adds to
other recent quasi-experimental evidence (e.g., Dee and Penner, 2017) which suggests that culturally
relevant pedagogy can be a particularly potent combination of curricula and teaching practice for
students that schools have historically underserved. Further research that examines the theorized
psychological mediators mentioned in this study will provide important guidance on how the active
ingredients of culturally relevant pedagogy can be instantiated in everyday school practices.


AFRICAN AMERICAN MALE ACHIEVEMENT (AAMA) PROGRAM
Program Features and History
        The centerpiece of the AAMA program is the Manhood Development Program (MDP). The
MDP is a class that meets every day during regularly scheduled school hours.5 Embedding the


5
  More recently, additional AAMA-affiliated and college-approved courses were available in some schools such as
"African-American Power in the U.S.," "The World's Great Men and Women of Color," and "Revolutionary Literature"
(Bakari 2019).
                                                                                                                      4


program in a regular class is an intentional design feature that seeks to provide participating students
with sustained engagement in a caring community (i.e., changing students' experience of the
schooling system) rather than episodic instruction in an after-school or pull-out program. To
support further the MDP's emphasis on unity and to create "a powerful peer-based support system"
(Watson, 2014), the course also emphasizes a "heterogeneous cohort model" in which students with
higher and lower-performing academic results are mixed together in each class. MDP instruction
draws in part on the "180 Degrees" social-emotional curriculum and includes units such as "The
Emotional Character of Manhood" and "How Do I See Myself/Life's Hard Questions." Other
MDP units focus on culturally relevant perspectives on history and society. These units include "The
African American Holocaust," "The Struggle for Liberation and Dignity," and "The Black Male
Image in American Media." The course also includes community-based projects (e.g., oral histories
of Black residents in Oakland).
         The MDP instructors who deliver this curriculum are carefully selected and trained Black
males who have a history of involvement in the Black community and are expected to take on a
nurturing, familial relationship with students. The training of MDP instructors also emphasizes
culturally relevant teaching methods, fostering students' critical engagement, and equipping students
with "identity resources" to counter the pervasive negative stereotypes and low expectations of
Black males (Bakari, 2019). MDP instruction also seeks to support a college-going culture through
personalized guidance (e.g., transcript evaluation, college and career counseling) and field trips that
emphasize culture and awareness of colleges and careers. Additionally, the MDP course itself
satisfies California's "A-G" requirements for admission to the University of California and
California State University systems. The broader AAMA program also includes community events
and annual celebrations that highlight the successes of Black male students throughout the district.
         The AAMA began operations among 9th graders in 3 regular, comprehensive OUSD high
schools during the 2010-11 school year. The program soon expanded to serve students in other
grade levels and schools throughout the district.6 The factors that preceded the creation and
sustained operations of the AAMA are notable in that they appear to reflect unique determinants
both within Oakland and at the federal level. Specifically, the AAMA program grew out of
Oakland's long-standing position "at the forefront of national and local efforts to reverse negative


6
  In some cases, the program operated in a school for several years before discontinuing. Currently, the AAMA is active
in 6 OUSD high schools. AAMA programming has also recently expanded to 4 middle schools and 4 elementary
schools.
                                                                                                         5


trends as they pertain to this group of youths" (Ginwright, Chatmon, & Hodge, 2019). However, in
spite of repeated efforts to change schooling experiences and outcomes for Black students,
educational advocates argued OUSD was failing to serve Black students well and brought a lawsuit
against the district. In 1998, The U.S. Department of Education's Office of Civil Rights (OCR)
agreed, finding the district out of compliance with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1965. A
subsequent court order required the district to provide Black students equal access to educational
resources.
        However, a district review in 2010 found that "past initiatives had done little to transform
the experiences, access, or educational attainment" of Black males (Watson, 2014). For example,
despite being 16 percent of the student population, Black males represented 42 percent of
suspensions annually and 75 percent of arrested students on campus (Ginwright, Chatmon, &
Hodge, 2019). Roughly 20 percent of Black male students were chronically absent across all grade
levels, and in spite of accountability mandates, just 28 percent of Black males met state standards in
English and 30 percent did so in math (Watson, 2018). Moreover, 55 percent of Black males were
off-course from graduating on-time or were at-risk of doing so compared with 37.5 percent of
students in the district overall (Lin, 2012; Marxer et al., 2012; Oakland Unified School District,
2011). Students often fell off track very early in high school and never recovered. These struggles
mirrored national challenges in meeting the needs of Black male students (Ginwright, 2010;
Noguera, 2008).
        The OUSD Superintendent, Tony Smith, collaborated with community leaders, parents,
educators, and local philanthropists to launch the AAMA Taskforce and to explore new approaches
to supporting OUSD's Black male students. Crucially, the prior ruling on the lack of compliance with
Title VI enabled the district to focus resources specifically on Black male students (Ginwright,
Chatmon, & Hodge, 2019). The AAMA Taskforce sought to create a program grounded in
recognizing the educational potential of Black males (Ginwright, Chatmon, & Hodge, 2019; Givens
& Nasir, 2018). The overarching goal for AAMA was to improve academic and life outcomes for
Black male students, by reducing the number of high-school dropouts, decreasing exclusionary
discipline, increasing attendance, decreasing incarceration rates, and increasing academic achievement
and attainment (Ginwright, Chatmon, & Hodge, 2019). The district partnered with Chris Chatmon
who designed and continues to lead the AAMA program, now in its 10th year of operations under five
different OUSD superintendents.
                                                                                                           6


Theoretical Frameworks
        As noted earlier, OUSD grounds its motivation for the AAMA program in targeted
universalism. This framework underscores the need for targeted means to achieve universally shared
social-policy goals. However, the design of the AAMA also has clear links to other prominent
conceptual frameworks. Most obviously, the AAMA explicitly embraces "culturally relevant
pedagogy" (CRP) as part of its design. Several decades of prominent, qualitative scholarship in
education research have stressed the promise of CRP (i.e., culturally aligned content and classroom
practices) to unlock the educational potential of historically marginalized students (e.g., Ladson-
Billings, 1992b, 1994, 1995; Ladson-Billings & Tate, 1995). A fundamental motivation for CRP is that
marginalized students often experience alienating school and classroom practices that are mis-aligned
with their cultural knowledge and out-of-school experiences (Banks, 1991; Gay, 1988; Ladson-Billings,
1992a; Nasir & Saxe, 2003; Valenzuela, 1999). CRP instead advocates for instructional practices (and
school environments) that are intentionally aligned with the cultural priors of students, validate and
affirm their cultural identities and intellectual capacity, and that cultivate critical engagement with their
surrounding environments (De Royston & Vakil, 2019; Gay, 2010).

        The key features of CRP and the AAMA program also appear to have a strong correspondence
with a more recent and independent body of social-psychological evidence on specific mediators (and
brief, targeted interventions) that promote academic motivation and performance. For example,
classroom exercises that encourage students to identify and affirm their personal values (e.g., Cohen
et al., 2006) and that promote belongingness in school (e.g., Walton and Cohen, 2011) show promise
and are consistent with CRP's emphasis on promoting learning environments that are affirming rather
than marginalizing. Similarly, "growth mindset" interventions that promote students' belief in their
latent capacity to learn (e.g., Yeager et al., 2019) parallel CRP's emphasis on stressing students' assets
and strengths rather than framing them as problems to be "fixed." Furthermore, interventions that
forewarn (and forearm) students about stereotypes (e.g., Johns et al., 2005) or underscore external
attributions for their life challenges (e.g., Ben-Zeev et al., 2005) are consistent with CRP's emphasis
on a heightened and highly critical engagement with both personal experiences and social history.

        However, there is an important distinction between these social-psychological interventions
and CRP-based programs like the AAMA. The psychological interventions are typically quite brief
(e.g., 15 minutes) and focus narrowly on a singular mechanism. In contrast, programs like the AAMA
arguably integrate elements from all of these particular mechanisms and deliver them to students on
                                                                                                          7


an unusually sustained and intensive basis (i.e., in a regularly scheduled year-long class). Programs like
the AAMA may also address a fundamental concern with the existing evidence on these varied
interventions; namely, their failure to replicate consistently (e.g., Dee, 2015). One compelling
explanation for these failed replications is that the brief, initial impetus of a psychological intervention
relies on highly supportive contexts that support and amplify their proximate impact (Yeager &
Walton, 2011).

        Because programs like the AAMA seek to change the broad context of classrooms and
schools, they may be more effective in cultivating learning environments that are necessary to sustain
early improvements in motivation and engagement. Additionally, the AAMA's emphasis on selecting
and supporting highly effective teaching further adds to these potentially critical environmental
moderators of individual mechanisms. Because the AAMA also relies exclusively on race and gender-
congruent instructors, it may also reduce implicit teacher biases and stereotype threat while promoting
role-model effects (e.g., Dee, 2004; Dee and Gershenson, 2017).

        The design features of the AAMA and these varied mediators are also consistent with
economic models of motivation and engagement. For example, Benabou and Tirole (2003) present a
model in which intrinsic motivation is formed in the presence of asymmetric information. That is,
individuals do not fully understand their own capacity for achievement and so rely on cues provided
by their environment (i.e., the "looking-glass self"; Cooley, 1902). In this manner, educational
environments that strongly and credibly signal students' capacity to learn may promote academic
identification and catalyze intrinsic motivation.

        Another relevant body of theoretical scholarship focuses on social identities and their role in
shaping varied behaviors (Akerlof & Kranton, 2010). A simple adaptation of a social-identity model
presented by Akerlof and Kranton (2002) illustrates the potential impact of programs like the AAMA.
Consider a static model in which a student chooses a level of effort, e. In part, this choice is
conventionally based on how effort maps into skills (i.e., k(e)), the economic value of those skills (i.e.,
w) and a quadratic term for the disutility of effort. However, another "identity" argument of the utility
function includes a fixed term, I, that reflects the value of an individual's authentic social identity and
a loss function based on how a student's effort differs from the expectation of their effort signaled by
their schooling environment, es. This two-part formulation closely tracks with a long-standing and
influential insight from W.E.B DuBois's 1903 book, The Souls of Black Folk. DuBois (1903) introduced
the term "double consciousness" to explain the internal "strife" marginalized people can experience
                                                                                                                              8


when they simultaneously understand both their self-worth and how they are viewed by a racist
environment (i.e., a low es ).7

         In this set-up, a student's overall utility function, U, applies weight, p, to their economic utility
and (1 ­ p) to their identity utility:

                                                        +                          +
                                 ! = # $%&(() - , ( , - + (1 - #) $0 - , (( - ( 1 ), -.

Akerlof and Kranton (2002) note that conventional economic models of human-capital investments
effectively assume p = 1 while ethnographic studies of high-school students suggest instead that
social concerns have more salience for their behavior than economic ones (i.e., p is quite small).
Regardless, the basic theoretical insight here is that CRP-based programs that, like the AAMA, are
embedded in the school environment, may reduce the psychological conflict associated with double
consciousness in these settings through affirmation, high expectations, and belongingness reflected
in increased es. It is straightforward to show that increased es unambiguously leads to an increase in a
                                                  23 
student's optimally chosen effort e* (i.e., 23 5 > 0) and that this effect is increasing in p, the weight
placed on the identity term.


Empirical Literature
         Our study of the AAMA program can also be situated within a variety of recent empirical
literatures. The most directly relevant are the recent qualitative and descriptive studies of the AAMA
(Watson, 2014, 2018; Givens and Nasir, 2018). These studies find evidence of the AAMA's success
on several fronts. For example, ethnographic studies highlight the deep connections the program
fosters between participating students and instructors, with particularly noteworthy changes in how
discipline is used by instructors and perceived by students (Nasir, Ross, McKinney de Royston,
Givens, & Bryant, 2013; Watson, 2014). Survey data indicate a large number of students believe that
their MDP instructor wants them to succeed, cares for and respects them, encourages them to do
well, and is someone they trust. Parents also seem to build trust and connections with schools
because of AAMA (Watson, 2014). Givens and colleagues (2016) find that the program helps foster

7
  Dubois (1903) wrote "It is a peculiar sensation, this double-consciousness, this sense of always looking at one's self
through the eyes of others, of measuring one's soul by the tape of a world that looks on in amused contempt and pity.
One ever feels his twoness,--an American, a Negro; two souls, two thoughts, two unreconciled strivings; two warring
ideals in one dark body, whose dogged strength alone keeps it from being torn asunder. The history of the American
Negro is the history of this strife,--this longing to attain self-conscious manhood, to merge his double self into a better
and truer self."
                                                                                                        9


a caring community that supported the development of new definitions of Black manhood among
students. The district also documented reductions in disciplinary infractions, including a fifty percent
reduction in the Black male suspension rate, and improvements in academic performance for Black
male students, including a ten-percentage point increase in Black students on the honor roll, and an
18-percentage point increase in cohort graduation rates. These reports were careful to note that the
changes could not be directly attributed to the AAMA program, but they do suggest positive
changes occurring in OUSD as the AAMA program developed (Watson, 2018).
        Our quasi-experimental study seeks to complement these studies with causally credible
evidence on the extent to which access to the AAMA program has influenced dropping out of high
school. We know of no other such quantitative evidence on the AAMA or any other MBK-affiliated
program. However, our results are related to other empirical literatures. One is the large body of
evidence that Black students benefit from having race-congruent teachers on a broad array of short
and long-term educational outcomes (Dee, 2004, 2005; Francis, 2012; Campbell, 2012; Gershenson,
Hart, Hyman, Lindsay, & Papageorge, 2018; Gershenson, Holt, & Papageorge, 2016; Holt &
Gershenson, 2017; Lindsay & Hart, 2017; Nicholson-Crotty, Grissom, Nicholson-Crotty, &
Redding, 2016). Though the AAMA does feature race-congruent teachers, its key program features
are also unique because the teachers are at the intersection of both race and gender and because the
AAMA also focuses on distinctive design features related to curriculum, classroom culture, and
instructional practices.
        The AAMA also has similarities with charter academies that exclusively serve male or Black
students. Qualitative studies suggest such schools benefit male students of color, particularly with
regards to social supports and educator relationships (Fergus & Noguera, 2010; Fergus, Noguera, &
Martin, 2014; Oeur, 2018). However, the AAMA also differs significantly from these initiatives
because it operates within traditional, co-educational schools and does so on a district-wide scale.
This study of the AAMA is also related to recent studies that provide quantitative evidence on the
impact of other forms of culturally relevant pedagogy. Studies of a Mexican-American Studies
course in the Tucson Unified School District (Cabrera et al., 2014) and an ethnic-studies course in
the San Francisco Unified School District (Dee and Penner, 2017) provide evidence that access to
these courses improves several academic outcomes. However, the AAMA differs from these courses
in notable ways including the targeted focus on Black males, its comparative district-wide scale, and
the program's breadth in combining culturally relevant pedagogy with social-emotional supports and
academic mentoring with out-of-class social supports and cultural opportunities. In sum, OUSD's
                                                                                                                       10


AAMA program provides a compelling opportunity to examine the efficacy of a unique, ambitious,
and multi-faceted approach to meeting the developmental needs of Black male students. In the next
sections, we turn to the data and methods we use to examine the AAMA's educational impact.


DATA
         For our key outcome variable, "event" dropouts, we relied on annual files produced by the
California Department of Education (CDE). These files report counts of enrolled students and the
number who dropped out by the subsequent academic year.8 The CDE files report the enrollment
and corresponding event dropout counts annually for cells at the school, grade, race, and sex level.
Our analysis relies on files from a 12-year period (i.e., AY 2005-06 through AY 2016-17) for the 9
regular, comprehensive schools in the Oakland Unified School District (OUSD) serving students in
grades 9 through 12. We excluded OUSD's alternative high schools (e.g., "continuation" schools
serving students at high risk of dropping out). We also excluded one, smaller high school (MetWest
High School), which has an alternative curriculum and inconsistent data on its AAMA
programming.
         This study window precedes the introduction of the first AAMA programs in three OUSD
high schools in AY 2010-11 and spans its subsequent expansion to three other OUSD high schools.
The remaining three other high schools did not offer the AAMA program during this time. Five of
the nine high schools in this study have balanced panel data on enrollment and dropouts (i.e., 4
grades observed in each of 12 years). In one of the remaining schools (i.e., Castlemont High School),
the CDE only reports enrollment and dropout counts at the 12th grade level. In another school (i.e.,
Fremont High School), the CDE only reports data since 2012.9 The remaining two high schools
have unbalanced school-grade-year panel data because they opened during the study window and
expanded to higher grades on a year-to-year basis.10 Our resulting data set consists of 310 school-
grade-year cells which identify the enrollment and dropout outcomes for 15,250 student-year
observations of Black male high-school students.

8
   The CDE definition of event dropouts is consistent with the federal approach. Students who graduated, transferred to
another school, died, moved to another country, or are missing school due to illness are not considered dropouts.
Unsurprisingly, event dropouts are at quite high risk of failing to graduate high school. For example, estimates based on
the nationally representative High School Longitudinal Study of 2009 (HSLS:09) indicate that, among students who
dropped out for as little as 4 weeks, only about a third were poised for on-time graduation.
9
  In both cases, this reporting may reflect the fact that these schools hosted a community of smaller schools during this
period.
10
   As one of several robustness checks, we report our results using only schools with balanced panel data and find similar
results.
                                                                                                                           11


         The identifying variation in this study relies on the staggered availability of the AAMA at the
school-grade level across different years. That is, our reduced-form estimates identify the impact of
AAMA availability on all Black male students.11 The AAMA program was first available for 9th
graders at three OUSD high schools during the 2010-11 school year. Over the subsequent six years,
the program expanded both to three other high schools and to higher grades within participating
schools. The program also became unavailable in some schools and grades because of staffing and
funding constraints or because of changes in the support of the school principal. We identified the
school-grade-year cells in which the AAMA was active by relying on multiple sources. Specifically,
we examined student-level roster data available from AAMA staff, OUSD course enrollment data,
staffing data, publicly available and internal archival documents on program operations in
discussions with central program leaders.
         Table 1 reports summary statistics for the key variables in this study. On average, the school-
grade cells in our study enrolled roughly 49 Black male students. On average, 3.4 of these students
dropped out by the following year.12 We also report the corresponding data for Black females who
have similar enrollment numbers but a slightly lower average dropout count. We describe below
how we use these data in our analysis. On average, the AAMA was available in 17 percent of the
school-grade-year cells in our data set. In the first five years of our study window, the AAMA was
universally unavailable. By the final year, it was available in roughly 36 percent of the school-grade
observations. Table 1 also indicates that the AAMA was particularly common in 9th grade and, to a
lesser extent, 10th grade.


SPECIFICATIONS
         We begin with a fixed-effects specification of the following structure:
                              819: = ;19 + <: + =>??@?19: A + BC19: + D19:
where Ysgt presents the dropout outcome for school-grade cell sg in year t. The terms, ;19 and <: ,
represent fixed effects unique to each school-grade observation and year, respectively. The term,


11 The available OUSD data suggest that, when the AAMA was available, generally 15 to 25 percent of Black male
students in the school-grade cohort participated. Our reduced-form estimates reflect both the direct effects of
participation and possible spillover effects on non-participating Black males.
12 These full-sample means mask heterogeneity over both time and grade levels. Consistent with OUSD's rising high-

school graduation rate, dropouts of Black males fell over this period. Furthermore, prior to the AAMA, Black males
were particularly likely to drop out in 12th grade. Consistent with this study's findings, Black males in OUSD are now
substantially less likely to dropout in 9th grade where the AAMA is particularly active but remain at comparatively high
risk in 12th grade where the program is less active.
                                                                                                         12


??@?19: , is a binary indicator for whether the AAMA was available in that school-grade-year cell.
The remaining variables represent other control variables we describe below and a mean-zero error
term that accommodates clustering at the school-grade level. This specification can be understood as
a "difference in differences" (DD) specification with school-grade as the cross-sectional unit of
observation and year as the time dimension. We also report the results of such DD specifications
that introduce grade-specific and school-specific year fixed effects. In models that condition on
school-by-year fixed effects, our analysis effectively relies on the variation among grades in the same
school and year, only some of which had direct access to the AAMA program.
        Several other analytical details of this approach merit further discussion. First, in the main
results we report, our dependent variable is the natural log of the dropout counts among Black male
students. Second, our set of covariates includes the natural log of the baseline enrollment of Black
male students. However, because some dropout counts (and a few enrollment counts) are zero, we
impute 0.5., and our covariate set also includes dummy variables for whether the dependent variable
or the enrollment count is based on this imputation. We also examine approaches that do not rely
on this imputation. Specifically, we find similar results in models that instead transform these count
data using the inverse hyperbolic sine. Furthermore, we find similar results from conditional
maximum likelihood estimate of a fixed-effects negative binomial and Poisson specifications
(Hausman, Hall, & Griliches, 1984). We report the key results of these and other robustness checks
in Appendix Table 1.
        An additional concern is the reliability of the statistical inferences based on this approach.
For example, because there are only 33 unique school-grade clusters in these data, the conventional
clustering procedure we use may reflect some finite-sample bias. To assess the empirical relevance of
this concern, we also report inferences using the procedure recently developed by Pustejovsky and
Tipton (2018) for fixed-effect applications like this. We also report results that weight our
specification by the average enrollment at the school-grade level. Finally, as an additional check, we
also discuss p-values based on randomization inference. In this permutation-based procedure, we
randomly assign treatment status within school-grade units over multiple replications (i.e., 10,000) to
construct a sampling distribution for our estimates under the null hypothesis of no effect.
        Another concern is the recent evidence that fixed-effects estimates like ours may not actually
correspond to the average treatment effect (ATE) of interest. For example, de Chaisemartin and
D'Haultfoeuille (2019) show that, when treatment effects are not constant across groups and time,
our DD approach generates a weighted sum of treatment effects in each group and period where
                                                                                                                        13


some of the weights can actually be negative. Following their procedure, we calculated the implied
weights and found that they were uniformly positive, both for models based on Black males and on
Black females.13 A related concern is that DD specifications like ours effectively weight the impacts
associated with specific school-grade cells by the conditional variance in treatment (e.g., Angrist &
Pischke, 2008). This implies that the early adopting school-grade cells (i.e., those that adopt in the
middle of our study window) receive a larger weight than those that adopted nearer the end of the
study window. We implemented a test recently introduced by Gibbons et al. (2018) and found that
we cannot reject the null hypothesis that our reported estimates are equivalent to an estimate
reweighted to address this concern. We report this reweighted estimate in Appendix Table 1.
         The binary treatment indicator in the "static" specification above also embeds an assumption
that the impact of AAMA availability does not vary over time. However, there is a theoretical reason
to suspect that the AAMA has larger effects in the 9th grade (i.e., when social identity in a new
school setting is most malleable). Furthermore, the impact of AAMA availability may have dynamic
properties. For example, the impact of access in one grade may persist to later grades even if the
program is unavailable.14 As a practical matter, our data do not provide much scope to discriminate
among these hypotheses as the AAMA was often introduced in grade 9 and then expanded to higher
grades in later years. Given the theoretical guidance, we focus on estimates that allow the impact of
the AAMA to vary by grade. However, we find similar results in semi-dynamic specifications that
instead allow the first exposure to AAMA availability to have different effects in later years and that
allow for "dosage" effects from cumulative access to the program. We report these findings in
Appendix Tables 2 and 3.
         We also report the results from parallel DD specifications that examine the impact of
AAMA availability on the dropout counts of Black females. These estimates could reflect the spillover
effects on females of having the AAMA available to their male peers. However, we can also view
these results as a falsification exercise. That is, in the absence of specification error, we'd expect the
impact of AAMA availability on females to be smaller, if not absent. Alternatively, we could view
any impact of the AAMA on Black females as indicative of a potential internal-validity threat (i.e., a


13 Another recent study (Goodman-Bacon, 2018) proposes a decomposition and analysis of the underlying 2 X 2 DD
estimates. However, that approach assumes that cross-sectional units can only move from a no-treatment condition to
treatment. Therefore, it cannot be applied in this context where some cross-sectional units enter and subsequently leave
the treatment condition.
14 The fact that program impact in earlier grades (i.e., reducing dropouts) creates selection into other school-grade-year

cells further complicates the dynamic character of the AAMA's impact. This implies that program availability is not an
event as in a typical DD design and suggests privileging semi-dynamic DD specifications over static ones.
                                                                                                             14


reflection of unobserved and confounding dropout determinants unique to the school-grade-year
cells as they adopted the AAMA). For example, the adoption of the AAMA could coincide with
other school efforts to support all students. As practical matter, we cannot distinguish the extent to
which effects on Black females reflect spillover effects or an internal-validity threat.
        To assess the empirical relevance of this concern, we also report the results of "difference in
difference in differences" (DDD) specifications that assume any impact on Black females reflects a
source of bias. Specifically, we stack the school-grade-year data for Black males and females (n =
620) to estimate a DDD specification which takes the following form:
                   819E: = ;19: + G19E + <E: + =>??@?19E: A + BC19E: + D19E:
The first three terms on the right-hand side of this equation represent an unrestrictive set of fixed
effects for all possible two-way interactions. That is, this specification conditions on fixed effects
unique to each school-grade-year cell, each school-grade-gender cell, and each gender-year cell. The
treatment indicator of interest, ??@?19E: , is a three-way interaction between being in a school-
grade cell and year in which the AAMA was available and also being male. This model can condition
on fixed effects specific to each school-grade-year cell because the dropout data from Black females
provides a "control" group within these cells.


RESULTS
        In Table 2, we report the key results from different versions of our basic DD specification
where the natural log of dropout counts is the dependent variable. These estimates consistently
indicate that, when the AAMA became available in a school and grade, the number of Black males
who dropped out of school fell significantly relative to the contemporaneous changes in other
school-grade observations. These results also indicate that the impact of AAMA access was
particularly large in 9th (and, to a lesser extent, 10th) grade. This heterogeneity is consistent with the
hypothesis that the AAMA promotes a positive social identity in the highly evaluative context of
schools (i.e., because the effect is larger at a time when social identities are particularly malleable).
However, the null hypothesis of a common treatment effect across grades is only rejected in models
that also condition on year-grade and school-year fixed effects (i.e., column 6 in Table 2).
        The magnitudes of the impact estimates in Table 2 merit careful interpretation. These point
estimates imply quite large percent changes. For example, column (1) in Table 2 implies that AAMA
access reduced dropout counts by 43 percent (i.e., e-0.559 ­ 1). However, these estimates are more
clearly plausible when benchmarked against the relevant means in the data. Specifically, in the 5
                                                                                                                15


years prior to the introduction of the AAMA, these school-grade cells averaged an enrollment of
61.3 Black males, 5.2 of whom dropped out by the start of the next year. So, a 43 percent reduction
implies that AAMA access reduced the number of dropouts by 2.2 students (i.e., 0.43 X 5.2).
Alternatively, it implies that AAMA access reduced the one-year event dropout rate from roughly 8.5
percent to 4.8 percent. A third way to frame these estimates is in terms of their impact on an
imputed on-time high-school graduation rate based on the grade-specific rates of school persistence
during the pre-AAMA period. Using this approach and the results in Table 2, we find that access to
the AAMA during 9th and 10th grades implies the high-school graduation rate for Black males
increased by at least 3.2 percentage points.15
        In Table 3, we similarly report the key results based on the dropout data are for Black
females. Though Black females did not participate in the AAMA, they may have benefited from
positive peer-group effects due to the participation of Black males. The results in Table 3, which
indicate that AAMA access reduced dropout counts among Black females, are consistent with this
hypothesis. And, plausibly, the estimated effects of AAMA access on Black females are smaller than
the corresponding estimates for males. For example, column (1) in Table 3 implies that AAMA
access reduced dropout counts for Black females by 29 percent (i.e., e-0.340 ­ 1). Furthermore, the
estimated impact on Black females also appears to be concentrated in the 9th grade (i.e., column (6)
in Table 3).
        However, an alternative interpretation of the results in Table 3 is that they instead reflect
unobserved confounds that are coincident with the introduction of the AAMA in specific schools
and grades. The robustness of the results in Tables 2 and 3 to conditioning on school-by-year fixed
effects (i.e., column 6) suggests this is not so. However, it may be that a school principal concerned
about student performance in a particular grade simultaneously welcomed the AAMA program and
introduced other unobserved initiatives. In this scenario, Table 3's estimated effects of AAMA
access on Black females could instead reflect the impact of other unobserved but coincident
interventions.
        In Table 4, we present DDD estimates that embed this conservative assumption using the
stacked data on Black males and females. In particular, these DDD estimates condition on fixed
effects unique to each school-grade-year cell. This approach effectively relies on comparisons in the
same school, grade, and year across Black males for whom AAMA is relevant and Black females for

15
  This conservative estimate embeds the assumption that AAMA access only influences event dropouts in grades 9 and
10 and has no dynamic effect on later dropout behavior.
                                                                                                                     16


whom the presence of the program is assumed to be wholly irrelevant. Under this conservative
approach, the estimated impact of the AAMA on the dropout counts is still qualitatively large and
statistically significant. Specifically, column 5 in Table 4 implies that AAMA access reduced the
dropout counts of Black males by 19 percent (i.e., e-0.216 ­ 1).
         Overall, these findings suggest that the AAMA program was effective in increasing the
school persistence of Black males and may have had spillover benefits for Black females. However,
another potential threat to the internal validity of this evidence is the possibility that the presence of
the AAMA program in a particular school, grade, and year led to mobility of students into (or out
of) the school. To examine the empirical relevance of this concern, we estimated auxiliary
regressions where the natural log of enrollment was the dependent variable. We report the key results
of this analysis in Table 5. Both DD and DDD specifications consistently suggest that the presence
of the AAMA program had small and statistically insignificant effects on the number of enrolled
Black males. These results suggest that student mobility across schools in the community does not
confound this study's main results.
         We also explored the robustness of our results to a variety of alternative approaches to
estimation, inference, and sample construction. First, we examined the statistical significance of our
main result (i.e., column 1, Table 2) under randomization inference.16 That is, over 10,000
replications, we randomly assigned treatment status within school-grade observations and estimated
the impact of this simulated treatment. Figure 1 shows the distribution of these simulated impact
estimates. Notably, none of these simulated estimates was as large as the actual estimate in absolute
value, implying a p-value < 0.0001. We also examined the robustness of our inferences after
correcting for the finite-sample bias that might be due to the small number of school-grade clusters
(Pustejovsky and Tipton 2018) and when weighting our estimation by enrollment. The results of
these approaches (Appendix Table 1) are quite similar to those reported in Table 2.
         Another potential concern is that, in the presence of heterogeneous treatment effects across
school-grade cells, our DD estimates may not correspond to the average treatment effect (ATE) of
interest. A recent study by Gibbons et al. (2018) proposes a reweighting procedure that recovers an
ATE estimate and a test for whether it differs from the conventional DD estimate. We implemented
this procedure and found it generated a somewhat larger estimate (Appendix Table 1) but that this
was not statistically distinguishable from the DD estimate in Table 2 (p-value = 0.2321). We also

16
  This permutation-based method may be particularly appropriate in quasi-experimental settings like ours where the
underlying variation can be more readily understood as design-based rather than based on sampling variation.
                                                                                                       17


examined alternative approaches to modeling dropout counts. These approaches consisted of
transforming dropout counts using the inverse hyperbolic sine (Bellemare & Wichman,
forthcoming) and estimating conditional maximum-likelihood versions of Poisson and negative
binomial regressions for specifications with fixed effects (Hausman et al., 1984). These approaches
also generated qualitatively similar results (Appendix Table 1).
        We also examined our key results in estimates based on alternative sample definitions.
Specifically, we conducted an analysis excluding data from three smaller high schools that were
particularly likely to have a zero count for dropouts. And, in a separate analysis, we limited our
approach to data from high schools with a balanced panel of grade observations across our studies.
We found similar results under both of these sample restrictions (Appendix Table 1).
        Finally, we also considered alternative approaches to modeling the potentially dynamic
impact of AAMA access. Guided by our underlying theoretical framework, our core analysis focused
on the potential treatment heterogeneity related to the immediate effect of AAMA access by grade
of exposure. However, it may also be that a student's first year of access to the AAMA has lingering
effects on subsequent years. Alternatively, there may be unique effects associated with cumulative
access to the AAMA over time (i.e., a dosage effects). As a practical matter, the data may afford little
latitude to distinguish among these patterns. The AAMA was often introduced in 9th grade in a
participating school and expanded to later grades thereafter. Therefore, for some cohorts, there is a
collinearity between effects in later grades, lagged effects of initial exposure, and the effects of
cumulative exposure. Nonetheless, in Appendix Tables 2 and 3, we present estimates based on
alternative measurement of the dynamic effects of AAMA access. Unsurprisingly, we find results
quite similar to those based on exposure by grade.


CONCLUSIONS
        The quasi-experimental evidence presented in this study indicates that access to the AAMA
as it expanded its operations across Oakland's high schools led to a meaningful reduction in the
dropout counts of Black males, particularly in 9th grade. Based on these event-dropout results, we
estimate that access to the AAMA in 9th and 10th grades increased the on-time high-school
graduation rate of Black males by about 3 percentage points. As a descriptive context for these gains,
we note that, between the graduating classes of 2010 and 2018, the state-calculated high-school
graduation rate for Black males in OUSD increased from 46 to 69 percent. This targeted gain among
Black males exceeded the contemporaneous districtwide improvement in OUSD's high-school
                                                                                                         18


graduation rate by about 5 percentage points. Our results also suggest the AAMA program
contributed substantially to these gains and might have greater impact if it had a more robust (and
similarly effective) presence in 12th grade where dropout rates are substantially higher. Nonetheless,
the social-welfare benefits of these improvements in school persistence can be substantial. A large
body of empirical studies have found evidence that links improvements in educational attainment to
gains on a broad array of lifelong social and economic indicators such as employment, earnings,
health outcomes, the use of public assistance, incarceration, and civic engagement (e.g., Belfield &
Levin, 2007).
        While the results of this study are highly encouraging, two potential caveats merit further
consideration. First, as with any promising intervention, the capacity of other districts to replicate
the impact of this program is an open question. The fact that the impact we document occurred as
the program dramatically increased its operations across OUSD schools suggests that scalability is
practical. However, the AAMA program may have also benefited from the unique Oakland context
and the unusual stability of its founding leadership and key staff. These key contextual resources
may not be available to other districts who hope to replicate this program. The recent expansion to
other school districts of programs modeled on the AAMA will provide important opportunities to
assess this challenge.
        A second important consideration is how the cost effectiveness of AAMA compares to
other programs that similarly show promise in promoting high-school persistence. A recent practice
guide on dropouts sponsored by the U.S. Department of Education (Rumberger et al., 2017)
provides a variety of relevant evidentiary benchmarks. One uniquely apt point of comparison is the
"Becoming a Man" program, which removes males from traditional classes once a week for 1-hour,
small-group sessions grounded in cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). A study of this program in
Chicago public schools found that program access increased high-school graduation rates by 3
percentage points (Heller et al., 2017, study 1). However, this out-of-class programming is also fairly
expensive. Specifically, the direct cost of fielding the two-year program among 9th and 10th graders
was nearly $4,000 per participant in 2010 dollars. However, much of the AAMA programming is
embedded in a conventional academic class that, in the absence of the AAMA, would be staffed by
other OUSD teachers who also receive instructional support (e.g., professional development).
Therefore, the more relevant direct costs of AAMA participation are the comparatively modest ones
related to out-of-class activities (e.g., leadership activities, conferences, and administrative overhead).
                                                                                                        19


This comparison suggests the AAMA can be uniquely cost-effective largely because so much of the
program is embedded in the reallocation of the resources funding conventional school operations.
        More generally, the evidence of positive impact presented here suggests that this
programmatic innovation and its conceptual foundations (e.g., targeted universalism) merit further
scrutiny and consideration. The ongoing efforts to adapt and replicate AAMA-like programs in
other school districts will provide such opportunities. Furthermore, consistent with targeted
universalism, OUSD has recently implemented educational programming that targets Black females,
Latino/a, and Asian/Pacific Islander students. The broad, ongoing implementation of MBK
programs in communities across the United States also provides compelling opportunities to identify
effective programs that merit further replication and scrutiny.


REFERENCES
Akerlof, G. A., & Kranton, R. E. (2002). Identity and schooling: Some lessons for the economics of
        education. Journal of Economic Literature, 40(4), 1167-1201.
Akerlof, G., & Kranton, R. (2010). Identity economics: How our identities shape our work, wages, and well-
        being. Princeton, New Jersey; Woodstock, Oxfordshire: Princeton University Press.
Angrist, J. D., & Pischke, J.-S. (2008). Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist's companion. Princeton
        University Press.
Bakari, B. (2019). The Khepera Curriculum and the transformative educator: A dual approach to
        engaging, encouraging, and empowering African American boys. In N. S. Nasir, J. R. Givens,
        & C. P. Chatmon (Eds.), "We dare say love": Supporting achievement in the educational Life of Black
        boys (pp. 42­50). New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Banks, J. A. (1991). A curriculum for empowerment, action, and change. In C. E. Sleeter (Ed.),
        Empowerment through multicultural education (pp. 125­141). Albany, NY: State University of New
        York Press.
Bellemare, M., & Wichman, C. J. (in press). Elasticities and the inverse hyperbolic sine
        transformation. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics.
Belfield, C., & Levin, H. (Eds.). (2007). The price we pay: Economic and social consequences of inadequate
        education. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press. Retrieved from
        http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.7864/j.ctt126269
Benabou, R., & Tirole, J. (2003). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. The Review of EconomicStudies,
        70(3), 489-520.
Ben-Zeev, T., Fein, S., & Inzlicht, M. (2005). Arousal and stereotype threat. Journal of Experimental
        Social Psychology, 41(2), 174-181.
Blackwell, A. G. (2017). The curb-cut effect. Stanford Social Innovation Review, Winter 2017, Accessed
        26 September 2019, https://ssir.org/articles/entry/the_curb_cut_effect.
Blazar, D., Heller, B., Kane, T., Polikoff, M., Staiger, D., Carrell, S.,...& Kurlaender, M. (2019).
        Learning by the book: Comparing math achievement growth by textbook in six Common Core states.
        Research Report. Cambridge, MA: Center for Education Policy Research, Harvard
        University.
                                                                                                               20


Cabrera, N. L., Milem, J. F., Jaquette, O., & Marx, R. W. (2014). Missing the (student achievement)
        forest for all the (political) trees empiricism and the Mexican American studies controversy
        in Tucson. American Educational Research Journal, 51(6), 1084­1118.
Campbell, S. L. (2012). For colored girls? Factors that influence teacher recommendations into
        advanced courses for black girls. The Review of Black Political Economy, 39(4), 389-402.
City of Oakland. (2016). My Brother's Keeper local action plan, May 2016. Retrieved from
        http://www2.oaklandnet.com/oakca1/groups/mayor/documents/report/oak063211.pdf
Cohen, G. L., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., & Master, A. (2006). Reducing the racial achievement gap: A
        social-psychological intervention. Science, 313(5791), 1307-1310.
Clegg, R. (2014, February 27). My Brother's Keeper and government-sponsored discrimination.
        National Review. Retrieved from https://www.nationalreview.com/corner/my-brothers-
        keeper-and-government-sponsored-discrimination-roger-clegg/
Cooley, C. H. (1902). Human nature and the social order. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.
Crenshaw, K., Ocen, P., & Nanda, J. (2015). Black girls matter: Pushed out, overpoliced, and underprotected.
        Center for Intersectionality and Social Policy Studies, Columbia University.
de Chaisemartin, C., & D'Haultfoeuille, X. (2019). Two-way fixed effects estimators with heterogeneous
        treatment effects. National Bureau of Economic Research.
De Royston, M. M., & Vakil, S. (2019). What it means to do this work: The voices of Manhood
        Development Program (MDP) instructors and "politicized care." In N. S. Nasir, J. R.
        Givens, & C. P. Chatmon (Eds.), "We dare say love": Supporting achievement in the educational life of
        Black boys. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Dee, T. S. (2004). Teachers, race, and student achievement in a randomized experiment. Review of
        Economics and Statistics, 86(1), 195­210.
Dee, T. S. (2005). A teacher like me: Does race, ethnicity, or gender matter? The American Economic
        Review, 95(2), 158­165.
Dee, T. S. (2015). Social identity and achievement gaps: Evidence from an affirmation intervention.
        Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 8(2), 149­168.
Dee, T. S., & Penner, E. K. (2017). The causal effects of cultural relevance: Evidence from an ethnic
        studies curriculum. American Educational Research Journal, 54(1), 127-166.
Dee, T. S., & Gershenson, S. (2017). Unconscious bias in the classroom: Evidence and
        opportunities. Mountain View, CA: Google Inc. Available from
        https://cepa.stanford.edu/content/unconscious-bias-classroom-evidence-and-opportunities
Du Bois, W. E. B. (1903). The souls of black folk: essays and sketches. Chicago, IL: A. G. McClurg & Co.
Dumas, M. J. (2016). My brother as "Problem" neoliberal governmentality and interventions for
        black young men and boys. Educational Policy, 30(1), 94­113.
Fergus, E., & Noguera, P. (2010). Theories of change among single-sex schools for Black and Latino boys: An
        intervention in search of theory. New York, NY: Metropolitan Center for Urban Education.
Fergus, E., Noguera, P., & Martin, M. (2014). Schooling for resilience: Improving the life trajectory of black and
        Latino boys. ERIC.
Francis, D. V. (2012). Sugar and spice and everything nice? Teacher perceptions of Black girls in the
        classroom. The Review of Black Political Economy, 39(3), 311-320.
Gay, G. (1988). Redesigning relevant curricula for diverse learners. Education and Urban Society, 2(4),
        327­340.
Gay, G. (2010). Culturally responsive teaching: Theory, research, and practice. Teachers College Press.
Gershenson, S., Hart, C., Hyman, J., Lindsay, C., & Papageorge, N. W. (2018). The long-run impacts of
        same-race teachers. National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                                                          21


Gershenson, S., Holt, S. B., & Papageorge, N. W. (2016). Who believes in me? The effect of
        student­teacher demographic match on teacher expectations. Economics of Education Review,
        52, 209­224.
Gibbons, C. E., Serrato, J. C. S., & Urbancic, M. B. (2018). Broken or fixed effects? Journal of
        Econometric Methods, 8(1).
Ginwright, S. A. (2010). Black youth rising: Activism and radical healing in urban America. Teachers College
        Press New York, NY.
Ginwright, S. A., Chatmon, C. P., & Hodge, G. (2019). The roots and routes of Oakland's African
        American Male Achievement Initiative (AAMA). In N. S. Nasir, J. R. Givens, & C. P.
        Chatmon (Eds.), "We dare say love": Supporting achievement in the educational life of black boys. New
        York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Givens, J. R., & Nasir, N. S. (2018). We dare say love: black male student experiences and the
        possibilities therein. In N. S. Nasir, J. R. Givens, & C. P. Chatmon (Eds.), "We dare say love":
        Supporting achievement in the educational life of black boys. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Givens, J. R., Nasir, N. S., Ross, K., & de Royston, M. M. (2016). Modeling manhood: Reimagining
        Black male identities in school. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 47(2), 167­185.
Goodman-Bacon, A. (2018). Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment timing (NBER Working
        Paper No. 25018). Retrieved from https://www.nber.org/papers/w25018.
Hausman, J., Hall, B.H., & Griliches, Z. (1984). Econometric models for count data with an
        application to the patents­R&D relationship. Econometrica, 52 (4), 909­938.
Heller, S. B., Shah, A. K., Guryan, J., Ludwig, J., Mullainathan, S., & Pollack, H. A. (2017). Thinking,
        fast and slow? Some field experiments to reduce crime and dropout in Chicago. The Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, 132(1), 1­54.
Holt, S. B., & Gershenson, S. (2017). The impact of demographic representation on absences and
        suspensions. Policy Studies Journal.
Jackson, K., & Makarin, A. (2018). Can online off-the-shelf lessons improve student outcomes?
        Evidence from a field experiment. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(3), 226­254.
Jacobs, L. R., & Fulwood III, S. (2014, September 26). Two Perspectives on My Brother's Keeper.
        Retrieved September 3, 2019, from https://talkpoverty.org/2014/09/26/my-brothers-
        keeper/
Johnson, P., & Philoxene, D. (2018). It makes me feel like I'm a monster. In N. S. Nasir, J. R.
        Givens, & C. P. Chatmon (Eds.), "We dare say love": Supporting achievement in the educational life of
        black boys. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Johns, M., Schmader, T., & Martens, A. (2005). Knowing is half the battle: Teaching stereotype
        threat as a means of improving women's math performance. Psychological Science, 16(3), 175­
        179. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0956-7976.2005.00799.
Klein, Alyson. (2019, April 10). Here's how well a key civil rights group think ESSA addresses
        equity. Retrieved from https://blogs.edweek.org/edweek/campaign-k-12/2019/04/equity-
        essa-urban-league-states.html
Ladson-Billings, G. J. (1992a). Liberatory consequences of literacy: A case of culturally relevant
        instruction for African American students. Journal of Negro Education, 378­391.
Ladson-Billings, G. J. (1992b). Reading between the lines and beyond the pages: A culturally relevant
        approach to literacy teaching. Theory into Practice, 31(4), 312­320.
Ladson-Billings, G. J. (1994). The dreamkeepers: Successful teachers of African American students. San
        Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Ladson-Billings, G. J. (1995). Toward a theory of culturally relevant pedagogy. American Educational
        Research Journal, 32(3), 465­491.
                                                                                                              22


Ladson-Billings, G. J., & Tate, W. (1995). Toward a critical race theory of education. The Teachers
          College Record, 97(1), 47­68.
Laymon, K. (2014, March 17). Hey Mama: A black mother and her son talk about language and love
          in the South. Guernica. Retrieved from https://www.guernicamag.com/hey-mama/
Lin, J. (2012, May 29). Report reveals sobering statistics about Oakland's Black male students.
          Retrieved September 3, 2019, from HuffPost website:
          https://www.huffpost.com/entry/oakland-schools-report_n_1553400
Lindsay, C. A., & Hart, C. M. (2017). Exposure to same-race teachers and student disciplinary
          outcomes for Black students in North Carolina. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis,
          39(3), 485-510.
Marxer, S., Brown, R., Spiker, S., Williams, J., Budi, E., Feldman, A., & Chang, A. (2012). African
          American Male Achievement initiative: A deeper look at African American males in OUSD. Retrieved
          from https://www.issuelab.org/resource/african-american-male-achievement-initiative-a-
          deeper-look-at-african-american-males-in-ousd.html
My Brother's Keeper. (2016). My Brother's Keeper 2016 progress report: Two years of expanding opportunity
          and creating pathways to success. The White House: Washington, DC. Retrieved from:
          https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/my-brothers-keeper#section-resources
My Brother's Keeper. (2016). My Brother's Keeper local action plan, May 2016. Retrieved from
          http://www2.oaklandnet.com/oakca1/groups/mayor/documents/report/oak063211.pdf
Nasir, N. S., Ross, K. M., McKinney de Royston, M., Givens, J., & Bryant, J. N. (2013). Dirt on my
          record: Rethinking disciplinary practices in an all-black, all-male alternative class. Harvard
          Educational Review, 83(3), 489­512.
Nasir, N. S., & Saxe, G. B. (2003). Ethnic and academic identities: A cultural practice perspective on
          emerging tensions and their management in the lives of minority students. Educational
          Researcher, 32(5), 14­18.
Nicholson-Crotty, S., Grissom, J. A., Nicholson-Crotty, J., & Redding, C. (2016). Disentangling the
          causal mechanisms of representative bureaucracy: Evidence from assignment of students to
          gifted programs. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 26(4), 745­757.
Noguera, P. A. (2008). Creating schools where race does not predict achievement: The role and
          significance of race in the racial achievement gap. The Journal of Negro Education, 90­103.
Oakland Unified School District. (2011). Investing in innovation application. Retrieved from
          https://www2.ed.gov/programs/innovation/2011/u411c110360narrative.pdf
Oeur, F. B. (2018). Black boys apart: Racial uplift and respectability in all-male public schools. U of Minnesota
          Press.
Petrilli, M. J. (2019, June 20). Toward a golden age of educational practice. Retrieved September 13,
          2019, from The Thomas B. Fordham Institute website:
          https://fordhaminstitute.org/national/research/toward-golden-age-educational-practice
powell, john a. (2008). Post-racialism or targeted universalism. Denv. UL Rev., 86, 785.
powell, john a., Menendian, S., & Reece, J. (2009). The importance of targeted universalism. Poverty
          & Race, 18(2).
powell, john a., & Rockeymoore, M. (2014, July 8). Obama's plan to aid Black men and boys will
          help everyone. Retrieved September 3, 2019, from The Chronicle of Philanthropy website:
          https://www.philanthropy.com/article/Obama-s-Plan-to-Aid-Black/152903/
Pustejovsky, J. E., & Tipton, E. (2018). Small-sample methods for cluster-robust variance estimation
          and hypothesis testing in fixed effects models. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 36(4),
          672­683.
Rumberger, R., Addis, H., Allensworth, E., Balfanz, R., Bruch, J., Dillon, E., Duardo, D., Dynarski,
          M., Furgeson, J., Jayanthi, M., Newman-Gonchar, R., Place, K., & Tuttle, C. (2017).
                                                                                                           23


       Preventing drop-out in secondary schools (NCEE 2017-4028). Washington, DC: National
       Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance (NCEE), Institute of Education
       Sciences, U.S. Department of Education. https://whatworks.ed.gov
Valenzuela, A. (1999). Subtractive schooling: US-Mexican youth and the politics of caring. Ithaca, NY: State
       University of New York Press.
Veghte, B. W., Schreur, E., & Waid, M. (2016). Social security and the racial gap in retirement
       wealth. National Academy of Social Insurance, 48.
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief social-belonging intervention improves academic and
       health outcomes of minority students. Science, 331(6023), 1447­1451.
Watson, V. M. (2014). The black sonrise: Oakland Unified School District's commitment to address and eliminate
       institutionalized racism. Oakland Unified School District.
Watson, V. M. (2018). Transformative schooling: towards racial equity in education. Routledge.
Whitehurst, G. (2009). Don't forget curriculum (Brown Center Letters on Education). Brookings
       Institution.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in education: They're not
       magic. Review of Educational Research, 81(2), 267­301.
Yeager, D. S., Hanselman, P., Walton, G. M., Murray, J. S., Crosnoe, R., Muller, C., ... & Paunesku,
       D. (2019). A national experiment reveals where a growth mindset improves achievement.
       Nature, 1-6.
     .005




                   Actual estimate
                   (p-value < 0.0001)
     .004
      .003
Fraction
     .002
     .001
     0




             -.6           -.4          -.2          0            .2           .4


         Figure 1 ­ Distribution of Simulated Impact Estimates (10,000 replications)
                         Table 1 - Descriptive Statistics

                                                                Standard
Variable                                             Mean       Deviation
Dropouts - Black Males                               3.40         6.60
Enrollment - Black Males                             49.19        39.99
Dropouts - Black Females                             2.48         4.05
Enrollment - Black Females                           47.46        40.78
AAMA                                                 0.17         0.37
AAMA X Grade 9                                       0.08         0.28
AAMA X Grade 10                                      0.05         0.21
AAMA X Grade 11 or 12                                0.04         0.19
Notes: This dataset consists of n=310 school-grade-year observations of high
schools in the Oakland Unified School District (OUSD) observed annually
from the 2005-06 through 2016-17 school years. These data represent 15,250
student-year observations of Black males and 14,713 student-year
observations of Black females.
                Table 2 - The Estimated Effects of AAMA Availability on Dropout Counts among Black Males

Independent variable                   (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)

AAMA                                -0.559***           -           -0.484***           -           -0.556***            -
                                     (0.166)                         (0.152)                         (0.184)
AAMA X Grade 9                           -          -0.821***            -          -0.856***            -          -0.959***
                                                      (0.262)                        (0.263)                         (0.195)
AAMA X Grade 10                         -            -0.351**           -            -0.269              -           -0.407
                                                      (0.142)                        (0.188)                         (0.256)
AAMA X Grade 11 or 12                   -             -0.386            -            -0.330              -           -0.166
                                                      (0.235)                        (0.238)                         (0.272)

p-value: (H0: 1 = 2 = 3 )               -            0.2110             -            0.1850              -           0.0174

Fixed Effects?
  School X Grade                           Y               Y                Y               Y            Y              Y
  Year                                     Y               Y                Y               Y            Y              Y
  Year X Grade                            N                N                Y               Y            Y              Y
  School X Year                           N                N                N               N            Y              Y
Notes: The dependent variable is the natural log of the dropout counts in the school-grade-year cell (N = 310). All models also
condition on the natural log of the corresponding enrollment count and on binary indicators for imputed dropout and
enrollment counts (see text for details). Standard errors are clustered at the school-grade level.
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
               Table 3 - The Estimated Effects of AAMA Availability on Dropout Counts among Black Females

Independent variable                   (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)

AAMA                                -0.340**            -           -0.339**            -            -0.128              -
                                     (0.139)                         (0.129)                         (0.178)
AAMA X Grade 9                           -          -0.498**             -          -0.572***            -          -0.472***
                                                     (0.239)                         (0.200)                         (0.152)
AAMA X Grade 10                         -            -0.218             -            -0.207              -           -0.016
                                                     (0.180)                         (0.242)                         (0.244)
AAMA X Grade 11 or 12                   -            -0.233             -            -0.238              -            0.254
                                                     (0.168)                         (0.176)                         (0.258)

p-value: (H0: 1 = 2 = 3 )               -            0.5901             -            0.3764              -           0.0307

Fixed Effects?
  School X Grade                           Y               Y                Y               Y            Y              Y
  Year                                     Y               Y                Y               Y            Y              Y
  Year X Grade                            N                N                Y               Y            Y              Y
  School X Year                           N                N                N               N            Y              Y
Notes: The dependent variable is the natural log of the dropout counts in the school-grade-year cell (N = 310). All models also
condition on the natural log of the corresponding enrollment count and on binary indicators for imputed dropout and
enrollment counts (see text for details). Standard errors are clustered at the school-grade level.
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
                          Table 4 - The Estimated Effects of AAMA Availability on Dropout Counts

                                                 Difference in Differences (DD)                    Difference in Difference in
                                           Black Males                   Black Females                 Differences (DDD)
Independent variable                   (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)               (5)             (6)

AAMA                                -0.559***           -           -0.340**             -           -0.216**            -
                                     (0.166)                         (0.139)                          (0.091)
AAMA X Grade 9                           -          -0.821***            -          -0.498**              -          -0.329**
                                                       (0.26)                        (0.239)                          (0.121)
AAMA X Grade 10                         -            -0.351**           -            -0.218              -            -0.141
                                                      (0.142)                        (0.180)                          (0.187)
AAMA X Grade 11 or 12                   -             -0.386            -            -0.233              -            -0.124
                                                      (0.235)                        (0.168)                          (0.151)

p-value: (H0: 1 = 2 = 3 )               -            0.2110             -            0.5901              -            0.4832

Fixed Effects?
  School X Grade                           Y              Y               Y             Y                 N              N
  Year                                     Y              Y               Y             Y                 N              N
  Year X Gender                            N             N                N             N                 Y              Y
  School X Grade X Gender                  N             N                N             N                 Y              Y
  School X Grade X Year                    N             N                N             N                 Y              Y
Notes: The dependent variable is the natural log of the dropout counts in the school-grade-year cell. All models also condition
on the natural log of the corresponding enrollment count and on binary indicators for imputed dropout and enrollment counts
(see text for details). The sample size for each DD specification is 310 and for each DDD specification, 620. Standard errors are
clustered at the school-grade level.
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
                         Table 5 - The Estimated Effects of AAMA Availability on Enrollment Counts

                                                   Difference in Differences (DD)                   Difference in Difference in
                                             Black Males                   Black Females                Differences (DDD)
Independent variable                     (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)              (5)             (6)

AAMA                                   -0.039            -            0.0124             -            -0.050              -
                                       (0.064)                        (0.064)                         (0.067)
AAMA X Grade 9                             -          -0.090              -           -0.037              -            -0.048
                                                      (0.126)                         (0.084)                          (0.093)
AAMA X Grade 10                           -           -0.015             -             0.103              -            -0.117
                                                      (0.074)                         (0.082)                          (0.073)
AAMA X Grade 11 or 12                     -           -0.012             -            -0.012              -             0.021
                                                      (0.110)                         (0.144)                          (0.106)
Fixed Effects?
  School X Grade                        Y                Y               Y                Y               N              N
  Year                                  Y                Y               Y                Y               N              N
  School X Grade X Year                N                 N              N                 N                Y             Y
  School X Grade X Gender              N                 N              N                 N                Y             Y
  Year X Gender                        N                 N              N                 N                Y             Y
Notes: The dependent variable is the natural log of the enrollment counts in the school-grade-year cell (n=310). All models also
condition on a binary indicator for imputed enrollment counts (see text for details). The sample size for each DD specification is
310 and for each DDD specification, 620. Standard errors are clustered at the school-grade level.
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
 Appendix Table 1 - The Estimated Effects of AAMA Availability on Dropout Counts of Black Males, Alternative Specifications

                                                                                              Estimate by Grade
Description                                            Overall Estimate           9th Grade       10th Grade    11th/12th Grade
                                                         -0.559***                -0.821***        -0.351**          -0.386
Baseline specification (Table 2)
                                                           (0.166)                 (0.262)          (0.142)          (0.235)

Finite-sample cluster adjustment (Pustejovsky and         -0.559***               -0.821**        -0.351*           -0.386
Tipton 2018)                                               (0.169)                 (0.284)         (0.154)          (0.252)

                                                           -0.439**               -0.702**         -0.191           -0.289
Weighted Least Squares (WLS)
                                                            (0.183)                (0.260)         (0.168)          (0.254)

                                                          -0.721***                   -              -                -
Reweighted estimates (Gibbons et al. 2018)
                                                           (0.203)

                                                           -0.501**               -0.833**         -0.337           -0.171
Inverse hyperbolic sine
                                                            (0.205)                (0.365)         (0.234)          (0.247)

                                                          -0.473***               -0.831***        -0.367            0.062
Fixed effects negative binomial
                                                           (0.171)                 (0.239)         (0.289)          (0.263)

                                                          -0.383***               -0.867***       -0.487*            0.141
Fixed effects Poisson
                                                           (0.132)                 (0.207)         (0.260)          (0.185)

                                                           -0.387**               -0.614***        -0.190           -0.254
Omitting smaller high schools (n = 222)
                                                            (0.152)                (0.206)         (0.171)          (0.232)

Balanced panel (n = 240)                                  -0.634***               -0.914***       -0.365**          -0.446
                                                           (0.193)                 (0.277)         (0.163)          (0.293)

Notes: See text for specification details. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
     Appendix Table 2 - The Estimated Effects of AAMA Availability on Dropout Counts

Independent variable                                  Black Males              Black Females

AAMA X First Exposure                                  -0.827***                  -0.545**
                                                         (0.254)                   (0.224)
AAMA X 1 Year After First Exposure                      -0.432**                   -0.159
                                                         (0.160)                   (0.117)
AAMA X 2 Years After First Exposure                     -0.489**                   -0.134
                                                         (0.196)                   (0.171)
AAMA X 3 Years After First Exposure                      -0.049                    -0.102
                                                         (0.248)                   (0.138)

p-value: (H0: 1 = 2 = 3 = 4 )                            0.1906                    0.3987

Notes: The dependent variable is the natural log of the dropout counts in the school-grade-year
cell. All models also condition on the natural log of the corresponding enrollment count and on
binary indicators for imputed dropout and enrollment counts, school-grade fixed effects, and
year fixed effects. The sample size for each DD specification is 310. Standard errors are clustered
at the school-grade level.
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
     Appendix Table 3 - The Estimated Effects of AAMA Availability on Dropout Counts

Independent variable                                  Black Males              Black Females

AAMA X 1st Year                                        -0.754***                  -0.524**
                                                         (0.253)                   (0.225)
AAMA X 2nd Year                                         -0.350**                   -0.239
                                                         (0.164)                   (0.211)
AAMA X 3rd or 4th Year                                   -0.388                    -0.129
                                                         (0.289)                   (0.176)

p-value: (H0: 1 = 2 = 3 )                                0.3123                    0.3814

Notes: The dependent variable is the natural log of the dropout counts in the school-grade-year
cell. All models also condition on the natural log of the corresponding enrollment count and on
binary indicators for imputed dropout and enrollment counts, school-grade fixed effects, and
year fixed effects. The sample size for each DD specification is 310. Standard errors are clustered
at the school-grade level.
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
