                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


      BIOMETRIC TRACKING, HEALTHCARE PROVISION, AND DATA QUALITY:
          EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM TUBERCULOSIS CONTROL

                                       Thomas Bossuroy
                                       Clara Delavallade
                                         Vincent Pons

                                      Working Paper 26388
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26388


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2019


We are deeply grateful to Sandeep Ahuja, Shelly Batra, and Prateek Ahuja at Operation ASHA
for supporting this study. For comments and suggestions, we thank Marcella Aslan, Jishnu Das,
Puneet Dewan, Esther Duflo, Rifat Hasan, Sophie Huddart, Reshmaan Hussam, Gabriel Koehler-
Derrick, Manoj Mohanan, Patrick Mullen, Madhukar Pai, Dr KS Sachdeva, Bill Thies, as well as
seminar participants at Harvard, Warwick, the World Bank, and Duke University, and conference
participants at GREThA, NEUDC, PAA, the Hewlett Foundation Workshop on Quality of
Healthcare, and USAID's TB Industry Day. For excellent field management and research
assistance, we are grateful to Siddhartha Baral, Sruthi Chandrasekaran, Rachna Nag Chowduri,
Sadish Dhakal, Radhika Jain, Chand Mazumdar, Mansi Shah, and Ameek Singh. Miral Kalyani
and Umry Shukla analyzed the qualitative data. Ravi Agarwal carried out scalability analysis.
This project was funded by grants from USAID, AusAid, and the Health Results Innovations
Trust Fund administered by the World Bank. Ethical approvals were obtained from the MIT
Committee on the Use of Humans as Experimental Subjects (COUHES), the Institutional Review
Boards of the Institute for Financial Management and Research (IFMR) in India, and the
University of Cape Town, South Africa. This study is registered in the AEA RCT Registry, and
the unique identifying number is AEARCTR-0000038. The views expressed in this paper are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the World Bank, Harvard Business
School, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Thomas Bossuroy, Clara Delavallade, and Vincent Pons. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Biometric Tracking, Healthcare Provision, and Data Quality: Experimental Evidence from
Tuberculosis Control
Thomas Bossuroy, Clara Delavallade, and Vincent Pons
NBER Working Paper No. 26388
October 2019
JEL No. I12,I18,O15,O33

                                           ABSTRACT

Developing countries increasingly use biometric identification technology in hopes of improving
the reliability of administrative information and delivering social services more efficiently. This
paper exploits the random placement of biometric tracking devices in tuberculosis treatment
centers in urban slums across four Indian states to measure their effects both on disease control
and on the quality of health records. The devices record health worker attendance and patient
adherence to treatment, and they automatically generate prompts to follow up with patients who
miss doses. Combining data from patient and health worker surveys, independent field visits, and
government registers, we first find that patients enrolled at biometric-equipped centers are 25
percent less likely to interrupt treatment--an improvement driven by increased attendance and
efforts by health workers and greater treatment adherence by patients. Second, biometric tracking
decreases data forgery: it reduces overreporting of patient numbers in both NGO data and
government registers and underreporting of treatment interruptions. Third, the impact of
biometric tracking is sustained over time and it decreases neither health worker satisfaction nor
patient satisfaction. Overall, our results suggest biometric tracking technology is both an effective
and sustainable way to improve the state's capacity to deliver healthcare in challenging areas.

Thomas Bossuroy                                   Vincent Pons
The World Bank                                    Harvard Business School
1818 H Street, NW                                 Morgan Hall 289
Washington, DC 20433                              Soldiers Field
tbossuroy@worldbank.org                           Boston, MA 02163
                                                  and NBER
Clara Delavallade                                 vpons@hbs.edu
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
cdelavallade@worldbank.org




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/38
1   Introduction

    Principle-agent theory posits that employees may reduce effort in the presence of information asym-
metry (Alchian and Demsetz, 1972; Laffont and Martimort, 2002), with damaging consequences for the
capacity of the state to deliver social services (Banerjee, Deaton, and Duflo, 2004). Besides adverse
effects on actual performance, the quality of performance data may itself suffer when agents exploit in-
formation asymmetry to misreport the outcomes of their work (Jacob and Levitt, 2003). Misreporting in
the public sector hampers the government's ability to assess the needs of its citizens, let alone address
them: historical accounts of the creation of modern bureaucracies show that possessing accurate data
on populations and territories is, in itself, a key component of state capacity (Tooze, 2001; Desrosières,
2002; Brambor, Goenaga and Lindvall, 2019).
    These issues are especially salient and consequential in tuberculosis-control programs. With 1.6
million deaths per year, tuberculosis (TB) is the second-deadliest communicable disease globally. India
has the highest number of cases: about 1,100 Indians die of TB every day (WHO, 2018). Yet most cases
of TB can be cured with a range of affordable, widely available antibiotics. For this to happen, patients
need to be diagnosed and they then need to comply with a six-month treatment regimen.
    To accomplish effective TB control around the world, the World Health Organization (WHO) pro-
motes a strategy called Directly Observed Therapy, Short Course (DOTS). In India, this strategy is im-
plemented by the Revised National TB Control Program (RNTCP), whose state- and district-level offices
leverage numerous partnerships with local NGOs. The RNTCP tasks community-based health workers
with referring potential cases to detection labs and directly observing that patients take their medication
every few days at the DOTS center. This decentralized organization makes monitoring health workers
both critical and difficult. The program's limited monitoring capacity stymies its efficiency, with direct
consequences on morbidity and survival (WHO, 2018). Failure to detect cases early and interruption of
treatment are highly likely to result in patient death and the spread of infection.
    This paper examines the benefits of using biometric tracking to improve service delivery and reduce
misreporting in TB control programs in India. We partnered with Operation ASHA (OpASHA), the
largest NGO delivering primary care to TB patients in India, to randomize the roll-out of biometric
tracking devices across 129 areas located in urban slums across four states in Northern India, with each

                                                      2
area covering a population of over 20,000 individuals. The innovative technology was developed in
partnership with Microsoft Research India and specially designed to optimize usability for low-skill
operators in environments with limited or unreliable internet connectivity. It was devised to perform
three main functions: ensuring that patients themselves receive their medication from health workers;
generating alerts when patients fail to come to the center to take their pills, thereby facilitating rapid
follow-up by health workers; and creating a real-time tool for program managers to monitor attendance
and performance of health workers. The devices also drastically reduce opportunities for health workers
to alter health records by overreporting new cases or underreporting instances of treatment interruption.
   While biometric tracking may improve the quality of health care provision and the truthfulness of
health records, this technology may also have unintended consequences. Patients weakened by the dis-
ease may no longer be able to take home several doses at a time for self-administration or send a relative
to the center to pick up their pills, which may lead to more strain and more frequent treatment interrup-
tions. In addition, health workers focusing on ensuring treatment adherence may reallocate efforts away
from other important activities, such as identifying early cases.
   Our impact evaluation uses information covering 3393 patients and 85 health workers and combines
multiple rich sources: several rounds of survey data collected both on patients and health workers; pro-
gram data collected from the NGO; administrative data collected from government hospitals; independent
data collected through random spot checks and observation days at DOTS centers; and semi-structured
qualitative interviews with 45 current and former OpASHA health workers and 47 patients. The com-
bination and comparison of program-generated and independently-collected data allows us to reliably
estimate impacts both on real TB control outcomes and on the extent of misreporting in public health
data.
   Our empirical analysis yields two main findings. First, biometric tracking increases patient adherence
to the TB treatment regimen: patients' interruption of their treatment, or "default," decreases by 25
percent, and in-person pill intake, a core requirement of the DOTS protocol, improves by 26 percent.
These results appear to be driven by a 17-percent boost in provider attendance at the center and an
increased frequency of follow-up home visits to patients who miss a dose. Second, biometric tracking
measurably decreases misreporting in NGO data and official government registers. The magnitude of the



                                                     3
reduced discrepancies between reported and independently-collected outcome measurements indicates
that, absent the devices, at least one-fourth of all default cases go unreported in government registers and
one-fifth of all new patients declared are overreported.
   We rule out the possibility that patient selection accounts for these results. One possibility suggested
by multitasking models in the agency literature (Holmström and Milgrom, 1991; Van Den Berg and
Van Der Klaauw, 2006) is that health workers using biometric devices reallocated their efforts towards
the indicators tracked by the devices, namely center attendance and patient treatment adherence, at the
expense of active case finding. In addition, they may have strategically avoided enrolling patients with
a presumed higher likelihood to miss doses and interrupt their treatment, and limited patient notification
altogether to keep their caseloads reasonable for treatment adherence activities. However, we do not find
any significant impact on the number of patients detected or on their observable characteristics. This
decreases the likelihood that our impact estimates may be confounded by differential patient selection
induced by the intervention. To provide further support for this conclusion, we check that our results on
patient-level outcomes are robust to restricting the analysis to a subset of patients whose selection could
not have been affected by the intervention: patients who were enrolled prior to the experiment (but whose
treatment continued into the time of experiment).
   In addition to these findings, we provide positive evidence on the sustainability and acceptability of
the technology. The decrease in overreported patient detections reduced the earnings of health workers
with biometric tracking devices by 7 percent. However, biometric tracking also reduced their workload,
and overall, their job satisfaction did not worsen. Patients did not report lower levels of satisfaction with
their treatment either, despite having to visit the DOTS centers more frequently themselves. Consistent
with maintained health worker and patient satisfaction, the technology remained in place and functional
over time in the vast majority of the centers, and its impact did not taper off significantly over the duration
of the experiment.
   The main contribution of this paper relates to the literature on public administration and state capacity
in developing countries. As the primary provider of social infrastructure, the state is called to play a
critical role in eradicating poverty and building human capital, which requires strong capacity (Besley
and Persson, 2010; Page and Pande, 2018). Weak capacity can result in vast inequalities in access to



                                                      4
healthcare across countries and along the wealth distribution (WHO and World Bank, 2017).
   The first dimension of state capacity we address is the efficiency of the personnel of public agencies
and their partner NGOs as well as their ability to serve the poor and underprivileged (Rasul and Rogger,
2016; Finan, Olken, and Pande, 2017). We make three contributions to the corresponding literature.
   First, a large number of experiments tackle absenteeism of public service providers, a key factor un-
dermining state capacity to deliver education and healthcare (Chaudhury and Hammer 2004; Banerjee
and Duflo, 2006). While technology-based attendance monitoring has shown positive impacts on the
presence of teachers (Duflo, Hanna, and Ryan, 2012) and health workers (Banerjee, Duflo, and Glen-
nerster, 2008; Dhaliwal and Hanna, 2017; Callen et al., 2018), the evidence is mixed when it comes to
attempts to strengthen service delivery through community-based monitoring (Björkman and Svensson,
2009; Banerjee et al., 2010; Banerjee et al., 2018; Raffler, Posner, and Parkerson, 2019). Results found
by Duflo, Hanna, and Ryan (2012) and Banerjee, Duflo, and Glennerster (2008) suggest that monitoring
works better in the presence of financial incentives. Our paper extends this literature by exploring whether
positive results can be achieved by combining monitoring with productivity gains for the frontline worker.
   Second, we contribute to the evidence on ways to boost medication adherence, which poses a particu-
larly difficult challenge for state capacity as it requires shaping daily individual decisions (Sabate, 2003).
As a result, even the most effective interventions targeting medication adherence have modest effects
(McDonald, Garg, and Haynes 2002). Demand-side interventions, targeted to the patients, include the
provision of tailored information on pill packaging (Cohen and Saran, 2018), text message reminders
(Pop-Eleches et al., 2011; Raifman et al., 2014), and financial incentives (Giuffrida and Torgerson, 1997;
DeFulio and Silverman, 2012). Our study contributes to the less-studied field of supply-side interventions
targeting healthcare providers acting on behalf of the state, which are generally part of larger intervention
packages and whose impacts are not as well documented (Nieuwlaat et al., 2014).
   Third, we contribute to a larger literature on leveraging technology to increase the state capacity to
deliver services. Two aspects of technology are used in the intervention evaluated here: connectivity that
enables real-time oversight of service delivery in remote areas, and biometric identification that enables
the creation of reliable registers of service recipients and their adherence to treatment. In the health sector,
mobile technology has been used to send text-message reminders to boost adherence to anti-malarial



                                                       5
treatment (Raifman et al., 2014) and antiretroviral treatment (Lester et al., 2010; Pop-Eleches et al.,
2011). Mobile communication can also be targeted to health workers, to help them manage appointments
and drug inventory and to improve their adherence to treatment protocols (Zurovac et al., 2011; Otto et al.,
2015). Biometric identification has seen a rapid growth in the past decade and is now used as a mechanism
for delivering public programs in more than 80 developing countries, with applications ranging from
financial services to social transfers, civil service reforms, and health policies (Zuniga, Win, and Susilo,
2010; Gelb and Clark, 2013). Evidence on the impact of biometric identification for healthcare provision
is encouraging but still scarce. Bhatnagar et al. (2012) and Snidal et al. (2015) study the use of biometric
devices for TB control through qualitative and observational studies. We contribute a randomized design
to solve selection issues and rigorously quantify the impact of the technology. Beyond the health sector,
studies have shown biometric technology to increase the efficiency of payments in cash-for-work and
pension programs (Muralidharan, Niehaus, and Sukhtankar, 2016) and fuel subsidies (Barnwal, 2016),
and to improve credit repayment rates (Giné, Goldberg, and Yang, 2012).
   A second, less-studied, dimension of state capacity pertains to the ability to measure individual cit-
izens' needs and public-sector performance accurately, in order to base policy decisions on a sound
assessment of priorities (Lee and Zhang, 2017; Koehler-Derrick, 2019). Historians of developed coun-
tries have shown how the construction of reliable public statistical systems was a driving force behind the
establishment of modern states (Scott, 1998; Tooze, 2001; Desrosières, 2002; Sretzer, 2007). Collecting
accurate and comprehensive data on service delivery and individual-level outcomes is particularly critical
to support effective public health systems and high-quality patient care (Oomman, 2013; OECD, 2013).
But health care data quality limitations persist in developed countries (e.g., Peabody et al., 2004), and
they are more acute and widespread in the developing world (Mikkelsen et al. 2015; Mohanan, Hay, and
Mor, 2016; Downey et al., 2018). Little improvement has been made in the past decades, so that the qual-
ity even of statistics as fundamental as birth and death rates remains poor overall in the world (Mahapatra
et al., 2007). In the context of health systems in India, Morton et al. (2016) show that data from a hospital
insurance program are practically unusable, eliminating critical information for state efforts to improve
healthcare for the poor, and Phillips et al. (2019) find significant overreporting in government health
facility data relative to externally collected data, in particular on incentivized indicators. Despite the im-



                                                      6
portance of data quality for healthcare delivery, there is a paucity of rigorous evidence on the causes of
health data incompleteness and misreporting and on interventions that can successfully address them. We
provide groundbreaking evidence on the effects of biometric tracking technology on data accuracy. We
find that by significantly strengthening the quality and reliability of NGO records and government health
registers, this technology has the potential to substantially improve state capacity in the consequential
area of TB control and beyond.
    By measuring impacts on the accuracy of administrative data, we finally advance the literature study-
ing the effects of monitoring on corruption (e.g., Slemrod, Blumenthal, and Christian, 2001; Nagin et
al., 2002; Di Tella and Schargrodsky, 2003; Ferraz and Finan, 2008; Kleven et al., 2011; Ichino and
Schündeln, 2012; Callen and Long, 2015). Becker and Stigler (1974) propose a seminal model linking
fraudulent behavior both to the nature of monetary incentives attached to corruption and to the likelihood
and consequences of being caught. Among the related literature, our paper is closest to Olken (2007) and
Duflo et al. (2013), who study fraudulent misreporting in the context of road construction in Indonesia
and industrial plant pollution in Gujarat, respectively. Similar to the measures used in these studies, our
measure of misreporting is based on the comparison between official data and independently-collected
data for the same outcomes of interest.1 However, the intervention we study differs substantially: it
strengthens top-down monitoring through technology instead of by government or third-party auditors.
This difference is critical given that in-person auditors may themselves engage in misreporting, unless
properly incentivized (Duflo et al., 2013).
    From a policy perspective, our results contribute to ongoing efforts in India to strengthen the delivery
of social programs through biometrically enhanced mechanisms. They point to the benefits that unique
identification such as India's Aadhaar system may have on TB control programs, both to facilitate the
delivery of primary care and to dramatically enhance the reliability of national health registers. This
latter point is of even greater importance as direct benefits transfers to TB patients such as financial and
nutritional support will be implemented to incentivize adherence (RNTCP, 2017) and could also be used
to encourage patient referrals (Goldberg, Macis, and Chintagunta, 2019). Policy implications of our study
   1 Recent papers use a comparable measurement strategy to study misreporting in macroeconomic indicators: Henderson
(2011) and Martinez (2019) identify the manipulation of GDP growth statistics by comparing them to nighttime luminosity
data, and Cavallo and Rigobon (2016) track the difference between official inflation numbers and actual increases in online
prices.



                                                            7
for TB control programs in India are discussed in Section 6.
      The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on TB in India
and on the intervention evaluated in this paper. Section 3 describes the experimental design, measurement
strategy, and internal validity checks. Section 4 presents the results on TB control outcomes and provider
efforts. Section 5 discusses the empirical strategy and findings related to misreporting. Section 6 presents
evidence on the acceptability, sustainability, and scalability of the intervention, and Section 7 concludes
the paper.


2     Setting: policy challenge and intervention

2.1     State capacity and TB control in India

      TB is the largest infectious killer of adults, claiming nearly 1.3 million lives annually, of which about
410,000 are in India (WHO, 2018). As a comparison, the number of TB deaths every ten days in India is
roughly equal to the number of deaths during the entire 2014­2015 Ebola outbreak in West Africa. While
severe coughing is the hallmark of the disease, those infected also experience weight loss, listlessness,
and crippling pain. Over 80 percent of the patients we surveyed reported suffering from respiratory
problems, body pain, and other general health problems. As a result, affected people are often unable to
work or care for their families, with direct consequences for household livelihoods. In our surveys, about
half of the patients who were gainfully employed at the time they contracted TB reported losing more
than 80 percent of their workdays and income as a direct consequence of the disease.
      Roughly 97 percent of all new TB cases are affected by drug-susceptible strains of the disease, and
effective first-line antibiotics are available at no cost in India. These baseline facts should make reducing
TB mortality attainable, yet challenges endure in two areas that reveal limits of Indian state capacity:
early diagnosis and enrollment of infected patients; and ensuring completion of the full course of treat-
ment.
      The first challenge, known as early case finding, is critical to improve the condition of infected pa-
tients and prevent the spread of this highly contagious, airborne disease. Contagion is particularly rapid
in urban slums characterized by high population density and poor sanitation. In our sample, the average
patient lives in a two-room house with five other family members. Fewer than a quarter of patients have

                                                       8
in-home access to tap water. As a result, disease transmission occurs primarily within families and com-
munities. Over 40 percent of the patients we surveyed reported that at least one other member of their
family had a history of the disease.
   Early case finding is hampered by low levels of awareness and information on TB, poor access to
care, and fear of social stigma about contracting the disease. Just half of the patients know about the
most prominent symptoms of TB before starting the treatment, and only two-thirds know that it is a
communicable disease (Huddart et al., 2018). In qualitative interviews, many patients showed lack of
knowledge about TB symptoms. They did not suspect that they had TB at their first consultation with
a health provider, and they continued to cycle through different private and government doctors without
suspecting TB. In fact, low-quality primary health care in India (Das and Hammer, 2007; Mohanan, Hay,
and Mor, 2016) and the prevalence of poorly qualified practitioners as primary points of care also hinder
the timely referral to a TB detection center (Satyanarayana et al., 2015; Das et al., 2015). Among the
surveyed patients who consulted a medical facility in the three months before starting their treatment
in OpASHA's centers, 60 percent went to see a private doctor and 35 percent received an injection--a
blatantly inadequate response to TB symptoms. Finally, almost half of the patients in our sample reported
fearing social discrimination if it became known in their community that they had TB.
   The second challenge, treatment adherence, is important to prevent relapses and the development of
drug-resistant strains of the disease, which are much more difficult and up to six times more expensive to
treat (WHO, 2018). However, improving adherence is far from straightforward. To be cured, an infected
patient needs to maintain a complicated regimen of up to seven drugs at a time, three times a week for
a two-month period--and then once a week for a further four months. These drugs often have strong
side-effects. Two-thirds of the patients in our study reported experiencing physical or psychological
side effects, including half complaining of severe effects such as nausea, vomiting, fever, and stomach
pains. After about two months of treatment, TB symptoms begin to wane, but the side effects of the
drugs remain. This leads patients to discontinue treatment prematurely. Treatment interruptions in our
sample occurred most frequently in the third month (median at 70 days after starting the treatment). Of
the patients who were going through their second round of TB treatment, only about half had completed
their earlier round.



                                                    9
2.2    The DOTS model

      In response to the joint challenges of increasing detection and ensuring adherence, India and other
countries have adopted the Directly Observed Therapy, Short Course delivery method. In the DOTS
model, patients are required to ingest each TB treatment dose under direct observation of trained providers
(DOTS providers) based in local care centers (DOTS centers).
      DOTS centers are widely dispersed, to facilitate patient access and the detection of new patients close
to home. In remote or overcrowded places where public hospitals are overburdened or inadequate, the
strategy calls on governments to collaborate with the private sector to achieve adequate service delivery.
Private care providers include a vast array of actors ranging from unqualified practitioners to mission
hospitals or NGOs, and the modalities of the partnerships vary according to the nature of the provider.
Such arrangements are meant to strengthen the state outreach capacity and improve TB-control outcomes,
especially for vulnerable, hard-to-reach populations.
      In practice, to enroll in the DOTS system, symptomatic patients first need to visit a Designated Mi-
croscopy Center, a medical unit generally located within a public hospital. Lab technicians detect TB
by examining sputum samples under a microscope to determine the presence of bacteria--a technique
called sputum smear microscopy. If a patient is found to be TB-positive, she is recorded in a government
register under a unique TB number and assigned to a DOTS center, depending on her location. The
TB Control Program sends a box of drugs bearing the patient's name and containing the full treatment
regimen as well as a personal treatment card to that center.
      The patient can then start her treatment. The DOTS provider in charge of her center tracks treatment
adherence by recording every visit made by the patient to the center on her treatment card, and declares
treatment interruption, or default, if the patient misses doses for four consecutive weeks. Additional tests
are done during the course of the treatment on sputum samples collected at the Designated Microscopy
Center to assess progress and determine outcomes. At the end of the six-month period, the DOTS provider
records the treatment outcome on the treatment card and reports this information to government registers
by handing the card over to the local Designated Microscopy Center.
      Although the implementation of DOTS has significantly improved efforts to contain TB over the
last two decades (WHO, 2014; also see McMillen, 2015 for a historical discussion), the system still


                                                      10
suffers from several shortcomings. Despite the spread of the DOTS centers, visiting a center three times
a week remains a significant burden, especially for those physically debilitated by the disease. In our
study sample, patients live on average three miles away from their treatment center, corresponding to an
average 11 minutes of reported travel time. In addition, the high level of decentralization reduces the TB
Control Program's administrative capacity to monitor DOTS providers and ensure robust service delivery.
The record system in DOTS centers is entirely paper-based, and treatment cards are only collected by
government staff from the TB Control Program once every one or two months. DOTS providers monitor
pill intake and TB treatment outcomes by cross-checking different roster sheets, a time-consuming and
error-prone process which also leaves room for opportunistic misreporting.


2.3    Operation ASHA

      OpASHA, our partner organization, is a large NGO based in New Delhi and operating TB DOTS
centers under public-private partnerships in Northern Indian states. OpASHA establishes most of its
centers in host facilities such as private medical practices (72 percent of the centers in the sample),
dispensaries (9 percent), temples, schools, and pharmacies. Taking advantage of existing facilities saves
operating costs while ensuring that the centers stay open at least as much time as the facility does. The
DOTS provider is a private doctor, pharmacist, or shopkeeper, depending on the hosting facility.
      In addition to the DOTS provider, OpASHA hires health workers and assigns them to treatment
centers. Because patients must show up every other day to their center, the organization has each health
worker operate two different centers, open on alternate days, in accordance with the pill intake schedule
of the patient population. In areas with lower population density, OpASHA does not establish fixed
treatment centers but hires mobile health workers to go around the communities and deliver information
and treatment pills at home. Operations are supervised by one manager per city.
      The health workers are the central piece of OpASHA's model. When physically present in the DOTS
center, they take up the responsibility of the DOTS provider, including supervising patients' pill intake
and filling out their treatment cards. In addition, they are responsible for the following two objectives.
First, they are tasked with promoting early case finding. They canvass the area spreading awareness
of TB symptoms and the availability of treatment, as well as asking health questions to households.



                                                   11
When they come across individuals showing TB symptoms, they provide information on the disease
and the treatment process and encourage them to get tested at the Designated Microscopy Center. When
respondents are too weak to go to the Center in person, health workers collect sputum samples, which they
deliver on their behalf. A significant share of symptomatic individuals visit the Designated Microscopy
Center of their own accord because they have prior knowledge of the medical care system or are referred
by existing or former patients. In these cases, the interaction with the health worker only starts when
they begin taking their treatment at the DOTS center. Second, health workers are responsible for tracking
patients who missed a dose and following-up with them by phone or in person, at their house, to bring
them back to the regular course of treatment. In qualitative interviews, health workers describe strategies
to boost medication adherence of defaulting patients, such as educating their families and neighbors to
encourage the patient, providing emotional support, increasing the frequency of home visits, or giving
patients several doses at a time to spare them trips to the center.
      Health workers receive a salary averaging Rs. 5600 per month (about USD 90 at the time of the
experiment), with variations across cities. OpASHA measures their performance by seven indicators,
including the number of new TB cases identified and the number of patients completing their treatment,
as well as other indicators related to the maintenance of the center. In all cities but three, health workers
receive financial incentives based on the number of new cases identified and amounting to 19 percent
of their total salary on average. Those disparities do not threaten the validity of results since treatment
assignment was stratified at the city level.2 Qualitative interviews show that health workers perceive a
strong pressure to achieve performance targets measured by the number of detections and the number of
defaults. They commonly complain about the level of stress and their fear that poor performance would
lead to salary cuts, sanctions, or contract termination.


2.4    The intervention

Our experiment evaluates biometric tracking devices installed in DOTS centers and designed to help
health workers monitor the treatment adherence of TB patients. OpASHA developed this technology,
called eCompliance, in partnership with Microsoft Research India. The devices consist of a tablet
equipped with a SIM card and a 2G internet data plan connected to a fingerprint scanner. A user-friendly
   2 Three   health workers--two in the control group and one in the treatment group--also received default-based incentives.


                                                              12
application allows health workers and DOTS providers to navigate the system intuitively. In biometric-
equipped centers, all patients register their fingerprints at the beginning of their treatment and scan them
again every time they come to the center to take their pills. The health workers can use a second portable
terminal to record their home visits to patients. The interface allows health workers to access the list of
patients that have missed a daily dose and warrant some specific follow-up action.
      The system also uses the health workers' fingerprints for authentication and records the date and time
when they log in and out of the system. In addition to a tool for health workers to monitor patients, it is
therefore also a tool for NGO management to monitor health workers' effort and performance. The data
are stored in the terminal located in the health center and sent daily to a server located in New Delhi for
both backup and monitoring purposes. Communication with the server is done through 2G and regular
SMSs, ensuring the maximum coverage possible even in remote areas with limited or unreliable internet
connectivity. The entire system costs less than USD 250 per center.


3     Research design

3.1    Experimental design and sample

      The study sample includes nine cities in four North Indian states, shown in Figure 1: Bhopal, Gwalior,
Indore, Sagar (in the state of Madhya Pradesh); Korba, Raipur, Durg-Bhilai (Chhattisgarh); Bhubaneswar
(Odisha); and East Delhi (Delhi). It includes 129 scattered and non-overlapping areas, grouped in 65
clusters. All clusters include two areas except one cluster which includes only one area. The vast majority
of the clusters (52) have a fixed DOTS center established in each area. Another seven clusters do not
have any center; each of these clusters has one mobile health worker devoted to that cluster's two areas.
Finally, there are six hybrid clusters which each have one area with a fixed center and one area that
receives mobile treatment.

                                            [Figure 1 about here]

      At the beginning of the experiment, OpASHA allocated a unique health worker to each cluster. The
study team then conducted the randomization at the cluster level, after stratifying by city and health
worker type (fixed, mobile, or hybrid). 34 clusters were allocated to the treatment group, and the re-

                                                     13
maining 31 to the control group. Two to four weeks after randomization, OpASHA installed biometric
tracking devices in centers (or provided them to mobile health workers) in the treatment group and gave
all the health workers who were selected to use the technology a dedicated short training. The experiment
lasted between 12 and 14 months, depending on the state.
      The experiment includes a total of 85 health workers. 65 (one per cluster) were hired at the outset
of the experiment and 20 joined as replacements. 16 health workers (24.6 percent) present at the be-
ginning of the experiment as well as six replacements left the organization for various reasons including
poor performance (48 percent), alternative work opportunities (24 percent), and illness (4 percent). The
likelihood to leave was not significantly affected by the intervention (Appendix Table A1, Panel A), and
differences in observable characteristics of attritors (Panel B, columns 1 to 6) or replacements (columns 7
to 12) across treatment and control groups are small in magnitude. Out of 73 differences shown in Table
A1, Panel B, only two are significant at the 5 percent level and three at the 10 percent level.
      The equality in retention rates across treatment and control groups is consistent with the fact that
biometric tracking did not significantly affect health workers' satisfaction with their jobs (we return to this
in Section 6). The logistics of replacing health workers also limited the scope for differential selection.
The simplicity of the technology made it unnecessary for OpASHA to select particular profiles to operate
centers equipped with the devices. To allow for a rapid replacement of health workers terminating their
contract, employee selection was based on a waitlist of existing ranked applicants. As a result, employee
turnover was handled rapidly, with departing health workers being replaced on the day of their departure
in most cases, and within eight days on average. Anecdotal evidence from the NGO management suggests
near to 100 percent acceptance rates by candidates who were offered the position.


3.2    Data sources

      We use many data sources in the analysis: several rounds of closed-ended surveys administered
both to patients and health workers, independent day-long monitoring of DOTS centers (henceforth,
"observation days"), random spot-checks of the centers, qualitative interviews with patients and health
workers, and program and administrative data from OpASHA and government registers. Apart from




                                                      14
program and administrative data, all data were collected specifically for the purpose of this study.3

Survey data
    Patient surveys were administered to all patients enrolled in OpASHA centers up to the last month
before the end of the experiment. Patients starting and finishing their treatment within the time span
of the experiment received surveys at two points: an entry survey about a month after the beginning of
the treatment (specifically between two and six weeks from the start date), and an exit survey within a
month after the end of the treatment, regardless of whether the end was due to completion or interruption.
Patients who were already well into their treatment when the experiment started did not receive an entry
survey but were instead administered an augmented exit survey including socio-demographic informa-
tion. Patients who were still undergoing treatment by the end of the experiment were administered an
early exit survey.
    The sampling frame was provided by the individual treatment cards maintained at each center. In total,
4910 patients were recorded as undergoing treatment in one of the areas included in the experiment. The
survey team contacted all patients to set up appointments, unless the health worker asked them not to,
citing reasons such as the patient hiding her condition from her family. Patients had the option to conduct
the survey outside of their homes if they wished to have privacy from their own family or community, or to
refuse the survey. Most patients consented to being interviewed at home. Surveyors made three attempts
to locate the patient before declaring them "Not found." Survey completion rates are 70.4 percent for
entry surveys and 64.2 percent for exit surveys. We discuss factors responsible for non-completion in
Section 5.3. 25 percent of patients were selected to receive both an entry and an exit survey and were
successfully surveyed both times, resulting in a database of 4600 observations from 3393 unique patients.
    Health workers were scheduled to be surveyed three times: just before the installation of the biometric
devices (baseline), after about six months of intervention (midline), and at the end of the intervention,
six to eight months after midline (endline). More than two-thirds of them successfully completed all
three, and 89 percent completed at least a baseline survey and one follow-up (either midline or endline).
Health worker survey data include 219 surveys of 85 health workers. We systematically approached
   3 Table  A2 in Appendix A checks that the presence of biometric devices did not create systematic differences in the avail-
ability of the various data sources across the treatment and control groups. Out of 14 differences shown in the table, two are
statistically significant: the number of random spot checks and the number of observation days patient data are slightly larger
in the treatment group.


                                                             15
those who quit their job during the intervention and administered an additional module on the reasons for
employment termination.

Observation days and random spot checks
   Enumerators conducted random day-long visits to the fixed DOTS centers or to mobile health work-
ers. They started the observation day by gathering the list of all patients scheduled to come on that day,
then proceeded to collect information on attendance (both of the health worker and of each individual
patient visiting the center), activities carried out at the center and during home visits, and the usage of
biometric devices (in the equipped centers). Each center received an average of two random visits per
month over the duration of the experiment, resulting in a dataset of 3,084 observation days. We merged
these data with the roster of patients in the experiment using three identifiers sequentially (TB number,
lab number, and patient name) and verifying each uncertain merge by hand. The coverage of observation
days is large. Overall, 85.7 percent of patients in the full sample appear in at least one observation day,
and the average number of observations per patient is 3.7. This provides us with a thorough independent
measure of medication adherence at the patient level, in both biometric and control centers.
   Although the dates of the observation days were random, health workers could of course adjust their
behavior, for instance the time at which they left the center, once they saw the enumerator. To further
strengthen the measurement of health worker attendance, senior survey staff conducted random, unan-
nounced spot checks of the DOTS centers and collected additional information on whether the center was
open and the health worker present. On average, each center received seven spot checks over the duration
of the experiment, for a total of 916 observations. These data provide a second independent measurement
of provider attendance.

Program and administrative data
   We collected center-wise data sheets, salary slips, and data from official TB registers. The center-
wise data sheets are monthly reports prepared for each center or mobile area by health workers and
used by OpASHA to track their performance and calculate salaries. They include data on the number
of new patients enrolled and the number of defaulting patients. Salary slips include health worker-level
performance data and the breakdown of monthly salaries. TB registers are the official source of patient-
level information for the TB Control Program. They are kept by government TB officers at the central

                                                    16
hospital and typically cover several Designated Microscopy Centers. They list the name and address of
all enrolled patients, the dates and results of their initial and follow-up sputum tests, and the outcome
of their treatment. We obtained access to TB registers in all study sites except Indore. We digitized and
matched these data with our other datasets using several identifiers in sequence and verifying unclear
cases by hand. Overall, TB register data were successfully matched for 94.1 percent of all patients in
cities where access was granted, allowing us to use the experiment to assess the extent of misreporting in
official government registers.

Qualitative interviews
      The study team conducted semi-structured interviews with 45 OpASHA health workers and 47 pa-
tients. Respondents were randomly sampled from the pool of all the health workers and patients who
were part of the experiment at the time. To elicit candid responses, we complemented the sample with
former health workers no longer employed by OpASHA.
      Interviews were conducted primarily in Hindi based on an interview template including "grand-tour,"
structured, and hypothetical interaction questions (Morse, 2014; Bhattacharya, 2017). Open-ended ques-
tions to health workers related to their intrinsic motivation, effort allocation, and data reporting. Ques-
tions to patients related to their TB knowledge, pathways to diagnosis, and experience with their current
treatment. We transcribed and translated interviews and used a qualitative data analysis software to code
them along major themes of interest, some pre-defined at the inception of the study and others emerging
from the transcripts.


3.3    Summary statistics and balance checks

      Table I presents summary statistics for health workers in the full sample used in the analysis (columns
1 to 3). Health workers were 31 years old on average. Almost three-quarters were men, 40 percent
belonged to the general caste, and 81 percent were Hindus. They were well-educated on average, with
more than a third having completed tertiary education. Although 75 percent of the health workers had
previous work experience (for an average of nine years), only 16 percent worked in the social/NGO sector
before joining OpASHA. A majority of health workers lived in one of the areas they covered, mostly in
decent conditions: almost all of them had electricity and 56 percent had access to tap water in their home.


                                                      17
More than half owned their house. They had some exposure to technology: 57 percent knew how to use
a computer and 40 percent had an email account. Although some health workers expressed interest and
motivation in social work in qualitative interviews, most mentioned doing this work because it is close to
home and salaries are acceptable.

                                             [Table I about here]

   Table I further presents balance checks for the subsample of health workers present at the outset of
the experiment (columns 4 to 8). We show means and standard deviations separately for the control
and treatment groups, the difference between the means of the two groups, and the p-value of a test of
the null hypothesis that they cannot be distinguished from each other. Out of 41 differences, two are
significant at the 5 percent level and seven at the 10 percent level. In addition to a few differences in
their socio-demographic characteristics, health workers in the treatment group were less likely to have
any previous work experience and they reported a lower number of patients enrolled in their centers prior
to randomization.
   Table II shows summary statistics for all patients (columns 1 to 3). Patients were 34 years old on
average, and 57 percent were men. Most belonged to the most-deprived castes in India: Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes (33 percent) and Other Backward Classes (36 percent). Only 18 percent
belonged to the better-off general caste category, as opposed to 40 percent of health workers. Most of
them lived in crowded, unsanitary conditions with high exposure to TB (see Section 2). Balance tests
shown in columns 4 to 8 are based on patients enrolled prior to the outset of the experiment because of the
possibility that the intervention affected the pool of patients enrolled in treatment and control centers after
its start (we explore this possibility in Section 4.3 and show it did not materialize). Out of 31 differences
shown in Table II, two are significant at the 5 percent level and three at the 10 percent level, which is in
line with what would be expected.

                                            [Table II about here]

   In the analysis, we show the robustness of our results to controlling for health workers' and patients'
socio-demographic characteristics as well as baseline outcomes.



                                                      18
4     Impact on TB control outcomes

4.1    Empirical strategy

      We report impact estimates in two main areas. First, we measure the impact of biometric tracking
on treatment adherence, which was the main TB control outcome targeted, as well as other patient-level
outcomes, with the following OLS specification:


                                    Yit = 1 + 1 Ti + Xi 1 +  is
                                                              1 + i1 ,                                    (1)
                                                               s


where Yit is the outcome for patient i at time t , Ti is a dummy equal to one if the patient was assigned
to a center equipped with a biometric tracking device (or to a mobile health worker using a biometric
device) and zero otherwise, is
                             1 are strata fixed effects, and Xi is a vector of patient controls. Patient

controls include gender, age, household size, time taken to go to the center, dummies indicating whether
the patient belongs to the general caste category, whether she is Hindu, whether she can read and write,
whether she owns her house, whether she has always lived in the area, whether she has lived there for
more than six years, whether she was enrolled after the beginning of the experiment, and whether the
observation was collected during the entry survey. For each control variable, we finally include a dummy
equal to one when the control is missing and replace the missings by 0's to avoid dropping observations.
We use various measures of adherence, rule out the existence of a confounding factor linked to differential
patient selection, and look into the impact on health outcomes. In Appendix B, Tables B1 through B6,
we check the robustness of all patient-level results to restricting the sample to patients enrolled before
the beginning of the experiment (but whose treatment continued into the time of experiment) and whose
selection can thus not be affected by the intervention.
      Second, we turn to the impact of the intervention on health worker effort, measured by attendance
and intensity of activities, using the following specification:


                                     Yit = 2 + 2 Ti + Zi 2 +  is
                                                               2 + i2 ,                                   (2)
                                                               s

      where Yit is an outcome for health worker i at time t , Ti is a dummy equal to one if the health worker


                                                      19
was assigned to the treatment group and zero otherwise, is
                                                         2 are strata fixed effects, and Zi is a vector of

health worker controls. Health worker controls include gender, age, household size, dummies indicating
whether the health worker belongs to the general caste category, whether she is Hindu, whether her level
of education is class 12 or below, whether she completed tertiary education, whether she has any previous
experience, and whether she owns her house, as well as baseline outcomes when available. Again, for
each control variable, we include a dummy equal to one when the control is missing and replace the
missings by 0's.
      In this section, all outcomes are constructed using data collected independently by the research team.
In particular, we focus on verified patients, defined as patients who were successfully surveyed by in-
dependent enumerators in face-to-face interviews, due to evidence indicating that some of the patients
found on treatment cards (our sampling frame for patient surveys) were fabricated, an issue we return to
in Section 5. Strata fixed effects are included in all regressions, and patient and health worker controls in
some of them. In all regressions, we adjust the standard errors for clustering at the level of the cluster of
areas, since randomization was conducted at this level. Although our main tables use regular cluster ro-
bust standard errors, Tables C1 through C9 and D1 through D9 in Appendices C and D show all the results
with p-values obtained using the wild cluster bootstrap procedure (Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller, 2008)
and the pairs cluster bootstrap procedure (Esarey and Menger, 2019). Using these alternative clustering
methods does not affect our results in any substantial way.


4.2    Impacts on treatment adherence

      Table III reports results on treatment interruption and adherence, the main disease control outcomes
targeted. TB treatment outcomes are measured using exit patient surveys. Following the WHO guide-
lines, we define default as a dummy equal to 1 for patients who stopped taking pills before completing
four months of treatment or missed doses for a period of two months or more, and 0 otherwise. Columns
5 and 6 of Panel A show that the likelihood to default drops by 1.8 percentage points, from a mean of
7.3 percent in the control group. This 25 percent drop is statistically significant at the 5 percent level and
robust to the inclusion of patient controls. Its magnitude makes it highly significant from economic and
public health standpoints too, given the risk that defaulting patients develop and spread a drug-resistant



                                                     20
strain of the disease and the cost and difficulty of treating it.4 There is no significant impact on other
treatment outcomes, but there is suggestive evidence that the decrease in defaults resulted in an increased
likelihood that patients were still receiving treatment by the time of the exit survey: indeed, the effects
on both outcomes are of similar magnitude and opposite signs.

                                                   [Table III about here]

    In Table III, Panel B, we report program impact on various measures of treatment adherence. Daily
adherence is measured routinely by health workers through the individual treatment cards provided by the
TB Control Program. Yet in practice, the quality and accuracy of these cards vary tremendously and there
is very limited capacity to ensure truthful reporting. Therefore, the results presented here rely instead on
the large number of independent observation days organized in all DOTS centers. On these days, an
independent enumerator would record all individual visits made to the center by patients or surrogates,
and all visits made by the health worker to the patients' homes.
    We compute a first adherence measure as the fraction of patients who did receive their dose on an
observation day relative to the total number of patients who were supposed to. Columns 1 and 2 show
that on an average day, the share of patients who came to the center in person increased by 13.9 percentage
points in the treatment group, from a mean of 54.2 percent in the control group. This 26 percent jump
is significant at the 1 percent level.5 The impact does not simply correspond to a substitution effect, in
which patients who would normally send a trusted relative to the center to pick up the pills now have
to make it to the center themselves to scan their fingerprints. As columns 3 and 4 show, the impact on
adherence is lower but still large and significant after including the possibility that patients send a relative
or that the health worker deliver the pills at the patients' homes.
    We then compute another measure of treatment adherence as the likelihood that observation-day
data demonstrate that the patient did not default from treatment according to the WHO definition. This
requires having enough patient-level observation points to ascertain that they did not interrupt their treat-
ment after the fourth month and did not miss doses for more than two months. In columns 5 and 6 of
   4 The  effect on defaults is also visible and of almost exact identical size among patients enrolled before the beginning of
the experiment, but not significant: our statistical power is much lower in this subsample, which includes only 28 percent of
the observations in the full sample (Appendix Table B1, Panel A).
    5 The effect is of similar magnitude and also significant at 1 percent when restricting the sample to patients enrolled before

the beginning of the experiment (Appendix Table B1, Panel B).


                                                               21
Table III, Panel B we first take a strict definition of pill intake in which the patient needs to come to the
center in person (similar to the first definition of adherence used in columns 1 and 2). With an average
of 3.7 data points per patient, we can independently rule out the occurrence of default for 4.6 percent
of patients in the control group--admittedly a very low fraction of non-defaulters since the default rate
in the control group is measured at 7.3 percent. Results show an increase of 3.9 percentage points (85
percent), significant at the 1 percent level, in this fully independent measure of confirmed non-defaults.
In columns 7 and 8 we expand the scope of pill intake methods to include delivery to a relative or at home
(similar to the definition used in columns 3 and 4), and again find a positive impact of biometric tracking
on treatment adherence, significant at 10 percent.
      Finally, Table III, Panel C leverages patient surveys to confirm impacts on compliance with some
key features of the DOTS protocol defined by the WHO. The share of patients who declare sending
another person to pick up their pills for them, a breach of the DOTS protocol, is massively reduced by
the introduction of biometric tracking. From a mean of 36.7 percent in the control group, this share drops
to 14.9 percent in the treatment group, a 21.8 percentage points difference. As discussed above, this
reduction does not offset the positive impact of the intervention on patient adherence. Similarly, there is
a large reduction in the share of patients who declare picking up pills for one week or more (i.e., three
or more separate doses of medication) and would then not be observed ingesting them. Both impacts are
significant at 1 percent.
      Overall, these results show that biometric tracking is an effective instrument for improving adherence
to the DOTS protocol and increasing daily pill intake, translating into a lower likelihood of default.


4.3    Impacts on detections and patient selection

      We now investigate whether the sizeable impacts of the intervention on treatment adherence came at
the cost of harming the other key objective of TB control programs: early case finding. Health work-
ers in the treatment group may have reallocated effort toward default-prevention activities to the detri-
ment of detection activities (for detrimental multitasking effects, see Holmström and Milgrom [1991]).
There could also be strategic decisions by health workers to avoid enrolling patients presumed to be
non-compliant and to limit patient notification altogether in order to keep their caseload reasonable for



                                                     22
treatment adherence activities, which they know will be monitored more stringently.
   Table IV reports the impact on the number of detections of verified patients. Panel A shows that
there is no significant impact on the number of verified patients detected by health workers per month
and treatment area. This rejects the multitasking hypothesis and suggests that there was no strategic
adjustment of the number of detections by the health workers to facilitate future default-prevention work.

                                           [Table IV about here]

   We also examine whether health workers equipped with biometric tracking devices focused their
detection efforts on patients who may be less prone to defaulting in the future. Panel B of Table IV
considers the same observable characteristics used in Table II and displays balance tests for a different
sample: patients enrolled after the beginning of the experiment. New patients were very similar overall
in the treatment and control groups. Out of 31 differences, one is significant at the 5 percent level,
and four at the 10 percent level. This result shows that health workers do not strategically adjust their
patient detection efforts, and implies that our impact estimates on treatment adherence in the full sample
of patients, shown above, are unlikely to be confounded by differential patient selection induced by the
intervention.
   Table A3 in Appendix A provides additional support for this conclusion. In Panel A, we consider
verified patients enrolled after the beginning of the experiment in the control group and regress their
likelihood to default on all observable characteristics. Three characteristics are significantly correlated
with default: the fraction of defaults increases with patients' distance to the center, and patients of a
religion other than Hindu or Muslim are relatively less likely to default, as are patients who can read.
Reassuringly, Table IV shows that all three variables are well-balanced across the control and treatment
groups. In Table A3, Panel B, we predict the likelihood to default of all verified patients enrolled after
the beginning of the experiment based on the point estimates from Panel A, and we regress this outcome
on the treatment dummy using a specification of the form in equation 1. The effect is not significant
and is close to zero, indicating that based on their observable characteristics, and absent the intervention,
patients in the control and treatment groups could be predicted to be equally likely to default. This result
is robust to excluding time to go to the center and distance to the center (two variables available for fewer
than 90 percent of patients) from the multivariate regression of default on observables (column 2) and to

                                                     23
including patients enrolled before the beginning of the experiment in that regression (columns 3 and 4).


4.4    Impact on patients' health

      We use a comprehensive health section from the patient surveys to test whether the improved adher-
ence to treatment induced measurable improvements in patients' health. Table V, Panel A reports results
on physical health, measured by the likelihood to be cured (a dummy equal to 1 for patients indicating
that a sputum test or x-ray result confirmed that they are no longer sick or that the OpAsha health worker
or a doctor told them they were cured), patients' ranking of their own health on a scale from 1 to 10,
and indices indicating difficulties in performing activities (such as drawing water from a well and rou-
tine housework), health symptoms (such as cough and respiratory problems), severe health symptoms
(if these symptoms were severe), and increased health symptoms (since the patients started taking pills).
Panel B reports results on mental and emotional health, including optimism, future-orientation, an index
of emotional distress, happiness, and patients' overall satisfaction with their lives on the 1 to 10 scale.
All indices are defined to be the equally weighted average of the z scores of their components, following
Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007). The full list of indices' components is indicated in the table's notes.
Overall, we do not find any significant impact of the intervention on patient health.
      This result is perhaps not surprising, given that the biometric tracking technology focuses on prevent-
ing defaults from treatment, a dramatic but relatively rare occurrence. Patients whose health was most
likely to improve because of the intervention are the ones who would have interrupted their treatment
otherwise. They constitute a small fraction of the overall sample, with default rates at 7.3 percent in the
control group.

                                             [Table V about here]


4.5    Impact on provider effort

      We now examine whether the positive results identified on TB control outcomes can be explained by
increased health worker effort. Table VI, Panel A shows results on health worker attendance, measured
using two independent data collection methods: the observation days, during which an independent
enumerator would record centers' opening and closing times and health worker presence (in addition


                                                      24
to keeping a log of visiting patients as analyzed in Section 4.2); and the random spot checks. The
intervention did not affect whether or not and for how much time the centers were open (columns 1 to
4 and 11 and 12), reflecting the fact that these centers are often located in another facility operating at
regular hours irrespective of TB-related activities (see Section 2.3). However, the biometric tracking
devices did increase the presence of the health worker at the center. The controlled regressions show a
statistically significant 4.5 and 7.1 percentage point increase in the likelihood that the health worker came
to the center during observation days and random spot checks, respectively. These effects are positive
but not significant in the specification without health worker controls (columns 5 and 6 and 13 and 14).
With presence during an average observation day at a fairly high 83.4 percent in the control group, the
marginal improvement is sizeable: absence was cut by about 27 percent in observation-day data and 18
percent in spot-check data. Furthermore, observation-day data allow us to compute rigorous attendance
durations by subtracting breaks taken by the health worker during the day. The data point to significant
improvements in presence time at the center, by about 20 minutes per day or 17 percent (columns 7 and
8). These results echo qualitative findings on health workers' perceptions of their work with the biometric
devices. Most note that the installation of the devices increased accountability for them to stay longer at
the center to make sure that all patients could come and scan their fingerprints, lest a missed-dose alert
would be recorded in the system.

                                           [Table VI about here]

   The increase in health worker presence might also be explained by a more rigorous enforcement of
work requirements by the NGO management in centers with biometric tracking. Columns 9 and 10 of
Table VI, Panel A show that those centers receive significantly more visits from OpASHA staff. The
additional visits may correspond to increased enforcement efforts by management, facilitated by the
data on health worker and patient attendance that the organization receives from the biometric tracking
devices, or to other activities related to the presence of the devices such as technical maintenance. To
disentangle these contrasting interpretations, we take advantage of our high-frequency observation-day
data and examine whether visits seem to be prompted by past dips in provider attendance or patient
adherence. Table A4 in Appendix A shows the results. In centers equipped with a biometric tracking
device, the likelihood of a management visit is significantly lower when patient adherence recorded over

                                                     25
the last four observation days is higher (columns 1 and 2). Although less significantly, the same result
appears to be true for the extensive margin of health worker presence (columns 3 and 4) but not for
the intensive margin (columns 5 and 6). These results suggest that one of the mechanisms by which
the intervention improved health worker presence and patient adherence is that the biometric tracking
devices facilitated the monitoring of health workers and that their managers acted on the information sent
by the devices to OpASHA's server every day.
      We now look into effects on the intensity of activities performed by health workers. Table VI, Panel
B reports results based on a variety of measurement sources. Using observation-day data, columns 1 and
2 show that biometric tracking induces a 32 percent hike in the frequency of (independently verified)
home visits by health workers to patients, an effect significant at the 10 percent level. The finding is
corroborated by patient survey data: columns 13 and 14 show that patients assigned to biometric tracking
report more visits by health workers to deliver pills at their doorstep.6 This result cannot be attributed
to a variation in the proportion of mobile health workers across groups because the randomization of
biometric equipment was stratified on this variable. This large increase in home visits comes in addition
to higher attendance figures at the center, pointing to a sizeable improvement in overall health worker
effort to ensure the adherence of patients to their treatment and follow up on missed doses.
      The other dimensions of intensity of activities do not seem to be affected by the presence of biometric
tracking devices. Health workers do not report intensifying activities aimed at preventing defaults other
than increased home visits (columns 3 and 4) or decreasing detection activities (columns 5 and 6). The
patient surveys confirm that health workers did not enhance or reduce the personalized service they
provide in response to the intervention (columns 7 to 12).


5     Impact on data quality

5.1    Qualitative evidence on misreporting

      Salary bonuses linked to performance indicators (here, the monthly number of detections) or general
pressure from management may lead health workers to forge performance numbers. Our structured qual-
    6 This
         result is robust to restricting the sample to patients present at the outset of the experiment as shown in Appendix
Table B3, columns 7 and 8.



                                                            26
itative interviews documented that misreporting can take many forms. Most of the qualitative evidence
was offered by former or retired health workers, who were more open about this part of their experience
than current employees, who generally offered more perfunctory responses.
   Health workers report instances where patients were entirely fabricated. Although symptomatic pa-
tients are supposed to go to the Designated Microscopy Center themselves to provide sputum and get
tested, before being enrolled in the DOTS system, health workers can offer to carry the sputum to the
Center. In some instances, they used sputum from one infected patient to create one or more additional
cases, which were then registered under fake names or using names of noninfected individuals in the
community for greater realism. The ghost patients would then be assigned a TB number, and a box of
pills would be delivered to the DOTS center. Health workers could also create fake patients without
tinkering with sputum samples by colluding with the lab technician at the Designated Microscopy Cen-
ter. Qualitative interviews revealed instances when several ground-level agents agreed on a mechanism
for artificially inflating detection numbers and splitting the associated monetary incentives. There was
reluctance by certain health workers to grant access to patients for survey purposes, a reaction that more
forthcoming health workers (especially retired ones) interpret as reflecting the fear that some of their
patients would be identified as fabricated.
   While health workers had evidence to share on inflated detection numbers, misreporting default data
is not as clearly documented in the qualitative interviews. Respondents tended to identify this issue as
present in the official TB registers maintained at the hospitals, rather than at the health-worker level. In
the regular reporting system without the biometric tracking devices, there is, however, scope for health
workers to misreport defaults. It only takes a check in the patient's treatment card to report continued pill
intake. Patients who interrupt their treatment can also be marked as having moved or having passed.
   Biometric tracking may dramatically reduce the scope of opportunity to misreport data. By requiring
fingerprint scans, it reduces the possibility that entirely fabricated patients are enrolled and that defaulting
patients are shown as adhering to the treatment. The biometric system does not fully eradicate any
possibility of forgery. Qualitative evidence revealed cases in which health workers managed to enroll
fabricated patients through one of the methods described above, and then have a relative or neighbor
register their fingerprint and scan it every few days over the course of the treatment. It is, however, a



                                                      27
much harder strategy to put in place and maintain over the duration of a full treatment course.


5.2    Measurement

      Health workers report the number of detections and defaults for each DOTS center to OpASHA's
                                                                        ~, j can be broken down as
management every month. For month i and center j, the reported outcome Yi
follows:


                                               ~, j = Yi, j + Mi, j
                                              Yi                                                         (3)

      where Yi, j is the true outcome and Mi, j corresponds to misreporting. Let Y~
                                                                                  T be the average monthly

outcome reported for centers in the treatment group and Y~
                                                         C the average monthly outcome reported for

centers in the control group. The treatment impact estimated on reported data can be decomposed as
follows:


                                     Y~
                                      T -Y~
                                          C = (YT - YC ) + (MT - MC )                                    (4)

      In equation 4, (YT - YC ) is the "true" impact, which we computed based on independent data and re-
ported in the previous section, and (MT - MC ) is the difference in misreporting between centers equipped
with biometric devices and control centers. Because the assignment of areas across treatment and control
was random, any unintentional dimension of misreporting should be evenly distributed and cancel out in
the difference. In addition, the outcomes of interest are little susceptible to random mistakes, as notifying
a new patient or concealing a defaulting patient involves several steps over a long period of time. Since
we cannot exclude that health workers still find ways to misreport in centers equipped with biometric de-
vices, the quantity (MT - MC ) is a lower bound for the actual level of misreporting happening in control
centers. Yet it should be close in absolute value to MC , as MT is expected to be small: as discussed above,
the scope for misreporting is much reduced in biometric-equipped centers, where patients need to scan
their fingerprints at the time of their detection and several times a week over the entire course of their
treatment.
      Equation 4 shows that the impact estimated on outcomes in program-generated data can be inter-
preted as the sum of the true impact and the difference in misreporting between centers in the treatment

                                                       28
and control groups. Therefore, to measure the impact of the intervention on misreporting, we mea-
sure the difference between true impact estimates based on outcome measures from our independent
data (surveys, observation days, and spot checks) and estimates based on program and government data
(center-wise reports, salary slips, and TB registers).


5.3    Impact on misreporting

      Table VII reports impact estimates on default as computed using different data sources. Columns
1 and 2 show the negative and significant impact on the likelihood of default measured by independent
survey data and correspond to the coefficients previously displayed in Table III (Panel A, columns 5 and
6). Columns 3 and 4 show the impact on defaults as measured in the center-wise data sheets prepared
by health workers every month. This primary source of program data shows no significant difference
in the fraction of defaults between the centers equipped with a biometric tracking device and those that
are not. The contrast between these two findings indicates that health workers underreported defaults
in centers without a biometric tracking device and that underreporting decreased by about one-fourth of
defaulting patients in centers equipped with a device. Health workers in the control group were able to
artificially lower the number of defaults in their reports, with the effect of concealing the actual decrease
in default rates in the treatment group. This finding obtained from OpASHA program data holds in data
from government TB registers, the official source of information for the TB Control Program: At the
end of the reporting chain, patient-level outcomes reported in these registers reflect the underreporting of
defaults by health workers without a biometric tracking device (columns 5 and 6).

                                           [Table VII about here]

      We use a seemingly unrelated regression framework to test the significance of the difference in point
estimates between treatment effects on actual likelihood to default and on default as reported in the
program data and in the government registers. Results are displayed at the bottom of Table VII. The
tests reject coefficient equality when estimated on TB register data (columns 5 and 6). Although point
estimates obtained with reported data (columns 3 and 4) are very similar to the ones using register data,
the lower statistical power resulting from using center x month outcomes instead of individual-level data
does not allow rejecting coefficient equality (the p-values are 0.111 and 0.118 in the regressions with and

                                                     29
without health worker controls, respectively).
    We now turn to measuring effects on misreporting of detections. Table VIII shows the impact of the
biometric tracking devices on the number of new cases reported. Columns 1 and 2 in Panel A report the
reliable estimates already shown in Table IV, Panel A, which are based on program data cross-checked
with patient surveys, and show that the biometric technology did not have a significant impact on the
number of detections. Columns 3 and 4 use OpASHA data on the number of new patients per DOTS
center x month compiled from the center-wise data sheets. The number of reported detections is signif-
icantly lower in biometric-equipped centers than in regular centers. With about 0.74 fewer notifications
per month officially reported in equipped centers, and a null impact of the intervention on the number
of "true" patients newly enrolled, the tracking technology appears to have curbed overreporting of de-
tections by about one-fifth of all patients declared. Using seemingly unrelated regressions, we can reject
coefficient equality at the 1 percent level, in the specification controlling only for strata fixed effects and
baseline outcomes, and at the 5 percent level, in the specification including health worker controls.

                                                [Table VIII about here]

    Another way to identify fabricated patients is to look at the likelihood that the survey team could ver-
ify each reported patient across the treatment and control areas, a strategy similar to the independent au-
diting surveys conducted by Niehaus and Sukhtankar (2013) and Muralidharan, Niehaus, and Sukhtankar
(2016) and the matching-based strategy used by Banerjee et al. (2016) to measure the number of ghost
program beneficiaries. Panel B reports survey outcomes for the full sampling frame of patients attempted
to be surveyed and enrolled after the beginning of the experiment. In the control group, enumerators
were able to verify about 69 percent of all reported detections. This percentage reflects the difficulty of
finding addresses and conducting survey operations in urban slums (which applies to areas equipped with
a biometric tracking device too), but also the extent of overreporting detection figures, a factor that would
be mostly cancelled out by the intervention. Patients were significantly more likely to be found and sur-
veyed in treatment group areas and significantly less likely to refuse to answer (columns 1 and 2).7 These
results are consistent with the forgery mechanism described in the qualitative evidence in which health
    7 In contrast, Appendix Table A5, Panel A shows no significant difference in the likelihood to verify patients reported in

the program data and enrolled before the beginning of the experiment, as would be expected. If anything, we were slightly
less likely to successfully verify treatment group patients enrolled before the beginning of the experiment.


                                                             30
workers enroll noninfected individuals as patients. Knowing that enumerators were visiting every one of
their patients, health workers would have talked the fake ones into refusing the survey. It also appears
quite consistent with the fact that certain health workers resisted survey operations or tried to undermine
them over the course of the experiment. Another possible overreporting mechanism consists in making
up individuals and registering them under fake identities and addresses. At the time of the survey, those
ghost patients are not found by surveyors. The coefficient attached to the survey outcome "not found"
is negative, even though nonsignificant, suggesting that the biometric tracking technology reduced scope
for this other form of forgery as well.
    Finally, Panel C of Table VIII confirms that the misreporting of patients carries over into official
government registers. As OpASHA works by delegation of each Indian state to implement the national
TB control program, the data it generates form an integral part of the public data. Patients from the
treatment group areas found in the official TB registers were significantly more likely to be actual verified
patients, suggesting that biometric tracking devices filter out fabricated patients that would otherwise be
present in public health records.8
    Taken together, these results provide robust evidence on the existence of forgery in health records
at the level of the primary provider and in government registers. The installation of biometric tracking
devices appears to significantly curb the level of misreporting and improve the truthfulness of health
records. Accurate and timely data are a critical component of the state capacity to design and imple-
ment policy, identify needs and allocate resources accordingly, and respond to crises, making this result
particularly important. In addition, this paper provides a direct illustration of the importance of data
quality for policymaking: the results from this impact evaluation would have been quite misleading if
we had only relied on the existing official data to measure outcomes. As shown in Tables VII and VIII,
the study would have reached the conclusion that biometric tracking devices had no impact on the like-
lihood to default while reducing the number of patients notified by health workers--and may have been
used to recommend abandoning the technology. The ability to make evidence-based policy decisions is
a component of state capacity that relies heavily on accurate program data.
   8 Again, in contrast, Appendix Table A5, Panel B shows no significant difference in the likelihood that patients found in
the TB registers and enrolled before the beginning of the experiment were verified patients.




                                                            31
6   Acceptability, sustainability, and scalability

    Increased monitoring may be met with strong resistance by primary providers, to the point of not
being sustainable (Banerjee, Duflo, and Glennerster, 2008; Dhaliwal and Hanna, 2017). This section
presents evidence on the acceptability of the equipment by health workers and patients, and its sustain-
ability in treatment centers.
    Table IX, Panel A presents the impact of the intervention on key measures of health worker well-
being. We showed in previous sections that the intervention resulted in fewer overreported detections,
even though the actual number of detections remained stable. Monthly salary data obtained from OpASHA
confirm that the monetary compensation associated with detections was reduced accordingly: columns 1
and 2 show that the compensation for detection activities significantly decreased, resulting in a 7 percent
cut in the total monthly salary of health workers using biometric devices compared to the control group
(columns 3 and 4). In addition to a reduced salary, qualitative evidence shows that treated health workers
bemoan the loss of discretionary power, e.g., the fact that they can no longer decide to provide several
doses of medicine at the same time or give the drugs to a family member for convenience.
    However, health workers equipped with biometric devices also enjoy a significantly reduced work-
load. In the control group, 22 percent of health workers report an excessive workload. The installation of
biometric tracking devices reduces this share by half, or even virtually removes this concern--depending
on the specification (columns 9 and 10). This reflects the fact that the devices make it easier for health
workers to do their work on default prevention. The coefficient attached to the number of challenges
faced in ensuring treatment adherence is negative, although non-significant (columns 5 and 6). 82 per-
cent of health workers who worked with biometric tracking found the technology useful or very useful,
and 77 percent believe that OpASHA should scale it up. Qualitative evidence shows that health workers
are satisfied with having less reporting responsibility since their activity record is entirely accessible by
management directly from the server. They also appreciate having all patient details immediately avail-
able, including their adherence record, treatment phase, and corresponding dosage. They acknowledge
that automatic alerts make the tracking of patients easier, but also regret that scanning fingerprints adds
to the number of steps involved in distributing drugs and forces them to stay longer hours at the center to
make sure all scheduled patients have had a chance to visit.

                                                     32
                                          [Table IX about here]

   Overall, despite imposing additional constraints on both health workers and patients, the installation
of biometric tracking devices does not seem to impact negatively the satisfaction level of either. On the
health worker side, we do not see any significant impact on their job satisfaction--if anything, the point
estimates on a standardized job satisfaction index have a positive sign (columns 11 and 12). This result
might reflect the fact that although the job offers less scope for fraudulently seeking compensation, it is
overall easier and more rewarding--an idea consistent with the very similar levels of turnover observed
in the treatment and control groups (Table A1 in Appendix A). On the patient side, Table IX, Panel B
shows that satisfaction levels are remarkably similar across treatment and control groups. Patients across
groups are equally satisfied with healthcare received and equally likely to recommend OpASHA to other
symptomatic individuals (columns 1 to 4). Consistently, according to health workers, patients across
treatment and control groups face a similar number of challenges to complete their treatment (columns
5 and 6). This may result from two opposite impacts: patients who are receiving more frequent home
visits may be more satisfied, while those under increased pressure to come to the center in person may
be less satisfied. Among patients exposed to the biometric devices, 62.8 percent report a positive or very
positive impression of the technology.
   The acceptability of biometric tracking devices may account for the durability of the equipment in
the centers. The information collected on observation days includes whether the equipment (fingerprint
reader, laptop, and USB key) is present in the center and working properly. Taking advantage of the
duration of the experiment, we can measure the evolution of technology presence over time. Table IX,
Panel C shows that in the first month of the experiment, 92 percent of DOTS centers in the treatment
group did have biometric equipment present on the day of observation. Columns 1 and 2 report how
each passing week affects this likelihood and show that the presence of technology is remarkably stable
over time. The remaining columns suggest that there was a slight reduction in the presence of certain
peripheral components over time, but the graphic representation of the evolution (Figure A1 in Appendix
A) shows a stabilization at high levels after six months.
   Not only is the technology present and functioning over time, the impact on the main outcomes of
interest appear to be maintained. If the impact of the technology was driven by a novelty factor, or


                                                    33
if health workers had found ways to circumvent the technology over time, then the positive effects on
TB control would only manifest themselves in the early weeks or months. Table A6 in Appendix A
shows point estimates on the interaction between treatment and time, in addition to the direct impact
of the treatment itself. The time variable is obtained by computing the number of days lapsed between
the installation of the biometric device and each patient's treatment start date (for outcomes measured
at the patient level) or between the installation of the biometric device and the observation day (for
outcomes measured at the patient x observation day level). Coefficients associated to the interacted term
are consistently not distinguishable from zero, except an estimate significant at the 10 percent level in
one regression out of 22, which provides reassurance that the impact is sustained over time.
   Finally, it is worth emphasizing that portable devices were successfully used by mobile health work-
ers, who are included in the sample even though their number was too small for us to conduct separate
impact analysis. Mobile health workers' level of satisfaction with the technology was close to the aver-
age among treated health workers: 86 percent of those who worked with biometric tracking found the
technology useful or very useful, and 71 percent believe that OpASHA should scale it up. This suggests
that the technology is not restricted to brick-and-mortar facilities but can also be used in remote settings,
rural areas, and other hard-to-reach places.
   These findings point to potential significant benefits of scaling up the eCompliance technology evalu-
ated in this paper to improve TB care provision. In 2012, the Government of India launched a web-based
centralized database of all TB patients called Nikshay, based on the digitization of treatment cards. By
aggregating TB records from across India in one unique dataset, Nikshay serves as a dashboard for the
National TB Control Program. Yet, as it relies on the digitization of paper-based documents, Nikshay
is not set up for identifying duplicates and establishing unique identity. The quality of the database is
entirely reliant on the quality of information on the treatment cards, and the digitization process may
even add a layer of potential error in the recording system. Further, the digitization process is imple-
mented with a lag of about one to two months between when the patient misses a dose and when the
corresponding information gets entered in the electronic database, thus disabling any quick corrective
action to ensure patient adherence to treatment.
   On the other hand, biometric identification technology is increasingly available in India, especially



                                                     34
since the national roll-out of Aadhaar, the Government of India's ambitious program to provide a biometrics-
based Unique Identification (UID) to all residents of India. Aadhaar is an individual identification num-
ber which can be authenticated through fingerprint scan, iris scan, and registered cellphone number and
serves as a proof of identity and address, anywhere in India. It currently covers about 1.2 billion individ-
uals, corresponding to 90 percent of the adult population. The objective of the Government of India is to
have various social programs use it as a platform for service delivery.
    With Nikshay and Aadhaar, the infrastructure is in place for scaling up biometric recognition tech-
nology linked in real time to an integrated database of TB care beneficiaries. Our results show that this
could massively improve the reliability of records and enable rapid follow-up on patients who miss doses.
In addition, it would give the government the information required to make rapid-cycle adjustments to
program implementation and hold private provider partners accountable for results, and it would facili-
tate the implementation of financial incentive schemes or direct benefits transfers to both providers and
patients (RNTCP, 2017).


7   Conclusion

    This paper provides original evidence on the benefits of using biometric tracking technology to
strengthen frontline service delivery and improve the reliability of government data. We exploit the
random placement of the technology across four Indian states and use a large variety of data sources to
obtain a detailed understanding of impacts and mechanisms and to uncover the extent of misreporting in
TB control.
    Results point to a sharp reduction in treatment interruptions, greater medication adherence, and a
greater compliance to the requirements of the DOTS protocol defined by the WHO. These results are
accounted for by a higher level of attendance by health workers and greater effort dedicated to following
up with defaulting patients through more frequent home visits. The biometric technology generated these
effects by facilitating both the tracking of patients' pill-taking, by health workers, and the monitoring of
health workers, by the NGO management. Potential downsides did not materialize: we do not see a
reallocation of health worker efforts away from other critical activities, such as early case finding, or a
strategic refocusing of care toward more compliant patients. In addition to these impacts on direct TB


                                                    35
control outcomes, the biometric technology dramatically reduces the scope for forging health registers.
Triangulating different data sources, we show that the intervention substantially reduced underreporting
of treatment interruptions and overreporting of new cases both in program data and in the government
registers. The fact that the technology is a productivity-enhancing tool helps explain why it appears well-
accepted by both patients and health workers--despite imposing more demands on both and generating
a loss in earnings for the latter--and why its impacts are sustained over time. Overall, biometric tracking
appears amenable for scale-up through India's TB Control Program.
   The technology studied here measurably improved state capacity at two levels. First, it increased the
capacity of a public program to efficiently extend its reach by addressing the principal-agent problem in-
herent to the decentralization of service provision. It enhanced the quality of implementation of a delivery
model based on partnerships with private-sector actors in charge of establishing highly localized points
of care. This resulted in a large impact on the likelihood that isolated, vulnerable people receive adequate
treatment against a deadly disease. Second, the technology improved the accuracy of public-health data,
which increases the capacity of the state to identify needs and allocate resources accordingly. Accurate
data pave the way to evidence-driven decisions: in our case, official data affected by misreporting issues
would have masked the positive effects of the program and likely led to its abandonment.
   In order to enhance state capacity in a durable way, changes need to be accepted and sustainable. The
technology we study holds health workers more accountable for their performance while at the same time
improving their productivity. This result may hold lessons for strategies to improve state capacity beyond
the important case of TB control. Sustainable improvement in the commitment of delivery agents may
be facilitated by a simultaneous effort to improve their work conditions and build the state's capacity.
Technology may improve state capacity, not only as a tool to deliver services by means both smarter and
faster but also through a positive impact on frontline workers, if they are willing to accept greater scrutiny
in exchange for a simplification of their daily tasks.




                                                     36
References

   Alchian, Armen A., and Harold Demsetz. "Production, Information Costs, and Economic Organiza-
tion." American Economic Review, 1972, 62 (5): 777­795.
   Banerjee, Abhijit, Angus Deaton, and Esther Duflo. "Wealth, Health, and Health Services in Rural
Rajasthan." American Economic Review, 2004, 94 (2): 326­330.
   --, and Esther Duflo. "Addressing Absence." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2006, 20 (1):
117­132.
   --, Esther Duflo, and Rachel Glennerster. "Putting a Band-Aid on a Corpse: Incentives for Nurses in
the Indian Public Health Care System." Journal of the European Economic Association, 2008, 6 (2­3):
487­500.
   -- Rukmini Banerji, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Stuti Khemani. "Pitfalls of Participatory
Programs: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Education in India." American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 2010, 2 (1):1­30.
   --, Esther Duflo, Clement Imbert, Santhosh Mathew, and Rohini Pande. "E-Governance, Account-
ability, and Leakage in Public Programs: Experimental Evidence from a Financial Management Reform
in India." NBER Working Paper Series, No. 22803 (2016).
   --, Rema Hanna, Jordan Kyle, Benjamin A. Olken, and Sudarno Sumarto. "Tangible Information
and Citizen Empowerment: Identification Cards and Food Subsidy Programs in Indonesia." Journal of
Political Economy, 2018, 126 (2): 451­491.
   Barnwal, Prabhat. "Curbing Leakage in Public Programs with Direct Benefit Transfers Evidence
from India's Fuel Subsidies and Black Markets." Working Paper (2016).
   Becker, Gary S., and George J. Stigler. "Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and Compensation of En-
forcers." Journal of Legal Studies, 1974, 3 (1): 1­18.
   Besley, Timothy, and Torsten Persson. "State Capacity, Conflict, and Development." Econometrica,
2010, 78 (1): 1­34.
   Bhatnagar, Nupur, Abhishek Sinha, Navkar Samdaria, Aakar Gupta, Shelly Batra, Manish Bhard-
waj, and William Thies. "Biometric Monitoring as a Persuasive Technology: Ensuring Patients Visit
Health Centers in India's Slums." In Hutchinson, David, Takeo Kanade, and Josef Kittler, Persuasive

                                                   37
Technology: Design for Health and Safety (169­180). (Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2012).
   Bhattacharya, Kakali. Fundamentals of Qualitative Research. A Practical Guide. (Abingdon-on-
Thames, UK: Routledge, 2017).
   Björkman, Martina, and Jakob Svensson. "Power to the People: Evidence from a Randomized Field
Experiment on Community-Based Monitoring in Uganda." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124
(2): 735­769.
   Brambor, Thomas, Agustín Goenaga, Johannes Lindvall, and Jan Teorell. "The Lay of the Land:
Information Capacity and the Modern State." Comparative Political Studies, 2019.
   Callen, Michael, and James D. Long. "Institutional Corruption and Election Fraud. Evidence from a
Field Experiment in Afghanistan." American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (1): 354­381.
   --, Saad Gulzar, Ali Hasanain, and Muhammad Yasir Khan. "The Political Economy of Public Sector
Absence: Experimental Evidence from Pakistan." NBER Working Paper, No. 22340 (2018).
   Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. "Bootstrap-Based Improvements for
Inference with Clustered Errors." Review of Economics and Statistics, 2008, 90 (3): 414­427.
   Chaudhury, Nazmul, and Jeffrey Hammer. "Ghost Doctors: Absenteeism in Rural Bangladeshi
Health Facilities." World Bank Economic Review, 2004, 18 (3): 423­441.
   Cohen, Jessica, and Indrani Saran. "The Impact of Packaging and Messaging on Adherence to
Malaria Treatment: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Uganda." Journal of Development
Economics, 2018, 134: 68­95.
   Das, Jishnu, and Jeffrey Hammer. "Money for Nothing: The Dire Straits of Medical Practice in Delhi,
India." Journal of Development Economics, 2007, 83 (1): 1­36.
   --, Ada Kwan, Benjamin Daniels, Srinath Satyanarayana, Ramnath Subbaraman, Sofi Bergkvist,
Ranendra K. Das, Veena Das, and Madhukar Pai. "Use of Standardised Patients to Assess Quality of Tu-
berculosis Care: A Pilot, Cross-Sectional Study." Lancet Infectious Diseases, 2015, 15 (11): 1305­1313.
   DeFulio, Anthony, and Kenneth Silverman. "The Use of Incentives to Reinforce Medication Adher-
ence." Preventive Medicine, 2012, 55 (S1): 86­94.
   Desrosières, Alain. The Politics of Large Numbers: A History of Statistical Reasoning. (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 2002).



                                                    38
   Dhaliwal, Iqbal, and Rema Hanna. "The Devil Is in the Details: The Successes and Limitations of
Bureaucratic Reform in India." Journal of Development Economics, 2017, 124: 1­21.
   Di Tella, Rafael, and Ernesto Schargrodsky. "The Role of Wages and Auditing During a Crackdown
on Corruption in the City of Buenos Aires." Journal of Law and Economics, 2003, 46 (1): 269­292.
   Downey, Laura, Neethi Rao, Lorna Guinness, Miqdad Asaria, Shankar Prinja, Anju Sinha, Rajni
Kant, Arvind Pandey, François Cluzeau, and Kalipso Chalkidou. "Identification of Publicly Available
Data Sources to Inform the Conduct of Health Technology Assessment in India." F1000Research, 2018,
7 (245).
   Duflo, Esther, Rema Hanna, and Stephen P. Ryan. "Incentives Work: Getting Teachers to Come to
School." American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (4): 1241­1278.
   --, Michael Greenstone, Rohini Pande, and Nicholas Ryan. "Truth-Telling by Third-Party Auditors
and the Response of Polluting Firms: Experimental Evidence from India." Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, 2013, 128 (4): 1499­1545.
   Esarey, Justin, and Andrew Menger. "Practical and Effective Approaches to Dealing With Clustered
Data." Political Science Research and Methods, 2019, 7 (3): 541­559.
   Ferraz, Claudio, and Frederico Finan. "Exposing Corrupt Politicians: The Effect of Brazil's Publicly
Released Audits on Electoral Outcomes." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (2): 703­745.
   Finan, Frederico, Benjamin Olken, and Rohini Pande. "The Personnel Economics of the Developing
State." In Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duflo, Handbook of Field Experiments (467­513).(Amsterdam,
Netherlands: North Holland, 2017).
   Gelb, Alan, and Julia Clark. "Identification for Development: The Biometrics Revolution." Center
for Global Development Working Paper, No. 315 (2013).
   Giné, Xavier, Jessica Goldberg, and Dean Yang. "Credit Market Consequences of Improved Personal
Identification: Field Experimental Evidence from Malawi." American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (6):
2923­2954.
   Giuffrida, Antonio, and David J. Torgerson. "Should We Pay the Patient? Review of Financial
Incentives to Enhance Patient Compliance." British Medical Journal, 1997, 315 (7110): 703­707.
   Goldberg, Jessica, Mario Macis, and Pradeep Chintagunta. "Incentivized Peer Referrals for Tubercu-



                                                 39
losis Screening: Evidence from India." NBER Working Paper Series, No. 25279 (2019).
   Henderson, Vernon, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil. "A Bright Idea for Measuring Economic
Growth." American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (3): 194­199.
   --, Paul Milgrom. "Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive Contracts, Asset Ownership, and
Job Design." Journal of Law Economics & Organization, 1991, 7: 24­52.
   Huddart, Sophia,Thomas Bossuroy, Vincent Pons, Siddharta Baral, Madhukar Pai, and Clara Delaval-
lade. "Knowledge about Tuberculosis and Infection Prevention Behavior: A Nine City Longitudinal
Study from India." PLoS One, 2018, 13 (10): E0206245.
   Ichino, Nahomi, and Matthias Schündeln. "Deterring or Displacing Electoral Irregularities? Spillover
Effects of Observers in a Randomized Field Experiment in Ghana." Journal of Politics, 2012, 74 (1):
292­307.
   Jacob, Brian, and Steven Levitt. "Rotten Apples: An Investigation of the Prevalence and Predictors
of Teacher Cheating." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (3): 843­877.
   Kleven, Henrik J., Martin B. Knudsen, Claus T. Kreiner, Søren Pedersen, and Emmanuel Saez. "Un-
willing or Unable to Cheat? Evidence from a Tax Audit Experiment in Denmark." Econometrica, 2011,
79 (3): 651­692.
   Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz. "Experimental Analysis of Neighbor-
hood Effects." Econometrica, 2007, 75 (1): 83­119.
   Koehler-Derrick, Gabriel. "The Informational Origins and Consequences of Colonial Governance."
Working Paper, 2019.
   Laffont, Jean-Jacques, and David Martimort. The Theory of Incentives: The Principal-Agent Model.
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2002).
   Lee, Melissa M., and Nan Zhang. "Legibility and the Informational Foundations of State Capacity."
The Journal of Politics, 2017, 79 (1): 118­132.
   Lester, Richard T., Paul Ritvo, Edward J. Mills, Antony Kariri, Sarah Karanja, Michael H. Chung,
William Jack et al., and Francis A. Plummer. "Effects of a Mobile Pphone Short Message Service on
Antiretroviral Treatment Adherence in Kenya (WelTel Kenya1): A Randomised Trial." Lancet Infectious
Diseases, 2010, 376 (9755): 1838­1845.



                                                     40
   Mahapatra, Prasanta, Kenji Shibuya, Alan D. Lopez, Francesca Coullare, Francis C. Notzon, Cha-
lapati Rao, and Simon Szreter. "Civil registration systems and vital statistics: successes and missed
opportunities." The Lancet, 2007, 370 (9599): 1653­1663.
   Martinez, Luis R. "How Much Should We Trust the Dictator's GDP Growth Estimates?" Working
Paper (2019).
   McDonald, Heather P., Amit X. Garg, and R. Brian Haynes. "Interventions to Enhance Patient Ad-
herence to Medication Prescriptions: Scientific Review." JAMA, 2002, 288 (22): 2868­2879.
   McMillen, Christian W. Discovering Tuberculosis: A Global History, 1900 to the Present. (New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2015).
   Mikkelsen, Lene, David E. Phillips, Carla AbouZahr, Philip W. Setel, Don de Savigny, Rafael Lozano,
and Alan D. Lopez. "A Global Assessment of Civil Registration and Vital Statistics Systems: Monitoring
Data Quality and Progress." The Lancet, 2015, 386 (10001): 1395­1406.
   Mohanan, Manoj, Katherine Hay, and Nachiket Mor. "Quality Of Health Care in India: Challenges,
Priorities, and the Road Ahead." Health Affairs (Project Hope), 2016, 35 (10): 1753­1758.
   Morse, Janice M. "The Implications of Interview Type and Structure in Mixed-Method Design." In
Jaber F. Gubrium, James A. Holstein, Amir B. Marvasti, and Karyn D. McKinney, The SAGE Handbook
of Interview Research: The Complexity of the Craft (193­206). (2014)
   Hutchinson, David, Takeo Kanade, and Josef Kittler, Persuasive Technology: Design for Health and
Safety (169­180). (Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2012).
   Morton, Matthew, Somil Nagpal, Rajeev Sadanandan, and Sebastian Bauhoff. "India's Largest Hos-
pital Insurance Program Faces Challenges in Using Claims Data to Measure Quality." Health Affairs
(Project Hope), 2016, 35 (10): 1792­1799.
   Muralidharan, Karthik, Paul Niehaus, and Sandip Sukhtankar. "Building State Capacity: Evidence
from Biometric Smartcards in India." American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (10): 2895­2929.
   Nagin, Daniel S., James B. Rebitzer, Seth Sanders, and Lowell J. Taylor. "Monitoring, Motivation,
and Management: The Determinants of Opportunistic Behavior in a Field Experiment." American Eco-
nomic Review, 2002, 92 (4): 850­873.
   Niehaus, Paul, and Sandip Sukhtankar. "Corruption Dynamics: The Golden Goose Effect." American



                                                 41
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2013, 5 (4): 230­269.
   Nieuwlaat, Robby, Nancy Wilczynski, Tamara Navarro, Nicholas Hobson, Rebecca Jeffery, Arun
Keepanasseril et al., and R. Brian Haynes. "Interventions for Enhancing Medication Aadherence."
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 11 (2014): CD000011.
   Olken, Benjamin A. "Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia." Jour-
nal of Political Economy, 2007, 115 (2): 200­249.
   Oomman, Nandini, Garrett Mehl, Matt Berg, and Rachel Silverman. "Modernising vital registration
systems: Why now?" The Lancet, 2013, 381 (9875): 1336­1337.
   Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. Strengthening Health Information Infras-
tructure for Health Care Quality Governance: Good Practices, New Opportunities, and Data Privacy
Protection Challenges. (Paris: OECD, 2013).
   Otto, Kate, Meera Shekar, Christopher Herbst, and Rianna Mohammed. "Information and Commu-
nication Technologies for Health Systems Strengthening; Opportunities, Criteria for Success, and Inno-
vation for Africa and Beyond." Health, Nutrition, and Population Discussion Paper No. 94943 ( World
Bank, 2015).
   Page, Lucy, and Rohini Pande. "Ending Global Poverty: Why Money Isn't Enough." Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 2018, 32 (4): 173­200.
   Peabody, John W., Jeff Luck, Sharad Jain, Dan Bertenthal, and Peter Glassman. "Assessing the Ac-
curacy of Administrative Data in Health Information Systems." Medical Care, 2004, 42 (11):1066­1072.
   Phillips, Beth S., Shreya Singhal, Shambhavi Mishra, Fnu Kajal, Sun Yu Cotter, and May Sudhi-
naraset. "Evaluating Concordance between Government Administrative Data and Externally Collected
Data among High-Volume Government Health Facilities in Uttar Pradesh, India." Global Health Action,
2019, 12 (1).
   Pop-Eleches, Cristian, Harsha Thirumurthy, James P. Habyarimana, Joshua S. G. Zivin, Markus Gold-
stein, Damien de Walque, Leslie D. Mackeen, Jessica Haberer, Sylvester N. Kimaiyo, John E. Sidle, Dun-
can Ngare, and David R. Bangsberg. "Mobile Phone Technologies Improve Adherence to Antiretroviral
Treatment in a Resource-Limited Setting: A Randomized Controlled Trial of Text Message Reminders."
AIDS, 2011, 25 (6): 825­834.



                                                    42
   Raffler, Pia, Daniel N. Posner and Doug Parkerson. "The Weakness of Bottom-Up Accountability:
Experimental Evidence from the Ugandan Health Sector." Working paper (2019).
   Raifman, Julia R. G., Heather E. Lanthorn, Slawa Rokicki, and Günther Fink. "The Impact of Text
Message Reminders on Adherence to Antimalarial Treatment in Northern Ghana: A Randomized Trial."
PLoS One, 2014, 9 (10): E109032.
   Rasul, Imran, and Daniel Rogger. "Management of Bureaucrats and Public Service Delivery: Evi-
dence from the Nigerian Civil Service." Economic Journal, 2016, 128 (608): 413­446.
   Revised National Tuberculosis Control Programme. "National Strategic Plan for Tuberculosis Elim-
ination 2017­2025." Central TB Division, Directorate General of Health Services, Ministry of Health
with Family Welfare, Government of India (2017).
   Sabate, Eduardo. Adherence to Long-Term Therapies: Evidence for Action. (Geneva, Switzerland:
World Health Organization, 2003).
   Satyanarayana, Srinath, Ramnath Subbaraman, Priya Shete, Genevieve Gore, Jishnu Das, Adithya
Cattamanchi et al., and Madhukar Pai.. "Quality of Tuberculosis Care in India: A Systematic Review."
International Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 2015, 19 (7): 751­763.
   Scott, James C. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have
Failed. (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1998).
   Slemrod, Joel, Marsha Blumenthal, and Charles Christian. "Taxpayer Response to an Increased Prob-
ability of Audit: Evidence from a Controlled Experiment in Minnesota." Journal of Public Economics,
2001, 79 (3): 455­483.
   Snidal, Sarah J., Genevieve Barnard, Emmanuel Atuhairwe, and Yanis B. Amor. "Use of eCom-
pliance, an Innovative Biometric System for Monitoring of Tuberculosis Treatment in Rural Uganda."
American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 2015, 92 (6): 1271­1279.
   Sretzer, Simon. "The Right of Registration: Development, Identity Registration, and Social Secu-
rity--A Historical Perspective." World Development, 2007, 35 (1): 67­86.
   Tooze, J. Adam. Statistics and the German State, 1900­1945: The Making of Modern Economic
Knowledge. (Cambridge, UK; New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
   Van Den Berg, Gerard J., and Bas Van Der Klaauw. "Counseling and Monitoring of Unemployed



                                                   43
Workers: Theory and Evidence from a Controlled Social Experiment." International Economic Review,
2006, 47 (3): 895­936.
   World Health Organization. "Global Strategy and Targets for Tuberculosis Prevention, Care and
Control after 2015" (2014).
   World Health Organization. "Global Tuberculosis Report 2018" (2018).
   World Health Organization and World Bank. Tracking Universal Health Coverage: 2017 Global
Monitoring Report. (Washington, DC: World Health Organization, 2017).
   Zuniga, Alejandro E.F., Khin Than Win, and Willy Susilo. "Biometrics for Electronic Health Records."
Journal of Medical Systems, 2010, 34(5): 975­983.
   Zurovac, Dejan, Raymond K. Sudoi, Willie S. Akhwale, Moses Ndiritu, Davidson H. Hamer, Alexan-
der K. Rowe, and Robert W. Snow. "The Effect of Mobile Phone Text-Message Reminders on Kenyan
Health Workers' Adherence to Malaria Treatment Guidelines: A Cluster Randomised Trial." Lancet In-
fectious Diseases, 2011, 378 (9793): 795­803.




                                                 44
Figure 1. States and Cities in the Sample
                                                                Table I: Health Worker Summary Statistics

                                                                            Full sample      Number of        Control group          Treatment group         P-value
                                                                                               obs.                                                        Treatment
                                                                         Mean         SD                    Mean          SD        Mean          SD        = Control
                                                                          (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)          (7)          (8)
Panel A. Health workers' characteristics
Male                                                                     0.741      0.441         85        0.794       0.410        0.710       0.461        0.382
Age                                                                       30.9       7.3          85         33.4        7.8          30.4        6.1         0.097
Caste
   General caste                                                         0.400      0.493         85        0.265       0.448        0.516       0.508        0.059
   Other Backward Class                                                  0.365      0.484         85        0.382       0.493        0.323       0.475        0.696
   Scheduled Caste                                                       0.106      0.310         85        0.118       0.327        0.097       0.301        0.832
   Scheduled Tribe                                                       0.094      0.294         85        0.206       0.410        0.032       0.180        0.035
   Minority                                                              0.035      0.186         85        0.029       0.171        0.032       0.180        0.945
Religion
   Hindu                                                                 0.812      0.393         85        0.765       0.431        0.903       0.301        0.148
   Muslim                                                                0.129      0.338         85        0.176       0.387        0.097       0.301        0.412
   Other                                                                 0.059      0.237         85        0.059       0.239        0.000       0.000        0.075
Highest education level achieved
   Class 12 and below                                                    0.634      0.485         82        0.688       0.471        0.633       0.490        0.684
   Tertiary                                                              0.341      0.477         82        0.281       0.457        0.333       0.479        0.671
   Other diploma/non-formal education                                    0.024      0.155         82        0.031       0.177        0.033       0.183        1.000
Work experience
   Any previous work experience                                          0.753      0.434         85        0.853       0.359        0.645       0.486        0.038
   Number of years of work experience                                     8.7        5.1          81         9.2         5.7          8.7         4.7         0.767
   Any previous working in a job related to TB                           0.153      0.362         85        0.147       0.359        0.161       0.374        0.910
   Any previous experience in the social/NGO sector                      0.159      0.367         82        0.206       0.410        0.138       0.351        0.549
   Any other income generating activity, in addition to OpASHA           0.083      0.278         84        0.088       0.288        0.129       0.341        0.750
Lives in one of the areas she covers                                     0.566      0.499         83        0.545       0.506        0.742       0.445        0.080
Household size                                                            5.6        2.9          83         5.2         2.7          6.2         3.4         0.266
Lives alone                                                              0.036      0.187         84        0.000       0.000        0.067       0.254        0.168
Assets
   Has electricty                                                        0.976      0.154         83        1.000       0.000        0.933       0.254        0.104
   Has tap water                                                         0.561      0.499         82        0.594       0.499        0.400       0.498        0.112
   Has a television                                                      0.904      0.297         83        0.848       0.364        0.933       0.254        0.222
   Has a refrigerator                                                    0.542      0.501         83        0.545       0.506        0.467       0.507        0.530
   Rents an apartment or house to a third party                          0.146      0.356         82        0.118       0.327        0.207       0.412        0.232
   Owns her house                                                        0.600      0.493         85        0.559       0.504        0.581       0.502        0.951
Exposure to technology
   Knows how to use a computer                                           0.565      0.499         85        0.559       0.504        0.516       0.508        0.725
   Knows how to use the internet                                         0.470      0.502         83        0.424       0.502        0.433       0.504        0.962
   Has an email account                                                  0.400      0.493         85        0.412       0.500        0.258       0.445        0.168
   Has a social networking account                                       0.329      0.473         85        0.294       0.462        0.258       0.445        0.663
Days spent in the experiment                                             308.9      141.0         85        349.1       127.7        333.7       137.7        0.655

Panel B. OpASHA center-wise data sheets
Reported baseline number of detections per month per area                2.692      1.394         65        2.965       1.562        2.393       1.135        0.061
Reported baseline fraction of defaults per month per area                0.034      0.062         65        0.029       0.050        0.039       0.074        0.434

Panel C. Observation days
Center open                                                              0.984      0.047         57        0.980       0.053        0.989       0.039        0.535
Total time center was open                                               309.5      183.1         57        307.4       183.5        311.8       186.2        0.966
Health worker present at the center                                      0.788      0.275         61        0.769       0.264        0.810       0.289        0.520
Total time health worker was present at the center, net of breaks        108.6       60.8         61        110.9        65.5        106.0        56.1        0.714
Visit by OpAsha                                                          0.055      0.114         65        0.067       0.126        0.043       0.100        0.310
Adherence 1: Patient came to center and took or picked up pill           0.519      0.258         65        0.520       0.265        0.517       0.255        0.963
Adherence 2: Adh. 1 + Relative came to the center and picked up          0.759      0.240         65        0.761       0.238        0.758       0.247        0.843
  the pill, or patient or relative was given pill during a home visit

Notes : In Panel A, the unit of observation is the health worker. For each variable, we report the mean, standard deviation, and number of observations in the full
sample (col. 1­3), including the replacement health workers. The means and standard deviations in the control and treatment groups are calculated based on the
subsample of health workers present at the beginning of the experiment (col. 4­7). We also report the p-value of the difference with control for strata fixed effects
and clustered standard errors (col. 8).
In Panels B and C, the unit of observation is the cluster of areas allocated to a health worker. Baseline detection and default outcomes are computed based on six
months of OpASHA center-wise data sheets prior to the experiment. Baseline observation days outcomes are computed based on observations days that took place
before the beginning of the experiment.
                                            Table II: Patient Summary Statistics

                                                Full sample     Number     Control group     Treatment group      P-value
                                                                of obs.                                         Treatment
                                              Mean       SD                Mean       SD     Mean        SD      = Control
                                                (1)      (2)      (3)        (4)      (5)      (6)       (7)        (8)
Male                                          0.574    0.495     3387      0.535    0.499    0.576     0.495       0.513
Age                                            33.9     16.4     3385       34.0     16.8     34.3      16.6       0.789
Caste
   Does not know                              0.047    0.211     3388      0.040    0.196     0.026    0.159       0.523
   General caste                              0.176    0.381     3388      0.160    0.367     0.165    0.371       0.566
   Other Backward Class                       0.357    0.479     3388      0.376    0.485     0.352    0.478       0.621
   Scheduled Caste                            0.249    0.432     3388      0.229    0.421     0.297    0.458       0.089
   Scheduled Tribe                            0.083    0.276     3388      0.118    0.323     0.103    0.305       0.158
   Minority                                   0.088    0.283     3388      0.078    0.268     0.058    0.234       0.539
Religion
   Hindu                                      0.856    0.351     3377      0.869    0.337     0.903    0.297       0.543
   Muslim                                     0.126    0.332     3377      0.112    0.315     0.081    0.274       0.629
   Other                                      0.017    0.131     3377      0.019    0.136     0.016    0.127       0.509
Literacy
   Cannot read or write                       0.296    0.457     3390      0.271    0.445     0.301    0.459       0.434
   Can read but not write                     0.038    0.192     3390      0.021    0.143     0.026    0.159       0.896
   Can read and write                         0.666    0.472     3390      0.708    0.455     0.673    0.470       0.394
Education
   Pre-primary                                0.234    0.424     3381      0.217    0.412     0.234    0.424       0.769
   Primary                                    0.387    0.487     3381      0.375    0.485     0.390    0.488       0.530
   Secondary                                  0.335    0.472     3381      0.367    0.482     0.334    0.473       0.468
   Undergraduate and more                     0.044    0.205     3381      0.042    0.200     0.042    0.201       0.911
Household size                                 5.5      2.4      3382       5.6      2.5       5.4      2.3        0.167
Lives alone                                   0.020    0.141     3392      0.019    0.136     0.016    0.126       0.500
Assets
   Has electricty                             0.965    0.184     3309      0.968    0.176     0.935    0.248       0.037
   Has tap water                              0.537    0.499     3324      0.520    0.500     0.418    0.494       0.465
   Has a television                           0.822    0.382     3205      0.826    0.379     0.832    0.375       0.464
   Has a refrigerator                         0.260    0.439     3206      0.276    0.448     0.230    0.422       0.303
   Owns her house                             0.694    0.461     3315      0.716    0.451     0.738    0.441       0.975
Migration status
   Has always lived in the area               0.502    0.500     3389      0.570    0.496     0.542    0.499       0.305
   Has lived there for more than 6 years      0.241    0.428     3389      0.209    0.407     0.258    0.438       0.026
   Has lived there for less than 5 years      0.256    0.437     3389      0.221    0.416     0.200    0.401       0.439
Is currently working                          0.335    0.472     3117      0.381    0.486     0.406    0.492       0.794
Time to go to the center (in minutes)          11.5     8.3      2429       11.6     8.7       12.4     9.7        0.839
Distance to the center (in miles)               3.0     4.9      2646        3.3     5.4        3.0     4.8        0.727

Notes : The unit of observation is a verified patient. For patients who completed more than one survey, we use data from
the first survey completed. For each variable, we first report the mean, standard deviation, and number of observations in
the full sample including all patients, whether enrolled before or after the beginning of the experiment (col. 1­3). The
means and standard deviations in the control and treatment groups are calculated based on the subsample of patients
enrolled before the beginning of the experiment (col. 4­7). We also report the p-value of the difference with control for
strata fixed effects and a dummy indicating whether the information comes from an entry or exit survey, and clustered
standard errors (col. 8).
                                                  Table III: Impact on Treatment Interruption and Adherence

Panel A: Impact on treatment interruption, or default (source: patient surveys)
                          Treatment complete            Treatment ongoing               Default                        Died               Outcome unknown
                             (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)            (7)             (8)        (9)        (10)
Treatment                  -0.003        -0.007         0.022        0.020        -0.018       -0.015         -0.001           0.000      0.000      0.003
                          (0.028)       (0.026)        (0.025)      (0.025)     (0.007)**    (0.007)**       (0.005)          (0.005)    (0.012)    (0.011)
Strata fixed effects         Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes        Yes        Yes
Patient controls                           Yes                        Yes                        Yes                            Yes                   Yes

Observations                2802          2802          2802         2802          2802         2802          2802             2802      2802         2802
R-squared                   0.055         0.072         0.064        0.074         0.020        0.033         0.014            0.024     0.054        0.105
Mean in control group       0.507         0.507         0.299        0.299         0.073        0.073         0.016            0.016     0.105        0.105

Panel B: Impact on treatment adherence (source: observation days)
                              Adherence 1:              Adherence 2:                Compliance with            Compliance with
                          Patient came to the     Adh. 1 + Relative came to      treatment verified (as     treatment verified (as
                           center and took or     the center and picked up          per adherence 1)           per adherence 2)
                            picked up the pill      the pill, or patient or
                                                    relative was given pill
                                                     during a home visit

                              (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)               (8)
Treatment                    0.139        0.122         0.073        0.056         0.039        0.038         0.024             0.023
                          (0.029)***   (0.024)***     (0.031)**    (0.025)**    (0.010)***   (0.010)***     (0.013)*          (0.013)*
Strata fixed effects          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes               Yes
Patient controls                           Yes                        Yes                        Yes                             Yes

Observations                12844         12844        12810         12810         3041         3041          3043             3043
R-squared                   0.084         0.131        0.105         0.160         0.037        0.054         0.059            0.072
Mean in control group       0.542         0.542        0.692         0.692         0.046        0.046         0.078            0.078

Panel C: Impact on patient compliance (source: patient surveys)
                             Occasionally sent      Ever picked up medicine
                         someone else to get the for one week or more
                                   pills                during one visit
                              (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)
Treatment                   -0.218       -0.218       -0.079       -0.078
                         (0.025)*** (0.025)*** (0.022)*** (0.021)***
Strata fixed effects          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Patient controls                           Yes                       Yes

Observations                3352          3352          3295         3295
R-squared                   0.130         0.149         0.089        0.103
Mean in control group       0.367         0.367         0.283        0.283

Notes: Clustered standard errors are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). In Panel A, Panel C, and Panel B,
col. 5­8, the unit of observation is a verified patient. We use the full sample of verified patients, whether enrolled before or after the beginning of the
experiment. In Panel A, we report these patients' treatment status at the time of their exit survey. Following the official definition by the WHO, we count as
default a patient who stopped taking pills before completing four months of treatment or missed doses for a period of two months or more. In Panel C, we
use the last survey completed by the patient and control for a dummy equal to 1 if it was the entry survey. In Panel B, col. 1­4, the unit of observation is a
verified patient x observation day.
In all regressions, we control for a dummy indicating whether the patient was enrolled after the beginning of the experiment. Patient controls include
gender, age, whether the patient belongs to the general caste category, whether she is Hindu, whether she can read and write, her household size,
whether she owns her house, whether she has always lived in the area, whether she has lived there for more than six years, and the time it takes her to go
to the center.
                                Table IV: Impact on Detections and Patient Selection

Panel A: Impact on number of verified detections (source: program data cross-checked with patient surveys)
                                           Verified detections per
                                              center per month
                                               (1)          (2)
Treatment                                    -0.103       -0.159
                                             (0.141)      (0.188)
Strata fixed effects                           Yes          Yes
Baseline detection                             Yes          Yes
Health worker controls                                      Yes

Observations                                  1637         1637
R-squared                                     0.170        0.182
Mean in control group                         1.762        1.762

Panel B: Impact on patient selection (patients enrolled after the beginning of the experiment)
                                                 Control group           Treatment group           P-value Number of
                                                                                                 Treatment   obs.
                                              Mean          SD         Mean           SD          = Control
                                               (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)            (5)      (6)
Male                                          0.586        0.493       0.576         0.494          0.434    2598
Age                                           34.4         16.4        33.1          16.1           0.102    2597
Caste
   Does not know                              0.048        0.214        0.053        0.224         0.847      2602
   General caste                              0.181        0.386        0.179        0.383         0.716      2602
   Other Backward Class                       0.357        0.479        0.352        0.478         0.996      2602
   Scheduled Caste                            0.231        0.422        0.267        0.442         0.152      2602
   Scheduled Tribe                            0.078        0.269        0.070        0.255         0.324      2602
   Minority                                   0.104        0.306        0.079        0.270         0.471      2602
Religion
   Hindu                                      0.832        0.374        0.870        0.337         0.362      2594
   Muslim                                     0.147        0.355        0.117        0.322         0.493      2594
   Other                                      0.021        0.142        0.013        0.114         0.201      2594
Literacy
   Cannot read or write                       0.304        0.460        0.294        0.456         0.311      2602
   Can read but not write                     0.043        0.202        0.044        0.204         0.598      2602
   Can read and write                         0.653        0.476        0.662        0.473         0.488      2602
Education
   Pre-primary                                0.247        0.431        0.226        0.418         0.083      2593
   Primary                                    0.371        0.483        0.410        0.492         0.048      2593
   Secondary                                  0.333        0.471        0.325        0.468         0.910      2593
   Undergraduate and more                     0.049        0.216        0.039        0.195         0.203      2593
Household size                                 5.5          2.6          5.4          2.2          0.183      2593
Lives alone                                   0.025        0.155        0.017        0.128         0.065      2602
Assets
   Has electricty                             0.970        0.172        0.966        0.181         0.711      2532
   Has tap water                              0.562        0.496        0.544        0.498         0.885      2543
   Has a television                           0.819        0.385        0.822        0.383         0.649      2460
   Has a refrigerator                         0.264        0.441        0.258        0.438         0.762      2459
   Owns her house                             0.689        0.463        0.679        0.467         0.712      2538
Migration Status
   Has always lived in the area               0.507        0.500        0.457        0.498         0.217      2600
   Has lived there for more than 6 years      0.227        0.419        0.269        0.444         0.079      2600
   Has lived there for less than 5 years      0.266        0.442        0.274        0.446         0.840      2600
Is currently working                          0.316        0.465        0.321        0.467         0.426      2388
Time to go to the center (in minutes)         11.0          7.4         11.8          8.7          0.281      1812
Distance to the center (in miles)              2.9          4.9          3.0          4.7          0.587      1998

Notes: In Panel A, the unit of observation is a treatment area x month. Clustered standard errors are in parentheses
(***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). We count as verified detection a new patient
reported by the health worker that we were actually able to find and survey. The baseline outcome is computed on
the four months preceding the beginning of the experiment. Health worker controls include gender, age, whether
the health worker belongs to the general caste category, whether she is Hindu, whether her level of education is class
12 or below, whether she completed tertiary education, whether she had any previous experience, her household
size, and whether she owns her house.
In Panel B, the unit of observation is a verified patient. We use the subsample of verified patients enrolled after the
beginning of the experiment and the first survey completed by the patient. For each variable, we report the means
and standard deviations in both the control group and the treatment group. We also report the p-value of the
difference with control for strata fixed effects and a dummy indicating whether the information comes from an entry
or exit survey, and clustered standard errors.
                                                                         Table V: Impact on Patients' Health

Panel A: Impact on patients' physical health (source: patient surveys)
                                   Cured            Patients' ranking of their Index of no difficulty in      Index of health        Index of severe health      Index of increased
                                                              health            performing activities           symptoms                   symptoms               health symptoms

                              (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)         (8)           (9)         (10)         (11)          (12)
Treatment                    0.015         0.012        0.012        -0.010       -0.022        -0.038       -0.008       0.001        -0.035       -0.026       -0.013        -0.011
                            (0.025)       (0.023)      (0.089)      (0.086)      (0.030)       (0.029)      (0.032)      (0.031)      (0.026)      (0.024)      (0.018)       (0.019)
Strata fixed effects          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
Patient controls                            Yes                        Yes                        Yes                      Yes                        Yes                        Yes

Observations                 2395          2395         2430         2430         2458          2458        2459          2459         2459         2459         2458         2458
R-squared                    0.069         0.095        0.037        0.106        0.048         0.168       0.263         0.296        0.111        0.146        0.005        0.012
Mean in control group        0.400         0.400        7.431        7.431          --            --          --            --           --           --           --           --

Panel B: Impact on patients' emotional health (source: patient surveys)
                           Thinks that household Has a project to improve         Index of emotional       Overall somewhat or      Overall satisfaction with
                          situation will improve in    their life and their            distress                very happy                   their life
                                  the future               family's life

                              (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)         (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)
Treatment                    0.000         0.002        -0.017       -0.017       0.010         0.010        -0.019       -0.020       -0.082       -0.086
                            (0.015)       (0.015)      (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.028)       (0.026)      (0.013)      (0.013)      (0.080)      (0.079)
Strata fixed effects          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Patient controls                            Yes                        Yes                       Yes                        Yes                       Yes

Observations                 2077          2077         2375         2375         2454          2454        2435          2435         2426         2426
R-squared                    0.034         0.062        0.088        0.112        0.071         0.102       0.027         0.050        0.194        0.250
Mean in control group        0.890         0.890        0.120        0.120          --            --        0.942         0.942        7.259        7.259

Notes : Clustered standard errors are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). The unit of observation is a verified patient. We use the
full sample of verified patients, whether enrolled before or after the beginning of the experiment, and control for a dummy indicating whether the patient was enrolled after the
beginning of the experiment. We report these patients' self-reported health (Panel A) and emotional health (Panel B) outcomes at the time of their exit survey. All outcomes are
self-reported. Patient controls as in Table III.
Cured is equal to 1 if the patient thinks they are cured and indicates that a sputum test/x-ray result confirmed that they are no longer sick; that the OpAsha health worker told
them they were cured / no longer have to take pills; or that a doctor told them they were cured / no longer have to take pills. Patients' ranking of their health goes from 1 (very
poor) to 10 (excellent). Index of no difficulty in performing activities is a standardized index of dummies equal to 1 if the patient hasn't experienced any difficulty in drawing water
from a well, routine housework such as cleaning or cooking, routine daily activities, maintaining their usual work schedule and, for children going to school, maintaining their usual
class and homework schedule. Index of health symptoms is a standardized index of dummies equal to 1 if the patient has experienced a cough, respiratory problems, other types of
body pain, other general health problems or any other health problem since they started taking pills. Index of severe health symptoms is a standardized index of dummies equal to
1 if these symptoms were severe (the cough was painful, very painful, or accompanied with phlegm/blood; the problems prevented them from completing their usual activities, at
home or at work/school). Index of increased health symptoms is a standardized index of dummies equal to 1 if these problems have increased since the patient started taking pills.
Index of emotional distress is a standardized index of dummies equal to 1 if the patient often or sometimes felt hopeless, that everything is an effort, worthless, envious of others,
angry, unable to sleep, prone to crying, never felt relaxed and peaceful, and never felt happy during the past seven days. Patients' overall satisfaction with their life goes from 1
(very bad life) to 10 (very good).
                                                                                Table VI: Impact on Health Worker Effort


Panel A: Impact on health worker attendance
                                Center open           Total time center was Health worker present        Total time health       Visit by OpAsha               Center open         Health worker present
                                                               open                at the center       worker was present at                                                           at the center
                                                                                                         the center, net of
                                                                                                               breaks
                                                                            (source: observation days)                                                            (source: random spot checks)
                                (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)       (9)         (10)            (11)        (12)       (13)        (14)
Treatment                      0.000        0.001        -10.7        9.2        0.019       0.045        20.2        22.3      0.033       0.030           0.001       0.005      0.049       0.071
                              (0.002)      (0.003)     (12.400)    (14.600)     (0.022)     (0.022)*    (8.2)**     (8.1)*** (0.012)*** (0.011)**          (0.016)     (0.021)    (0.046)    (0.029)**
Strata fixed effects            Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
Health worker controls                       Yes                     Yes                       Yes                     Yes                   Yes                         Yes                    Yes

Observations                   2,749       2,749        2,414        2,414        3,063          3,063    2,987        2,987       2,855        2,855        916          916         916          916
R-squared                      0.002       0.003        0.100        0.200        0.149          0.167    0.200        0.200       0.021        0.031       0.029        0.051       0.154        0.205
Mean in Control Group          0.998       0.998        338.9        338.9        0.834          0.834    117.3        117.3       0.054        0.054       0.945        0.945       0.598        0.598

Panel B: Impact on health worker activities
                            # home visits as % of      Intensity of default     Intensity of detection   Health worker gives          Frequency of           Health worker            Health worker
                           all patients scheduled        activities (index)        activities (index)    advice related to TB       interactions with       supports patient        sometimes or often
                            to come on that day                                                                                       health worker         during treatment          delivers pills at
                                                                                                                                                                                      patient's home
                             (source: observation              (source: health worker surveys)                                              (source: patient surveys)
                                     days)
                                (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)          (10)        (11)         (12)        (13)         (14)
Treatment                      0.037       0.049        0.031        -0.103      -0.065      -0.071       0.014        0.014      -0.051       -0.045      -0.003       -0.004       0.073        0.087
                             (0.020)*    (0.026)*      (0.069)       (0.096)     (0.056)     (0.069)     (0.016)      (0.016)     (0.063)      (0.060)     (0.028)      (0.028)     (0.041)*    (0.035)**
Strata fixed effects            Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
Health worker controls                      Yes                        Yes                     Yes
Baseline control                                         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
Patient controls                                                                                                        Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes

Observations                   2341        2341          134          134         134          134        3280         3280        3193         3193        3293         3293        3295         3295
R-squared                      0.111       0.114        0.304        0.380       0.663        0.702       0.051        0.061       0.192        0.203       0.325        0.330       0.335        0.402
Mean in control group          0.115       0.115          --           --          --           --        0.894        0.894       1.749        1.749       0.213        0.213       0.454        0.454

Notes: Clustered standard errors are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). Patient and health worker controls as in Tables III and IV. In Panel A, the
unit of observation is an observation day (col. 1­8) or a random visit (col. 9­12). In col. 1­4 and 11­14, the sample is restricted to areas with a fixed center. In col. 5­10, the sample includes both
areas with a fixed center and those receiving mobile treatment.
In Panel B, col. 1 and 2, the unit of observation is an observation day and the sample is restricted to areas with a fixed center. In col. 3­6, the unit of observation is a health worker x survey (either
midline or endline). Intensity of default activities is a standardized index of the health worker's ability to name a patient that they counseled for missing doses or defaulting, the number of methods
used to prevent patients from defaulting, the number of days spent visiting ongoing patients over the previous seven days, the number of days spent visiting ongoing patients per week in general,
and the number of actions taken when patients miss doses. Intensity of detection activities is a standardized index of the health worker's ability to name a patient that they suspected for TB and
sent for sputum testing, the number of sputum samples of TB suspects collected last week, the number of days spent detecting new patients over the previous seven days, the number of days
spent detecting new patients per week in general, and the number of methods used to detect new patients. In col. 7­14, the unit of observation is a verified patient. We use the full sample of
verified patients, whether enrolled before or after the beginning of the experiment, use the last survey completed by the patient, and control for dummies indicating whether this was the entry
survey and whether the patient was enrolled after the beginning of the experiment.
                                              Table VII: Impact on Quality of Reporting on Default

                                              Actual likelihood to default       Defaults as reported in the         Default as reported in the
                                                                                       program data                    government registers
                                               (source: patient surveys)           (source: program data)         (source: government registers)
                                                  (1)               (2)              (3)             (4)                (5)            (6)
Treatment                                       -0.018            -0.015            0.000           0.001             0.000           0.000
                                              (0.007)**         (0.007)**          (0.008)         (0.008)           (0.006)         (0.005)
Strata fixed effects                              Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes
Patient controls                                                    Yes                                                                Yes
Baseline outcome                                                                     Yes              Yes
Health worker controls                                                                                Yes

Observations                                    2802              2802             1832              1832              2913             2913
R-squared                                       0.020             0.033            0.023             0.031             0.009            0.022
Mean in control group                           0.073             0.073            0.045             0.045             0.021            0.021

Test: Treatment = Treatment(1) (or (2))
  P-value                                         --                --             0.118             0.111             0.060            0.078
  F-statistic                                     --                --             2.51              2.61              3.67             3.22

Notes: Clustered standard errors are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). Patient and health
worker controls as in Tables III and IV. In all col. but 3 and 4, the unit of observation is a verified patient. We use the full sample of verified
patients, whether enrolled before or after the beginning of the experiment, and control for a dummy indicating whether the patient was
enrolled after the beginning of the experiment. In col. 3 and 4, the unit of observation is a treatment area x month. The baseline outcome is
computed on the six months preceding the beginning of the experiment.
We use a seemingly unrelated regressions framework to compare treatment effects on actual likelihood to default and on default as reported
in the program data and in the goverment registers. We test the null hypothesis that effects on actual and reported defaults are equal and
report the corresponding p-value and F-statistic. For instance, in col. 3 (resp. col. 4), we report the p-value and F-statistic corresponding to the
test of the null that treatment effects reported in col. 1 and 3 (resp. 2 and 4) are equal.
                                                  Table VIII: Impact on Quality of Reporting on Patient Detection

Panel A: Impact on number of verified and reported detections
                                                    Verified detections                      Reported detections
                                          (source: program data cross-checked
                                                                                            (source: program data)
                                                   with patient surveys)
                                                  (1)                   (2)                 (3)                  (4)
Treatment                                       -0.103                -0.159              -0.744               -0.795
                                               (0.141)               (0.188)            (0.243)***           (0.260)***
Strata fixed effects                              Yes                   Yes                 Yes                  Yes
Baseline outcome                                  Yes                   Yes                 Yes                  Yes
Health worker controls                                                  Yes                                      Yes

Observations                                    1637                 1637                 1832                 1832
R-squared                                       0.170                0.182                0.470                0.489
Mean in control group                           1.762                1.762                3.730                3.730

Test: Treatment = Treatment(1) (or (2))
  P-value                                         --                   --                 0.003                0.014
  F-statistic                                     --                   --                  9.29                 6.41

Panel B: Impact on survey outcomes, individual level (sources: program data, patient surveys)
                                          Patient verified          Survey not           Survey not      Survey not        Survey not        Survey not
                                            (found and         completed: Patient completed: Patient completed: Health completed: Patient completed: Other
                                             surveyed)         refused to answer        not found     worker warning        death             reasons

                                                  (1)                 (2)                   (3)                   (4)                  (5)                  (6)
Treatment                                       0.058               -0.020                -0.011                -0.015               -0.004               -0.008
                                              (0.025)**           (0.007)***             (0.017)               (0.011)              (0.007)              (0.010)
Strata fixed effects                             Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes

Observations                                    3647                 3647                 3647                 3647                 3647                 3647
R-squared                                       0.057                0.010                0.064                0.025                0.016                0.034
Mean in control group                           0.685                0.068                0.106                0.059                0.031                0.049

Panel C. Impact on the fraction of patients reported in the government registers which are verified (sources: government registers, patient surveys)
                                          Fraction of verified
                                                patients
                                                   (1)
Treatment                                        0.075
                                               (0.028)***
Strata fixed effects                               Yes

Observations                                    2998
R-squared                                       0.026
Mean in control group                           0.697

Notes: Clustered standard errors are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). In Panel A, the unit of observation is a
treatment area x month. We count as verified detection a new patient reported by the health worker that we were actually able to find and survey. The baseline
outcome is computed on the four months preceding the beginning of the experiment in col. 1 and 2 and six months in col. 3 and 4 (because more historical data are
available). Health worker controls as in Table IV. We use a seemingly unrelated regressions framework to compare treatment effects on the number of verified
detections and reported detections. We test the null hypothesis that the two effects are equal and report the corresponding p-value and F-statistic. Specifically, in
col. 3 (resp. col. 4), we report the p-value and F-statistic corresponding to the test of the null that treatment effects reported in col. 1 and 3 (resp. 2 and 4) are
equal.
In Panel B, the unit of observation is a patient reported in the program data. We use the subsample of patients enrolled after the beginning of the experiment. We
report the likelihood that these patients were verified (found and surveyed) and, otherwise, the reason why we could not survey them. We control for a dummy
indicating whether the information comes from an entry or exit survey.
In Panel C, the unit of observation is a patient reported in the program data and in the government registers. We use the subsample of patients enrolled after the
beginning of the experiment. We report the likelihood that these patients were verified. Indore is excluded as we did not obtain access to the TB register in that
city.
                                                                     Table IX: Sustainability of the Intervention

Panel A: Impact on health worker salary and satisfaction
                            Monthly compensation         Monthly salary          # of challenges faced in # of challenges faced in      Excessive workload        Standardized job
                            for detection activities                                getting a patient to     detecting patients                                   satisfaction index
                                                                                   complete treatment
                                                                                          course
                                     (source: salary data from OpAsha)                                             (source: health worker surveys)
                                 (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)            (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)         (10)           (11)         (12)
Treatment                      -324.3        -224.9       -428.5     -341.1         -0.220       -0.238       0.013       -0.167      -0.105       -0.199         0.123        0.140
                             (114.4)*** (97.1)** (159.7)*** (182.7)*               (0.164)      (0.184)      (0.162)     (0.214)     (0.054)* (0.062)***         (0.093)      (0.121)
Strata fixed effects             Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
Health worker controls                         Yes                     Yes                         Yes                      Yes                      Yes                        Yes
Baseline control                                                                     Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes

Observations                     693          693          936          936          121          121          117          117          118          118          132          132
R-squared                       0.400        0.500        0.400        0.500        0.193        0.254        0.207        0.282        0.218        0.255        0.271        0.346
Mean in control group           1321         1321         5791         5791         3.309        3.309        2.746        2.746        0.222        0.222          --           --

Panel B: Impact on patients' satisfaction with healthcare received
                                Satisfied with their       Would refer a TB      # of challenges faced by
                              interaction with their     suspect to an OpAsha      patients to complete
                                  health worker              health worker           treatment course
                                          (source: patient surveys)              (source: health worker
                                                                                          surveys)
                                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)
Treatment                       0.005        0.003        0.034        0.033        -0.053        -0.212
                               (0.012)      (0.012)      (0.022)      (0.022)      (0.133)       (0.204)
Strata fixed effects             Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
Patient controls                              Yes                       Yes
Health worker controls                                                                            Yes
Baseline control                                                                     Yes          Yes

Observations                    2378         2378         2441         2441          119          119
R-squared                       0.024        0.048        0.475        0.482        0.246        0.304
Mean in control group           0.957        0.957        0.178        0.178        2.500        2.500

Panel C. Technology presence over time (source: observation days)
                             Center has biometric      Share of all devices  Share of all devices
                                  equipment            (fingerprint reader,  (fingerprint reader,
                                                         laptop, USB key)      laptop, USB key)
                                                              present       present and working
                                (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)      (5)          (6)
# weeks since beginning       -0.002       -0.002      -0.006        -0.006  -0.006        -0.006
  of the experiment          (0.001)*     (0.001) (0.002)*** (0.002)*** (0.002)*** (0.002)***
Center fixed effects            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes      Yes          Yes
Health worker controls                       Yes                       Yes                   Yes

Observations                    1414         1414         1403         1403         1398         1398
R-squared                       0.309        0.326        0.373        0.389        0.361        0.376
Mean in first month             0.921        0.921        0.909        0.909        0.899        0.899

Notes: Clustered standard errors are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). Patient and health worker controls as in Tables III and
IV. In Panel A, col. 1­4, the unit of observation is a health worker x month. In Panel A, col. 5­10 and Panel B, col. 5 and 6, the unit of observation is a health worker x survey
(either midline or endline). The standardized job satisfaction index is a standardized index of the health worker's satisfaction with their compensation, their satisfaction with their
work, and whether they recommended the job to someone else in the past six months. In Panel B, col. 1­4, the unit of observation is a verified patient. We use the full sample of
verified patients, whether enrolled before or after the beginning of the experiment, report these patients' outcomes at the time of their exit survey, and control for a dummy
indicating whether the patient was enrolled after the beginning of the experiment. In Panel C, the unit of observation is an observation day.
APPENDIX FIGURES AND TABLES (FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION)

Appendix A. Additional Results


                                 Figure A1. Technology Presence in Biometric Centers over Time
                                                                                 Table A1: Attrition Checks

Panel A: Impact on health worker attrition
                                                                          Treatment          Robust SE         Strata fixed   Health worker         R-   Observ Mean in control
                                                                                                                 effects        controls         squared ations    group
                                                                              (1)               (2)                (3)             (4)             (5)      (6)             (7)
                                                                            -0.016             0.071               Yes             No             0.213     85           0.273
Dropped out during intervention
                                                                            -0.003             0.128               Yes             Yes            0.425     85           0.273

Panel B: Attritors and replacements' characteristics
                                                                                         Attritors                                                        Replacements
                                                                         Control group  Treatment P-value Observ                       Control group         Treatment  P-value Observ
                                                                         Mean      SD  Mean      SD   T=C ations                      Mean       SD       Mean      SD    T=C   ations
                                                                          (1)      (2)  (3)      (4)   (5)  (6)                        (7)       (8)        (9)    (10)   (11)   (12)
Male                                                                     1.000 0.000 0.700 0.483 0.226      22                        0.700    0.483       0.700 0.483 1.000      20
Age                                                                      29.3     10.9 30.5     8.3  0.738  22                        28.7       7.7       26.3     6.3  0.204    20
Caste
   General caste                                                         0.250      0.452   0.400     0.516   0.567      22              0.400    0.516    0.500    0.527         0.717   20
   Other Backward Class                                                  0.500      0.522   0.500     0.527   1.000      22              0.300    0.483    0.500    0.527         0.457   20
   Scheduled Caste                                                       0.167      0.389   0.000     0.000   0.115      22              0.200    0.422    0.000    0.000         0.162   20
   Scheduled Tribe                                                       0.083      0.289   0.100     0.316   0.904      22              0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000           -     20
   Minority                                                              0.000      0.000   0.000     0.000     -        22              0.100    0.316    0.000    0.000         0.248   20
Religion
   Hindu                                                                 0.750      0.452   1.000     0.000   0.029      22              0.600    0.516    0.900    0.316         0.126   20
   Muslim                                                                0.083      0.289   0.000     0.000   0.260      22              0.100    0.316    0.100    0.316         1.000   20
   Other                                                                 0.167      0.389   0.000     0.000   0.157      22              0.300    0.483    0.000    0.000         0.023   20
Highest education level achieved
   Class 12 and below                                                    0.636      0.505   0.700     0.483   0.766      21              0.400    0.516    0.700    0.483         0.232   20
   Tertiary                                                              0.364      0.505   0.300     0.483   0.766      21              0.600    0.516    0.300    0.483         0.232   20
   Other diploma/non-formal education                                    0.000      0.000   0.000     0.000     -        21              0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000           -     20
Work experience
   Any previous work experience                                          0.750      0.452 0.700 0.483         0.841      22              0.800    0.422    0.700    0.483         0.656   20
   Number of years of work experience                                    9.091      5.166 10.200 4.341        0.571      21              7.200    4.566    8.700    5.293         0.563   20
   Any previous working in a job related to TB                           0.083      0.289 0.200 0.422         0.381      22              0.300    0.483    0.000    0.000         0.056   20
   Any previous experience in the social/NGO sector                      0.000      0.000 0.000 0.000           -        21              0.111    0.333    0.100    0.316         0.939   19
   Any other income generating activity, in addition to OpASHA           0.000      0.000 0.100 0.316         0.350      22              0.000    0.000    0.000    0.000           -     19
Lives in one of the areas covered by the centers                         0.545      0.522 0.500 0.527         0.862      21              0.400    0.516    0.222    0.441         0.529   19
Household size                                                            5.6        2.5    5.0   3.2         0.645      22               5.3      2.3      5.9      1.9          0.273   20
Lives alone                                                              0.000      0.000 0.100 0.316         0.350      22              0.100    0.316    0.000    0.000         0.248   20
Assets
   Has electricty                                                        1.000      0.000   0.900     0.316   0.351      21              1.000    0.000    1.000    0.000           -     20
   Has tap water                                                         0.818      0.405   0.700     0.483   0.595      21              0.900    0.316    0.600    0.516         0.191   20
   Has a television                                                      0.818      0.405   0.900     0.316   0.634      21              0.900    0.316    1.000    0.000         0.248   20
   Has a refrigerator                                                    0.455      0.522   0.600     0.516   0.450      21              0.500    0.527    0.800    0.422         0.185   20
   Rents an apartment or house to a third party                          0.083      0.289   0.000     0.000   0.358      20              0.100    0.316    0.111    0.333         0.941   19
   Owns her house                                                        0.667      0.492   0.400     0.516   0.219      22              0.600    0.516    0.800    0.422         0.269   20
Exposure to technology
   Knows how to use a computer                                           0.750      0.452   0.600     0.516   0.434      22              0.500    0.527    0.800    0.422         0.131   20
   Knows how to use the internet                                         0.727      0.467   0.600     0.516   0.534      21              0.500    0.527    0.700    0.483         0.330   20
   Has an email account                                                  0.583      0.515   0.300     0.483   0.187      22              0.500    0.527    0.700    0.483         0.330   20
   Has a social networking account                                       0.583      0.515   0.300     0.483   0.139      22              0.500    0.527    0.500    0.527         1.000   20
Days spent in the experiment                                             138.3      114.3   113.8     108.2   0.638      22              185.1    114.1    218.9    123.0         0.605   20
Reported baseline number of detections per month per area                2.568      2.148   2.770     0.954   0.812      16
Reported baseline number of defaults per month per area                  0.038      0.060   0.014     0.015   0.286      16
Center open                                                              0.984      0.044   1.000     0.000   1.000      14
Total time center was open                                               373.1      235.4   259.7     144.3   0.735      14
Health worker present at the center                                      0.772      0.230   0.733     0.406   0.280      15
Total time health worker was present at the center                       96.4       66.5    96.4      73.5    0.374      15
Visit by OpAsha                                                          0.108      0.182   0.041     0.078   0.400      16
Adherence 1: Patient came to center and took or picked up pill           0.318      0.279   0.482     0.287   0.374      16
Adherence 2: Adh. 1 + Relative came to the center and picked up          0.622      0.303   0.676     0.304   0.492      16
   the pill, or patient or relative was given pill during a home visit

Notes: In Panel A, the unit of observation is the health worker. ***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively. We include all health workers who were part of
the experiment. Health worker controls as in Table IV.
In Panel B, the means and standard deviations in the control and treatment groups are calculated based on the subsample of attritors (health workers who left the sample over the
course of the experiment) and replacements (health workers who entered the sample over the course of the experiment) respectively (col. 1­4 and 7­10). We also report the p-
value of the difference with clustered standard errors (col. 5 and 11).
In the last ten lines of Panel B, the unit of observation is the cluster of areas allocated to a health worker. The sample includes all clusters in which the initial health worker attrited.
Baseline detection and default outcomes are computed based on six months of OpASHA center-wise data sheets prior to the experiment. Baseline observation days outcomes are
computed based on observation days that took place before the beginning of the experiment.
                                               Table A2: Availability of Various Data Sources

Panel A: Patient data
                              Entry survey        Exit survey complete     Verification data          At least one         Total number of
                               complete                                        available            observation day        observation days
                                   (source: patient surveys)             (source: government              (source: observation days)
                                                                               registers)
                                   (1)                     (2)                     (3)                     (4)                    (5)
Treatment                         0.024                   0.007                  0.025                   -0.006                   0.4
                                 (0.019)                 (0.017)                (0.022)                 (0.014)                 (0.1)**
Strata fixed effects               Yes                     Yes                    Yes                      Yes                    Yes

Observations                      3393                   3393                     3057                   3393                    3393
R-squared                         0.476                  0.131                    0.111                  0.064                   0.300
Mean in control group             0.607                  0.725                    0.946                  0.896                    3.6

Panel B: Healthworker data
                             Baseline survey         Midline survey           Endline survey     Number of months of
                               complete                complete                 complete              salary data
                                                                                                 (source: salary data
                                             (source: healthworker surveys)
                                                                                                    from OpAsha)
                                   (1)                      (2)                    (3)                     (4)
Treatment                         0.000                   -0.038                  0.050                   -0.2
                                    --                   (0.064)                 (0.080)                 (0.9)
Strata fixed effects               Yes                      Yes                    Yes                    Yes

Observations                        85                     85                       85                     85
R-squared                           --                   0.282                    0.181                  0.400
Mean in control group             1.000                  0.818                    0.727                   11.1

Panel C: Area-level data
                               At least one          Total number of      At least one random     Total number of  Number of months of
                             observation day        observation days           spot check       random spot checks    program data
                                    (source: observation days)                   (source: random spot checks)       (source: program
                                                                                                                          data)
                                   (1)                     (2)                      (3)                  (4)                 (5)
Treatment                         0.000                    0.0                    0.011                  0.9                -0.3
                                    --                    (0.7)                  (0.009)               (0.4)**             (0.2)
Strata fixed effects               Yes                     Yes                     Yes                   Yes                Yes

Observations                       122                    122                      122                    122                     122
R-squared                           --                   0.800                    0.728                  0.600                   0.900
Mean in control group             1.000                   25.0                    0.906                   7.1                     15.1

Notes : Clustered standard errors are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). In Panel A, the
unit of observation is a verified patient. We use the full sample of verified patients, whether enrolled before or after the beginning of the
experiment, and control for a dummy indicating whether the patient was enrolled after the beginning of the experiment. In column 3, we
exclude Indore, where we did not obtain access to the TB register. In Panel B, the unit of observation is a healthworker. In Panel C, the
unit of observation is a treatment area. While there are 129 areas, the number of observations is 122 because the data for the seven
mobile health workers is not area-specific.
                                 Table A3: Impact on Likelihood to Default Predicted Based on Observables


Panel A: Multivariate regression of control group patients' defaults on observables
                                                                                                                   Default
                                                                                                    (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)
Male                                                                                               0.024      0.022       0.021     0.025
                                                                                                  (0.016)    (0.017)     (0.014)  (0.016)
Age                                                                                                0.000      0.000       0.000     0.000
                                                                                                  (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.000)  (0.000)
Caste: doesn't know                                                                               -0.054      0.015      -0.049     0.027
                                                                                                  (0.052)    (0.051)     (0.054)  (0.043)
Other Backward Class                                                                               0.010      0.018      -0.022    -0.003
                                                                                                  (0.027)    (0.022)     (0.028)  (0.020)
Scheduled Caste                                                                                   -0.001      0.006      -0.019    -0.010
                                                                                                  (0.023)    (0.016)     (0.027)  (0.019)
Scheduled Tribe                                                                                    0.013      0.007      -0.015     0.008
                                                                                                  (0.039)    (0.034)     (0.036)  (0.033)
Minority                                                                                          -0.025      0.011      -0.051     0.008
                                                                                                  (0.065)    (0.046)     (0.041)  (0.035)
Muslim                                                                                             0.014     -0.014       0.003    -0.034
                                                                                                  (0.062)    (0.041)     (0.036)  (0.029)
Other religion                                                                                    -0.091     -0.090      -0.078    -0.018
                                                                                                (0.031)*** (0.020)*** (0.023)*** (0.045)
Can read but not write                                                                            -0.101     -0.079      -0.119    -0.052
                                                                                                (0.031)*** (0.036)** (0.028)*** (0.052)
Can read and write                                                                                -0.031     -0.028      -0.056    -0.037
                                                                                                  (0.041)    (0.036)     (0.041)  (0.033)
Primary education                                                                                  0.005     -0.009       0.057     0.032
                                                                                                  (0.044)    (0.044)     (0.038)  (0.037)
Secondary education                                                                               -0.001     -0.010       0.049     0.024
                                                                                                  (0.051)    (0.045)     (0.045)  (0.037)
Undergraduate and more                                                                            -0.005      0.007       0.028     0.017
                                                                                                  (0.057)    (0.052)     (0.045)  (0.043)
Size of the Household                                                                             -0.004      0.001      -0.004     0.000
                                                                                                  (0.004)    (0.003)     (0.004)  (0.003)
Lives alone                                                                                       -0.007     -0.035      -0.034    -0.053
                                                                                                  (0.094)    (0.055)     (0.074)  (0.047)
Has tap water                                                                                     -0.026     -0.036      -0.026    -0.035
                                                                                                  (0.023)   (0.021)*     (0.019) (0.016)**
Has a television                                                                                  -0.029      0.009      -0.013     0.011
                                                                                                  (0.033)    (0.023)     (0.023)  (0.016)
Has a refrigerator                                                                                 0.039      0.025       0.012     0.015
                                                                                                  (0.041)    (0.032)     (0.033)  (0.025)
Owns her house                                                                                     0.011      0.007       0.011     0.003
                                                                                                  (0.027)    (0.021)     (0.019)  (0.016)
Has lived in the area for more than 6 years (but not always)                                      -0.038     -0.015      -0.020    -0.007
                                                                                                  (0.023)    (0.028)     (0.019)  (0.021)
Has lived there for less than 5 years                                                             -0.004     -0.013       0.022     0.000
                                                                                                  (0.029)    (0.026)     (0.022)  (0.018)
Is currently working                                                                               0.037      0.032       0.029     0.024
                                                                                                  (0.027)   (0.018)*     (0.018)  (0.015)
Time to go to the center                                                                          -0.001                 -0.001
                                                                                                  (0.002)                (0.001)
Distance to the center                                                                             0.007                  0.004
                                                                                                (0.003)***               (0.003)

Including patients enrolled before the beginning of the experiment                                  No          No           Yes         Yes

Observations                                                                                       593          965         882         1378
R-squared                                                                                         0.046        0.023       0.031        0.016

Panel B: Impact on likelihood to default predicted based on observables
                                                                                                        Predicted likelihood to default
                                                                                                   (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)
Treatment                                                                                         0.003       -0.002       0.006        0.000
                                                                                                 (0.005)     (0.002)      (0.004)     (0.002)

Panel A regression includes patients enrolled before the beginning of the experiment               No           No           Yes         Yes
Panel A regression includes time to the center and distance to the center                          Yes          No           Yes         No
Strata fixed effects                                                                               Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes

Observations                                                                                      1374         2210        1374         2210
R-squared                                                                                         0.109        0.078       0.083        0.103
Mean in control group                                                                             0.075        0.079       0.070        0.077

Notes: Clustered standard errors are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). The unit of
observation is a verified patient.
In Panel A, we regress control group verified patients' likelihood to default on patient-level observables. Col. 1 and 2 use the subsample of
verified patients enrolled after the beginning of the experiment and col. 3 and 4 use the full sample of verified patients, whether enrolled
before or after the beginning of the experiment. Col. 1 and 3 use all patient-level observables shown in Tables II and IV except for "Has
electricity," which is equal to 1 for all patients, and col. 2 and 4 drop variables observed for fewer than 90 percent of patients: time to go to
the center and distance to the center. Omitted categories are general caste, Hindu, cannot read or write, pre-primary education, and has
always lived in the area.
In Panel B, we predict the likelihood to default of all treatment and control group patients enrolled after the beginning of the experiment,
based on the coefficients estimated in Panel A, and using all specifications shown in Panel A in turn.
            Table A4: Responsiveness of OpAsha Visits to Patients' Treatment Adherence and Health Workers' Presence at the Center

                                                                                                           Visit by OpAsha
                                                                                   (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)
Patient adherence lagged                                                          0.041       0.031
                                                                                (0.027)      (0.023)
Patient adherence lagged * Treatment                                             -0.103      -0.079
                                                                               (0.048)**    (0.045)*
Health worker present at the center lagged                                                                 0.032       0.022
                                                                                                          (0.026)     (0.024)
Health worker present at the center lagged * Treatment                                                    -0.081      -0.066
                                                                                                         (0.044)*     (0.047)
Total time health worker was present at the center lagged                                                                           0.007       0.002
                                                                                                                                   (0.006)     (0.005)
Total time health worker was present at the center lagged * Treatment                                                              -0.004       0.000
                                                                                                                                   (0.006)     (0.006)

Strata fixed effects                                                               Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
Health worker controls                                                                         Yes                      Yes                      Yes

Observations                                                                     2692         2692        2776         2776        2773         2773
R-squared                                                                        0.024        0.032       0.023        0.033       0.022        0.032

Notes: Clustered standard errors are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). The unit of observation is
an observation day. All regressions control for the direct influence of Treatment. Health worker controls as in Table IV.
Patient adherence measures average adherence of all the center's patients. Individual patient adherence is equal to 1 if the patient came to the
center and took or picked up the pill, their relative came to the center and picked up the pill, or the patient or their relative was given the pill
during a home visit (in line with the definition of Adherence 2 in Table III). The total time the health worker was present at the center is computed
net of breaks and measured in number of hours. The lagged values of patient adherence, health worker presence at the center, and the total time
the health worker was present at the center are computed over the four previous observation days.
                                      Table A5: Impact on Quality of Reporting on Patient Detection, Baseline

Panel A: Impact on survey outcomes, individual level (sources: program data, patient surveys)
                           Patient verified         Survey not           Survey not           Survey not  Survey not        Survey not
                             (found and       completed: Patient completed: Patient completed: Health completed: Patient completed: Other
                              surveyed)        refused to answer        not found         worker warning   death             reasons

                                   (1)                 (2)                  (3)                   (4)                  (5)                  (6)
Treatment                        -0.025               0.007                0.031                -0.002               -0.005               -0.006
                                (0.030)              (0.014)              (0.028)              (0.012)              (0.011)              (0.006)
Strata fixed effects               Yes                 Yes                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes

Observations                     1251                 1251                 1251                 1251                 1251                 1251
R-squared                        0.027                0.026                0.013                0.055                0.020                0.030
Mean in control group            0.637                0.081                0.150                0.044                0.058                0.029

Panel B. Impact on the fraction of patients reported in the government registers which are verified (sources: government registers, patient surveys)
                           Likelihood to find
                             the patient in
                              government
                                registers
                                    (1)
Treatment                         -0.044
                                 (0.034)
Strata fixed effects                Yes

Observations                      950
R squared                        0.030
Mean in control group            0.676

Notes: Clustered standard errors are in parentheses (***, **, * indicate significance at 1, 5, and 10 percent, respectively). In Panel A, the unit of
observation is a patient reported in the program data. We use the subsample of verified patients enrolled before the beginning of the experiment.
Other notes as in Table VIII.
                                       Table A6: Changes in Impact on Treatment Interruption and Adherence over Time

Panel A: Impact on treatment interruption, or default (source: patient surveys)
                          Treatment complete            Treatment ongoing                Default                    Died               Outcome unknown
                              (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)        (7)              (8)        (9)        (10)
Treatment                   -0.001        -0.003        0.017         0.013       -0.023        -0.022     -0.003           -0.002      0.011      0.014
                           (0.031)       (0.030)       (0.031)       (0.031)    (0.010)**     (0.010)**   (0.004)          (0.004)    (0.012)    (0.011)
Treatment x time             0.003         0.000        0.002         0.003        0.006         0.008      0.002            0.002     -0.013     -0.013
                           (0.017)       (0.016)       (0.019)       (0.019)     (0.008)       (0.008)    (0.003)          (0.003)    (0.010)    (0.009)
Strata fixed effects          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes        Yes              Yes        Yes        Yes
Patient controls                            Yes                        Yes                        Yes                         Yes                   Yes

Observations                2802           2802         2802         2802         2802         2802        2802            2802       2802        2802
R squared                   0.088          0.107        0.101        0.111        0.020        0.033       0.014           0.025      0.055       0.106
Mean in control group       0.507          0.507        0.299        0.299        0.073        0.073       0.016           0.016      0.105       0.105

Panel B: Impact on treatment adherence (source: observation days)
                              Adherence 1:              Adherence 2:               Compliance with           Compliance with
                           Patient came to the    Adh. 1 + Relative came to     treatment verified (as    treatment verified (as
                           center and took or     the center and picked up         per adherence 1)          per adherence 2)
                            picked up the pill      the pill, or patient or
                                                    relative was given pill
                                                     during a home visit

                               (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)        (7)               (8)
Treatment                     0.197         0.186         0.118        0.113       0.034        0.036      0.021             0.022
                          (0.045)***     (0.040)***   (0.044)***   (0.037)***   (0.012)***   (0.012)***   (0.014)          (0.013)*
Treatment x time             -0.026        -0.028        -0.020       -0.025       0.004        0.002      0.003             0.001
                            (0.018)       (0.016)*      (0.019)      (0.017)      (0.007)      (0.007)    (0.008)           (0.008)
Strata fixed effects           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes               Yes
Patient controls                             Yes                        Yes                      Yes                          Yes

Observations                12844          12844        12810        12810        3041         3041        3043             3043
R-squared                   0.091          0.137        0.109        0.163        0.039        0.056       0.061            0.077
Mean in control group       0.542          0.542        0.692        0.692        0.046        0.046       0.078            0.078

Panel C: Impact on patient compliance (source: patient surveys)
                             Occasionally sent      Ever picked up medicine
                          someone else to get the for one week or more
                                   pills                 during one visit
                               (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)
Treatment                    -0.227         -0.226       -0.086       -0.086
                          (0.027)***     (0.027)***   (0.024)***   (0.023)***
Treatment x time              0.008          0.007        0.006        0.006
                            (0.013)        (0.013)      (0.015)      (0.013)
Strata fixed effects           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes
Patient controls                              Yes                       Yes

Observations                3352           3352         3295         3295
R-squared                   0.130          0.149        0.090        0.103
Mean in control group       0.367          0.367        0.283        0.283

Notes: We control for time lapsed between the beginning of the experiment and the patient's treatment start date in Panels A and C as well as Panel B, col.
5­8, and for time lapsed between the beginning of the experiment and the observation date, in Panel B, col. 1­4 (in hundreds of days). We interact
treatment with time. Other notes as in Table III.
Appendix B. Patients Enrolled Before the Beginning of the Experiment


  Table B1: Impact on Treatment Interruption and Adherence (Patients Enrolled Before the Beginning of the Experiment)

Panel A: Impact on treatment interruption, or default (source: patient surveys)
                          Treatment complete         Treatment ongoing                Default            Outcome unknown
                             (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)       (8)
Treatment                  -0.026       -0.024        0.046        0.044        -0.016      -0.017       -0.004    -0.002
                          (0.045)       (0.044)      (0.042)      (0.041)       (0.018)     (0.018)      (0.006)   (0.007)
Strata fixed effects         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes
Patient controls                          Yes                       Yes                       Yes                    Yes

Observations                 788          788          788          788          788          788          788          788
R squared                   0.027        0.068        0.031        0.070        0.030        0.053        0.047        0.077
Mean in control group       0.604        0.604        0.321        0.321        0.065        0.065        0.010        0.010

Panel B: Impact on treatment adherence (source: observation days)
                             Adherence 1:              Adherence 2:         Compliance with                Compliance with
                          Patient came to the     Adh. 1 + Relative came treatment verified (as         treatment verified (as
                          center and took or     to the center and picked   per adherence 1)               per adherence 2)
                           picked up the pill    up the pill, or patient or
                                                   relative was given pill
                                                    during a home visit

                             (1)        (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)
Treatment                   0.158      0.162          0.041        0.046       -0.009       -0.005        -0.026      -0.022
                         (0.038)*** (0.034)***       (0.038)      (0.035)      (0.010)      (0.008)     (0.011)**    (0.011)*
Strata fixed effects         Yes        Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes
Patient controls                        Yes                         Yes                       Yes                       Yes

Observations                1812         1812         1819         1819          634          634          636          636
R-squared                   0.086        0.136        0.114        0.176        0.027        0.103        0.079        0.137
Mean in control group       0.539        0.539        0.710        0.710        0.031        0.031        0.055        0.055

Panel C: Impact on patient compliance (source: patient surveys)
                            Occasionally sent     Ever picked up medicine
                         someone else to get the for one week or more
                                  pills                during one visit
                             (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)
Treatment                  -0.222     -0.215     -0.103     -0.107
                         (0.038)*** (0.038)*** (0.030)*** (0.029)***
Strata fixed effects         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Patient controls

Observations                 770          770          764          764
R-squared                   0.113        0.162        0.080        0.128
Mean in control group       0.414        0.414        0.291        0.291

Notes: We use the subsample of verified patients enrolled before the beginning of the experiment. In Panel A, we don't
report regression results for "Died" because this outcome takes value 0 for all patients in this subsample. Other notes as in
Table III.
                                         Table B2: Impact on Patients' Health (Patients Enrolled Before the Beginning of the Experiment)

Panel A: Impact on patients' physical health (source: patient surveys)
                                   Cured            Patient's ranking of their Index of no difficulty in     Index of health     Index of severe health      Index of increased
                                                              health            performing activities          symptoms                symptoms               health symptoms

                              (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)         (11)       (12)
Treatment                    0.037         0.042        -0.062       -0.032       -0.046        -0.052      -0.010      -0.004      -0.055       -0.054       -0.007     -0.011
                            (0.044)       (0.040)      (0.126)      (0.114)      (0.057)       (0.048)     (0.034)     (0.031)     (0.043)      (0.040)      (0.027)    (0.028)
Strata fixed effects          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes
Patient controls                            Yes                        Yes                        Yes                     Yes                      Yes                     Yes

Observations                  770          770           776          776          782           782         783         783         783          783         782         782
R-squared                    0.063        0.101         0.043        0.136        0.052         0.196       0.311       0.368       0.159        0.213       0.016       0.044
Mean in control group        0.406        0.406         7.178        7.178          --            --          --          --          --           --          --          --

Panel B: Impact on patients' emotional health (source: patient surveys)
                          Thinks that household Has a project to improve          Index of emotional       Overall somewhat or   Overall satisfaction with
                         situation will improve in    their life and their             distress                very happy                their life
                                 the future              family's life

                               (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)         (7)         (8)        (9)          (10)
Treatment                    -0.031        -0.022       -0.019       -0.018       -0.043        -0.045      -0.034      -0.033     -0.282        -0.241
                            (0.024)       (0.024)      (0.020)      (0.020)      (0.041)       (0.039)     (0.022)     (0.021)   (0.125)**     (0.114)**
Strata fixed effects           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes
Patient controls                             Yes                       Yes                        Yes                     Yes                      Yes

Observations                  686          686           772          772          780           780         774         774         775          775
R-squared                    0.057        0.108         0.145        0.182        0.081         0.128       0.051       0.079       0.139        0.209
Mean in control group        0.864        0.864         0.144        0.144          --            --        0.947       0.947       7.252        7.252

Notes : We use the subsample of verified patients enrolled before the beginning of the experiment. Other notes as in Table V.
Table B3: Impact on Health Worker Activities as Reported by Patients (Patients Enrolled Before the Beginning of the Experiment)

                          Health worker gives        Frequency of            Health worker          Health worker
                          advice related to TB     interactions with        supports patient      sometimes or often
                                                     health worker          during treatment        delivers pills at
                                                                                                    patient's home
                                                            (source: patient surveys)
                            (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)
Treatment                 -0.012      -0.013      -0.027       -0.008      -0.017       -0.011     0.076      0.073
                          (0.023)     (0.023)     (0.100)      (0.101)     (0.036)      (0.034)   (0.043)*   (0.042)*
Strata fixed effects        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes
Patient controls                        Yes                      Yes                      Yes                   Yes

Observations               759         759         730          730         761          761       761         761
R-squared                 0.084       0.114       0.075        0.096       0.421        0.444     0.340       0.363
Mean in control group     0.915       0.915       1.403        1.403       0.227        0.227     0.448       0.448

Notes: We use the subsample of verified patients enrolled before the beginning of the experiment. Other notes as in
Table VI.
Table B4: Impact on Quality of Reporting on Default (Patients Enrolled Before the Beginning of the Experiment)

                                           Actual likelihood to default     Default as reported in the
                                                                              government registers
                                            (source: patient surveys)     (source: government registers)
                                               (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)
Treatment                                    -0.016           -0.017          0.008           0.007
                                             (0.018)          (0.018)        (0.011)         (0.010)
Strata fixed effects                           Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes
Patient controls                                                Yes                            Yes

Observations                                  788              788             643              643
R-squared                                    0.030            0.053           0.011            0.053
Mean in control group                        0.065            0.065           0.023            0.023

Test: Treatment = Treatment(1) (or (2))
  P-value                                      --               --            0.169            0.156
  F-statistic                                  --               --            1.93             2.06

Notes: We use the subsample of verified patients enrolled before the beginning of the experiment. Other
notes as in Table VII.
Table B5: Impact on Patients' Satisfaction with Healthcare Received (Patients Enrolled Before the Beginning of the Experiment)

                                        Satisfied with their     Would refer a TB
                                      interaction with their   suspect to an OpAsha
                                          health worker           health worker
                                                 (source: patient surveys)
                                         (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)
Treatment                               0.003        0.005       -0.020      -0.019
                                       (0.014)      (0.014)     (0.024)      (0.022)
Strata fixed effects                     Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
Patient controls                                      Yes                      Yes

Observations                             752         752          778         778
R-squared                               0.032       0.060        0.393       0.419
Mean in control group                   0.965       0.965        0.227       0.227

Notes: We use the subsample of verified patients enrolled before the beginning of
the experiment. Other notes as in Table IX.
Table B6: Changes in Impact on Treatment Interruption and Adherence over Time (Patients Enrolled Before the Beginning of the Experiment)

Panel A: Impact on treatment interruption, or default (source: patient surveys)
                          Treatment complete            Treatment ongoing                Default            Outcome unknown
                             (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)        (7)         (8)
Treatment                  0.018         0.018          -0.019       -0.014        0.004        -0.002     -0.004      -0.002
                          (0.072)       (0.070)        (0.057)      (0.055)       (0.040)      (0.040)     (0.014)    (0.014)
Treatment x time           0.059         0.057          -0.086       -0.078        0.027         0.021      0.000      0.000
                          (0.079)       (0.082)        (0.068)      (0.070)       (0.043)      (0.046)     (0.015)    (0.014)
Strata fixed effects         Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes
Patient controls                           Yes                         Yes                        Yes                    Yes

Observations                  788          788          788           788           788          788         788          788
R squared                    0.027        0.069        0.034         0.072         0.033        0.056       0.053        0.083
Mean in control group        0.604        0.604        0.321         0.321         0.065        0.065       0.010        0.010

Panel B: Impact on treatment adherence (source: observation days)
                              Adherence 1:              Adherence 2:                 Compliance with          Compliance with
                           Patient came to the    Adh. 1 + Relative came to       treatment verified (as   treatment verified (as
                           center and took or     the center and picked up           per adherence 1)         per adherence 2)
                            picked up the pill      the pill, or patient or
                                                    relative was given pill
                                                     during a home visit

                              (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)         (7)          (8)
Treatment                    0.210        0.203        0.118         0.121        -0.026        -0.021      -0.059       -0.053
                          (0.057)***   (0.055)***    (0.057)**     (0.051)**      (0.027)       (0.026)    (0.034)*      (0.032)
Treatment x time            -0.058       -0.048        -0.084        -0.081       -0.026        -0.023      -0.050       -0.046
                            (0.039)      (0.037)     (0.037)**     (0.033)**      (0.026)       (0.027)     (0.044)      (0.044)
Strata fixed effects          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
Patient controls                           Yes                         Yes                        Yes                      Yes

Observations                 1812         1812         1819          1819           634          634         636          636
R-squared                    0.099        0.148        0.124         0.184         0.045        0.117       0.111        0.164
Mean in control group        0.539        0.539        0.710         0.710         0.031        0.031       0.055        0.055

Panel C: Impact on patient compliance (source: patient surveys)
                              Occasionally sent     Ever picked up medicine
                          someone else to get the for one week or more
                                    pills                during one visit
                              (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)
Treatment                   -0.297        -0.279       -0.160       -0.156
                          (0.069)*** (0.064)*** (0.065)**         (0.065)**
Treatment x time            -0.101        -0.086       -0.074       -0.065
                            (0.084)       (0.083)     (0.088)      (0.084)
Strata fixed effects          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
Patient controls                            Yes                       Yes

Observations                  770          770          764           764
R-squared                    0.115        0.165        0.083         0.129
Mean in control group        0.414        0.414        0.291         0.291

Notes: We use the subsample of verified patients enrolled before the beginning of the experiment. Other notes as in Table A6.
Appendix C. Wild Cluster Bootstrap Standard Errors


                  Table C1: Health Worker Summary Statistics (Wild Cluster Bootstrap)

                                                                        Control    Treatment   P-value
                                                                         group       group   Treatment
                                                                         mean        mean     = Control
                                                                           (1)         (2)       (3)
Panel A. Health workers' characteristics
Male                                                                     0.794        0.710        0.394
Age                                                                       33.4         30.4        0.081
Caste
   General caste                                                         0.265        0.516        0.051
   Other Backward Class                                                  0.382        0.323        0.700
   Scheduled Caste                                                       0.118        0.097        0.828
   Scheduled Tribe                                                       0.206        0.032        0.031
   Minority                                                              0.029        0.032        0.920
Religion
   Hindu                                                                 0.765        0.903        0.128
   Muslim                                                                0.176        0.097        0.374
   Other                                                                 0.059        0.000        0.070
Highest education level achieved
   Class 12 and below                                                    0.688        0.633        0.682
   Tertiary                                                              0.281        0.333        0.663
   Other diploma/non-formal education                                    0.031        0.033        1.000
Work experience
   Any previous work experience                                          0.853        0.645        0.036
   Number of years of work experience                                     9.2          8.7         0.753
   Any previous working in a job related to TB                           0.147        0.161        0.902
   Any previous experience in the social/NGO sector                      0.206        0.138        0.536
   Any other income generating activity, in addition to OpASHA           0.088        0.129        0.742
Lives in one of the areas she covers                                     0.545        0.742        0.092
Household size                                                            5.2          6.2         0.262
Lives alone                                                              0.000        0.067        0.188
Assets
   Has electricty                                                        1.000        0.933        0.182
   Has tap water                                                         0.594        0.400        0.102
   Has a television                                                      0.848        0.933        0.218
   Has a refrigerator                                                    0.545        0.467        0.530
   Rents an apartment or house to a third party                          0.118        0.207        0.210
   Owns her house                                                        0.559        0.581        0.934
Exposure to technology
   Knows how to use a computer                                           0.559        0.516        0.731
   Knows how to use the internet                                         0.424        0.433        0.949
   Has an email account                                                  0.412        0.258        0.177
   Has a social networking account                                       0.294        0.258        0.660
Days spent in the experiment                                             349.1        333.7        0.659

Panel B. OpASHA center-wise data sheets
Reported baseline number of detections per month per area                2.965        2.393        0.054
Reported baseline fraction of defaults per month per area                0.029        0.039        0.426

Panel C. Observation days
Center open                                                              0.980        0.989        0.515
Total time center was open                                               307.4        311.8        0.961
Health worker present at the center                                      0.769        0.810        0.519
Total time health worker was present at the center, net of breaks        110.9        106.0        0.710
Visit by OpAsha                                                          0.067        0.043        0.333
Adherence 1: Patient came to center and took or picked up pill           0.520        0.517        0.956
Adherence 2: Adh. 1 + Relative came to the center and picked up          0.761        0.758        0.837
  the pill, or patient or relative was given pill during a home visit

Notes : We use the wild cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Cameron, Colin, Gelbach, and Miller
(2008) to allow for correlation of the error terms at the level of the cluster and report the corresponding
p-value. We use 5,000 bootstrap iterations. Other notes as in Table I.
           Table C2: Patient Summary Statistics (Wild Cluster Bootstrap)

                                                Control   Treatment   P-value
                                              group mean group mean Treatment
                                                                     = Control
                                                   (1)        (2)       (3)
Male                                             0.535      0.576      0.562
Age                                               34.0       34.3      0.800
Caste
   Does not know                                  0.040        0.026         0.568
   General caste                                  0.160        0.165         0.628
   Other Backward Class                           0.376        0.352         0.691
   Scheduled Caste                                0.229        0.297         0.128
   Scheduled Tribe                                0.118        0.103         0.210
   Minority                                       0.078        0.058         0.590
Religion
   Hindu                                          0.869        0.903         0.626
   Muslim                                         0.112        0.081         0.696
   Other                                          0.019        0.016         0.577
Literacy
   Cannot read or write                           0.271        0.301         0.469
   Can read but not write                         0.021        0.026         0.930
   Can read and write                             0.708        0.673         0.424
Education
   Pre-primary                                    0.217        0.234         0.756
   Primary                                        0.375        0.390         0.568
   Secondary                                      0.367        0.334         0.526
   Undergraduate and more                         0.042        0.042         0.926
Household size                                     5.6          5.4          0.191
Lives alone                                       0.019        0.016         0.566
Assets
   Has electricty                                 0.968        0.935         0.042
   Has tap water                                  0.520        0.418         0.524
   Has a television                               0.826        0.832         0.536
   Has a refrigerator                             0.276        0.230         0.424
   Owns her house                                 0.716        0.738         0.985
Migration status
   Has always lived in the area                   0.570        0.542         0.365
   Has lived there for more than 6 years          0.209        0.258         0.050
   Has lived there for less than 5 years          0.221        0.200         0.490
Is currently working                              0.381        0.406         0.801
Time to go to the center (in minutes)              11.6         12.4         0.844
Distance to the center (in miles)                   3.3          3.0         0.732

Notes : We use the wild cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Cameron, Colin,
Gelbach, and Miller (2008) to allow for correlation of the error terms at the level of
the cluster and report the corresponding p-value. We use 5,000 bootstrap
iterations. Other notes as in Table II.
                                    Table C3: Impact on Treatment Interruption and Adherence (Wild Cluster Bootstrap)

Panel A: Impact on treatment interruption, or default (source: patient surveys)
                          Treatment complete            Treatment ongoing                Default                     Died           Outcome unknown
                             (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)             (8)     (9)       (10)
Treatment                  -0.003        -0.007         0.022        0.020         -0.018       -0.015      -0.001          0.000   0.000      0.003
P-value                    0.957         0.836         0.490         0.535         0.021        0.045       0.808           0.979   1.000      0.802
Strata fixed effects         Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes     Yes        Yes
Patient controls                           Yes                        Yes                         Yes                        Yes                Yes

Observations                2802          2802         2802          2802          2802         2802        2802            2802    2802         2802
Mean in control group       0.507         0.507        0.299         0.299         0.073        0.073       0.016           0.016   0.105        0.105
Number replications         5000          5000         5000          5000          5000         5000        5000            5000    5000         5000

Panel B: Impact on treatment adherence (source: observation days)
                              Adherence 1:              Adherence 2:                 Compliance with          Compliance with
                          Patient came to the     Adh. 1 + Relative came to       treatment verified (as   treatment verified (as
                           center and took or     the center and picked up           per adherence 1)         per adherence 2)
                            picked up the pill      the pill, or patient or
                                                    relative was given pill
                                                     during a home visit

                             (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)             (8)
Treatment                   0.139         0.122        0.073         0.056         0.039        0.038       0.024           0.023
P-value                     0.000         0.000        0.035         0.044         0.002        0.000       0.145           0.154
Strata fixed effects         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes
Patient controls                           Yes                        Yes                        Yes                         Yes

Observations                12844         12844        12810        12810          3041         3041        3043            3043
Mean in control group       0.542         0.542        0.692        0.692          0.046        0.046       0.078           0.078
Number replications         5000          5000         5000         5000           5000         5000        5000            5000

Panel C: Impact on patient compliance (source: patient surveys)
                              Occasionally sent     Ever picked up medicine
                         someone else to get the for one week or more
                                    pills                during one visit
                              (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)
Treatment                   -0.218        -0.218      -0.079        -0.078
P-value                      0.000         0.000       0.002         0.002
Strata fixed effects          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
Patient controls                            Yes                       Yes

Observations                3352          3352         3295          3295
Mean in control group       0.367         0.367        0.283         0.283
Number replications         5000          5000         5000          5000

Notes: We use the wild cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Cameron, Colin, Gelbach, and Miller (2008) to allow for correlation of the error terms at
the level of the cluster and report the corresponding p-value. We use 5,000 bootstrap iterations. Other notes as in Table III.
               Table C4: Impact on Detections and Patient Selection (Wild Cluster Bootstrap)

Panel A: Impact on number of verified detections (source: program data cross-checked with patient surveys)
                                            Verified detections per
                                               center per month
                                                (1)          (2)
Treatment                                     -0.103       -0.159
P-value                                       0.522        0.527
Strata fixed effects                            Yes          Yes
Baseline detection                              Yes          Yes
Health worker controls                                       Yes

Observations                                  1637         1637
Mean in control group                         1.762        1.762
Number replications                            5000         5000

Panel B: Impact on patient selection (patients enrolled after the beginning of the experiment)
                                              Control     Treatment      P-value Number of
                                               group         group     Treatment       obs.
                                               mean          mean       = Control
                                                  (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)
Male                                            0.586        0.576        0.463        2598
Age                                              34.4         33.1        0.171        2597
Caste
   Does not know                                0.048        0.053        0.879        2602
   General caste                                0.181        0.179        0.735        2602
   Other Backward Class                         0.357        0.352        1.000        2602
   Scheduled Caste                              0.231        0.267        0.200        2602
   Scheduled Tribe                              0.078        0.070        0.370        2602
   Minority                                     0.104        0.079        0.542        2602
Religion
   Hindu                                        0.832        0.870        0.376        2594
   Muslim                                       0.147        0.117        0.498        2594
   Other                                        0.021        0.013        0.257        2594
Literacy
   Cannot read or write                         0.304        0.294        0.346        2602
   Can read but not write                       0.043        0.044        0.637        2602
   Can read and write                           0.653        0.662        0.510        2602
Education
   Pre-primary                                  0.247        0.226        0.109        2593
   Primary                                      0.371        0.410        0.092        2593
   Secondary                                    0.333        0.325        0.910        2593
   Undergraduate and more                       0.049        0.039        0.278        2593
Household size                                    5.5          5.4        0.234        2593
Lives alone                                     0.025        0.017        0.109        2602
Assets
   Has electricty                               0.970        0.966        0.726        2532
   Has tap water                                0.562        0.544        0.900        2543
   Has a television                             0.819        0.822        0.700        2460
   Has a refrigerator                           0.264        0.258        0.804        2459
   Owns her house                               0.689        0.679        0.730        2538
Migration Status
   Has always lived in the area                 0.507        0.457        0.267        2600
   Has lived there for more than 6 years        0.227        0.269        0.118        2600
   Has lived there for less than 5 years        0.266        0.274        0.849        2600
Is currently working                            0.316        0.321        0.449        2388
Time to go to the center (in minutes)            11.0         11.8        0.314        1812
Distance to the center (in miles)                 2.9          3.0        0.652        1998

Notes: We use the wild cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Cameron, Colin, Gelbach, and Miller (2008)
to allow for correlation of the error terms at the level of the cluster and report the corresponding p-value.
We use 5,000 bootstrap iterations. Other notes as in Table IV.
                                                            Table C5: Impact on Patients' Health (Wild Cluster Bootstrap)

Panel A: Impact on patients' physical health (source: patient surveys)
                                   Cured            Patients' ranking of their Index of no difficulty in     Index of health       Index of severe health      Index of increased
                                                              health            performing activities          symptoms                  symptoms               health symptoms

                               (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)         (10)         (11)         (12)
Treatment                    0.015        0.012        0.012         -0.010       -0.022       -0.038      -0.008      0.001        -0.035       -0.026       -0.013       -0.011
P-value                      0.568        0.645        0.904         0.912        0.484        0.235       0.840       0.976        0.228        0.320        0.528        0.588
Strata fixed effects          Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Patient controls                           Yes                         Yes                       Yes                    Yes                        Yes                       Yes

Observations                 2395         2395          2430         2430          2458         2458        2459        2459         2459         2459         2458         2458
Mean in control group        0.400        0.400         7.431        7.431          --           --          --          --           --           --           --           --
Number replications          5000         5000          5000         5000          5000         5000        5000        5000         5000         5000         5000         5000

Panel B: Impact on patients' emotional health (source: patient surveys)
                           Thinks that household Has a project to improve         Index of emotional       Overall somewhat or    Overall satisfaction with
                          situation will improve in    their life and their            distress                very happy                 their life
                                  the future               family's life

                               (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)         (10)
Treatment                    0.000        0.002        -0.017        -0.017       0.010        0.010       -0.019      -0.020       -0.082       -0.086
P-value                      0.996        0.922        0.283         0.287        0.747        0.733       0.195       0.174        0.368        0.344
Strata fixed effects          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Patient controls                           Yes                         Yes                      Yes                      Yes                       Yes

Observations                 2077         2077          2375         2375          2454         2454        2435        2435         2426         2426
Mean in control group        0.890        0.890         0.120        0.120          --           --         0.942       0.942        7.259        7.259
Number replications          5000         5000          5000         5000          5000         5000        5000        5000         5000         5000

Notes : We use the wild cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Cameron, Colin, Gelbach, and Miller (2008) to allow for correlation of the error terms at the level of the cluster
and report the corresponding p-value. We use 5,000 bootstrap iterations. Other notes as in Table V.
                                                                 Table C6: Impact on Health Worker Effort (Wild Cluster Bootstrap)


Panel A: Impact on health worker attendance
                               Center open          Total time center was Health worker present       Total time health        Visit by OpAsha           Center open         Health worker present
                                                             open               at the center       worker was present at                                                        at the center
                                                                                                      the center, net of
                                                                                                            breaks
                                                                         (source: observation days)                                                            (source: random spot checks)
                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)        (9)         (10)        (11)           (12)       (13)          (14)
Treatment                     0.000       0.001       -10.7        9.2       0.019        0.045        20.2        22.3       0.033       0.030       0.001          0.005      0.049         0.071
P-value                       0.794       0.784       0.448       0.605      0.469        0.110      0.033        0.035       0.011       0.028       0.974          0.850      0.322         0.025
Strata fixed effects           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes
Health worker controls                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes                        Yes                      Yes

Observations                  2,749       2,749       2,414        2,414       3,063       3,063       2,987       2,987      2,855       2,855        916           916         916           916
Mean in Control Group         0.998       0.998       338.9        338.9       0.834       0.834       117.3       117.3      0.054       0.054       0.945         0.945       0.598         0.598
Number replications           5000        5000        5000         5000        5000        5000        5000        5000       5000        5000        5000          5000        5000          5000

Panel B: Impact on health worker activities
                            # home visits as % of    Intensity of default    Intensity of detection   Health worker gives       Frequency of            Health worker            Health worker
                           all patients scheduled      activities (index)       activities (index)    advice related to TB    interactions with        supports patient        sometimes or often
                            to come on that day                                                                                 health worker          during treatment          delivers pills at
                                                                                                                                                                                 patient's home
                            (source: observation             (source: health worker surveys)                                           (source: patient surveys)
                                    days)
                               (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)        (11)          (12)       (13)           (14)
Treatment                     0.037       0.049      0.031         -0.103      -0.065      -0.071     0.014       0.014       -0.051      -0.045      -0.003        -0.004     0.073          0.087
P-value                       0.123       0.150      0.662         0.354       0.281       0.352      0.473       0.456       0.483       0.515       0.937         0.911      0.114          0.030
Strata fixed effects           Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes            Yes
Health worker controls                     Yes                       Yes                     Yes
Baseline control                                       Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
Patient controls                                                                                                    Yes                    Yes                       Yes                       Yes

Observations                  2341        2341         134           134         134            134    3280        3280       3193        3193        3293          3293        3295          3295
Mean in control group         0.115       0.115         --            --          --             --    0.894       0.894      1.749       1.749       0.213         0.213       0.454         0.454
Number replications           5000        5000        5000          5000        5000           5000    5000        5000       5000        5000        5000          5000        5000          5000

Notes: We use the wild cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Cameron, Colin, Gelbach, and Miller (2008) to allow for correlation of the error terms at the level of the cluster and report the
corresponding p-value. We use 5,000 bootstrap iterations. Other notes as in Table VI.
                                Table C7: Impact on Quality of Reporting on Default (Wild Cluster Bootstrap)

                                            Actual likelihood to default       Defaults as reported in the        Default as reported in the
                                                                                     program data                   government registers
                                              (source: patient surveys)         (source: program data)         (source: government registers)
                                                 (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)                (5)            (6)
Treatment                                      -0.018           -0.015           0.000          0.001              0.000           0.000
P-value                                        0.021            0.045           0.992           0.936              0.969          0.946
Strata fixed effects                             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes
Patient controls                                                  Yes                                                               Yes
Baseline outcome                                                                  Yes              Yes
Health worker controls                                                                             Yes

Observations                                   2802             2802             1832             1832             2913             2913
Mean in control group                          0.073            0.073            0.045            0.045            0.021            0.021
Number replications                            5000             5000             5000             5000             5000             5000

Test: Treatment = Treatment(1) (or (2))
  P-value                                        --               --             0.159            0.168            0.109            0.142
  F-statistic                                    --               --

Notes: We use the wild cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Cameron, Colin, Gelbach, and Miller (2008) to allow for correlation of the
error terms at the level of the cluster and report the corresponding p-value. We use 5,000 bootstrap iterations. Unlike in Table VII, we cannot
compare treatment effects on actual likelihood to default and on default as reported in the program data and in the goverment registers
using a seemingly unrelated regressions framework as the covariance matrix stored by the cgmwildboot Stata command cannot be used in
any post-estimation inference (see the Stata help file for cgmwildboot). Other notes as in Table VII.
                                      Table C8: Impact on Quality of Reporting on Patient Detection (Wild Cluster Bootstrap)

Panel A: Impact on number of verified and reported detections
                                                    Verified detections                      Reported detections
                                          (source: program data cross-checked
                                                                                            (source: program data)
                                                  with patient surveys)
                                                 (1)                   (2)                  (3)                  (4)
Treatment                                      -0.103                -0.159               -0.744               -0.795
P-value                                        0.522                 0.527                0.012                0.019
Strata fixed effects                             Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Baseline outcome                                 Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Health worker controls                                                 Yes                                       Yes

Observations                                    1637                 1637                 1832                 1832
Mean in control group                           1.762                1.762                3.730                3.730
Number replications                              5000                 5000                5000                 5000

Test: Treatment = Treatment(1) (or (2))
  P-value                                         --                   --                 0.006                0.042
  F-statistic                                     --                   --

Panel B: Impact on survey outcomes, individual level (sources: program data, patient surveys)
                                          Patient verified          Survey not           Survey not      Survey not        Survey not        Survey not
                                            (found and         completed: Patient completed: Patient completed: Health completed: Patient completed: Other
                                             surveyed)         refused to answer        not found     worker warning        death             reasons

                                                 (1)                   (2)                  (3)                  (4)                  (5)                (6)
Treatment                                       0.058                -0.020               -0.011               -0.015               -0.004             -0.008
P-value                                         0.043                0.010                0.554                0.189                0.621              0.493
Strata fixed effects                             Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                Yes

Observations                                    3647                 3647                 3647                 3647                 3647               3647
Mean in control group                           0.685                0.068                0.106                0.059                0.031              0.049
Number replications                             5000                 5000                 5000                 5000                 5000               5000

Panel C. Impact on the fraction of patients reported in the government registers which are verified (sources: government registers, patient surveys)
                                          Fraction of verified
                                                patients
                                                   (1)
Treatment                                        0.075
P-value                                          0.020
Strata fixed effects                              Yes

Observations                                    2998
Mean in control group                           0.697
Number replications                              5000

Notes: We use the wild cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Cameron, Colin, Gelbach, and Miller (2008) to allow for correlation of the error terms at the level
of the cluster and report the corresponding p-value. We use 5,000 bootstrap iterations. Unlike in Table VIII, we cannot compare treatment effects on the number of
verified detections and reported detections using a seemingly unrelated regressions framework as the covariance matrix stored by the cgmwildboot Stata
command cannot be used in any post-estimation inference (see the Stata help file for cgmwildboot). Other notes as in Table VIII.
                                                       Table C9: Sustainability of the Intervention (Wild Cluster Bootstrap)

Panel A: Impact on health worker salary and satisfaction
                            Monthly compensation         Monthly salary         # of challenges faced in # of challenges faced in   Excessive workload        Standardized job
                            for detection activities                               getting a patient to     detecting patients                                satisfaction index
                                                                                  complete treatment
                                                                                         course
                                     (source: salary data from OpAsha)                                           (source: health worker surveys)
                                 (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)         (10)        (11)         (12)
Treatment                      -324.3        -224.9       -428.5     -341.1       -0.220       -0.238      0.013        -0.167      -0.105       -0.199      0.123        0.140
P-value                         0.009         0.074        0.019      0.148       0.211        0.255       0.941        0.465       0.077        0.005       0.231        0.302
Strata fixed effects             Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes
Health worker controls                         Yes                     Yes                       Yes                      Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Baseline control                                                                    Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes

Observations                    693         693          936          936          121          121          117         117         118          118         132         132
Mean in control group           1321        1321         5791         5791        3.309        3.309        2.746       2.746       0.222        0.222         --          --
Number replications             5000        5000         5000         5000        5000         5000         5000        5000        5000         5000         5000        5000

Panel B: Impact on patients' satisfaction with healthcare received
                                Satisfied with their       Would refer a TB     # of challenges faced by
                              interaction with their     suspect to an OpAsha     patients to complete
                                  health worker              health worker          treatment course
                                          (source: patient surveys)             (source: health worker
                                                                                         surveys)
                                 (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)
Treatment                      0.005        0.003       0.034        0.033         -0.053       -0.212
P-value                        0.704        0.796       0.164        0.169         0.693        0.435
Strata fixed effects            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes
Patient controls                             Yes                      Yes
Health worker controls                                                                          Yes
Baseline control                                                                    Yes         Yes

Observations                   2378         2378         2441        2441          119          119
Mean in control group          0.957        0.957        0.178       0.178        2.500        2.500
Number replications            5000         5000         5000        5000         5000         5000

Panel C. Technology presence over time (source: observation days)
                             Center has biometric      Share of all devices       Share of all devices
                                  equipment            (fingerprint reader,       (fingerprint reader,
                                                         laptop, USB key)           laptop, USB key)
                                                             present             present and working
                                 (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
# weeks since beginning        -0.002       -0.002      -0.006       -0.006       -0.006       -0.006
  of the experiment            0.088        0.152       0.001        0.001        0.001        0.000
Center fixed effects             Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Health worker controls                        Yes                      Yes                       Yes

Observations                   1414         1414         1403        1403         1398         1398
Mean in first month            0.921        0.921        0.909       0.909        0.899        0.899
Number replications            5000         5000         5000        5000         5000         5000

Notes: We use the wild cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Cameron, Colin, Gelbach, and Miller (2008) to allow for correlation of the error terms at the level of the cluster
and report the corresponding p-value. We use 5,000 bootstrap iterations. Other notes as in Table IX.
Appendix D. Pairs Cluster Bootstrap Standard Errors


                  Table D1: Health Worker Summary Statistics (Pairs Cluster Bootstrap)

                                                                        Control   Treatment   P-value
                                                                         group      group   Treatment
                                                                         mean       mean     = Control
                                                                           (1)        (2)       (3)
Panel A. Health workers' characteristics
Male                                                                    0.794       0.710      0.455
Age                                                                      33.4        30.4      0.108
Caste
   General caste                                                        0.265       0.516      0.069
   Other Backward Class                                                 0.382       0.323      0.823
   Scheduled Caste                                                      0.118       0.097      0.976
   Scheduled Tribe                                                      0.206       0.032      0.048
   Minority                                                             0.029       0.032      1.108
Religion
   Hindu                                                                0.765       0.903      0.163
   Muslim                                                               0.176       0.097      0.464
   Other                                                                0.059       0.000      0.157
Highest education level achieved
   Class 12 and below                                                   0.688       0.633      0.784
   Tertiary                                                             0.281       0.333      0.778
   Other diploma/non-formal education                                   0.031       0.033      1.143
Work experience
   Any previous work experience                                         0.853       0.645      0.049
   Number of years of work experience                                    9.2         8.7       0.891
   Any previous working in a job related to TB                          0.147       0.161      1.051
   Any previous experience in the social/NGO sector                     0.206       0.138      0.614
   Any other income generating activity, in addition to OpASHA          0.088       0.129      0.874
Lives in one of the areas she covers                                    0.545       0.742      0.103
Household size                                                           5.2         6.2       0.327
Lives alone                                                             0.000       0.067      0.130
Assets
   Has electricty                                                       1.000       0.933      0.112
   Has tap water                                                        0.594       0.400      0.127
   Has a television                                                     0.848       0.933      0.257
   Has a refrigerator                                                   0.545       0.467      0.613
   Rents an apartment or house to a third party                         0.118       0.207      0.272
   Owns her house                                                       0.559       0.581      1.106
Exposure to technology
   Knows how to use a computer                                          0.559       0.516      0.839
   Knows how to use the internet                                        0.424       0.433      1.127
   Has an email account                                                 0.412       0.258      0.195
   Has a social networking account                                      0.294       0.258      0.752
Days spent in the experiment                                            349.1       333.7      0.772

Panel B. OpASHA center-wise data sheets
Reported baseline number of detections per month per area               2.965       2.393      0.075
Reported baseline fraction of defaults per month per area               0.029       0.039      0.513

Panel C. Observation days
Center open                                                             0.980       0.989      0.611
Total time center was open                                              307.4       311.8      1.117
Health worker present at the center                                     0.769       0.810      0.618
Total time health worker was present at the center, net of breaks       110.9       106.0      0.819
Visit by OpAsha                                                         0.067       0.043      0.399
Adherence 1: Patient came to center and took or picked up pill          0.520       0.517      1.124
Adherence 2: Adh. 1 + Relative came to the center and picked up         0.761       0.758      0.982
  the pill, or patient or relative was given pill during a home visit

Notes : We use the pairs cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Esarey and Menger (2019) to allow for
correlation of the error terms at the level of the cluster and report the corresponding p-value. We use
5,000 bootstrap iterations. Other notes as in Table I.
          Table D2: Patient Summary Statistics (Pairs Cluster Bootstrap)

                                                Control   Treatment   P-value
                                              group mean group mean Treatment
                                                                     = Control
                                                   (1)        (2)       (3)
Male                                             0.535      0.576      0.640
Age                                               34.0       34.3      0.940
Caste
   Does not know                                 0.040         0.026         0.642
   General caste                                 0.160         0.165         0.717
   Other Backward Class                          0.376         0.352         0.768
   Scheduled Caste                               0.229         0.297         0.142
   Scheduled Tribe                               0.118         0.103         0.256
   Minority                                      0.078         0.058         0.703
Religion
   Hindu                                         0.869         0.903         0.689
   Muslim                                        0.112         0.081         0.774
   Other                                         0.019         0.016         0.658
Literacy
   Cannot read or write                          0.271         0.301         0.542
   Can read but not write                        0.021         0.026         1.034
   Can read and write                            0.708         0.673         0.494
Education
   Pre-primary                                   0.217         0.234         0.888
   Primary                                       0.375         0.390         0.647
   Secondary                                     0.367         0.334         0.612
   Undergraduate and more                        0.042         0.042         1.061
Household size                                    5.6           5.4          0.245
Lives alone                                      0.019         0.016         0.649
Assets
   Has electricty                                0.968         0.935         0.151
   Has tap water                                 0.520         0.418         0.638
   Has a television                              0.826         0.832         0.602
   Has a refrigerator                            0.276         0.230         0.551
   Owns her house                                0.716         0.738         1.120
Migration status
   Has always lived in the area                  0.570         0.542         0.426
   Has lived there for more than 6 years         0.209         0.258         0.066
   Has lived there for less than 5 years         0.221         0.200         0.555
Is currently working                             0.381         0.406         0.929
Time to go to the center (in minutes)             11.6          12.4         0.983
Distance to the center (in miles)                  3.3           3.0         0.842

Notes : We use the pairs cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Esarey and
Menger (2019) to allow for correlation of the error terms at the level of the cluster
and report the corresponding p-value. We use 5,000 bootstrap iterations. Other
notes as in Table II.
                                    Table D3: Impact on Treatment Interruption and Adherence (Pairs Cluster Bootstrap)

Panel A: Impact on treatment interruption, or default (source: patient surveys)
                          Treatment complete            Treatment ongoing                Default                     Died           Outcome unknown
                             (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)             (8)     (9)       (10)
Treatment                  -0.003        -0.007         0.022        0.020         -0.018       -0.015      -0.001          0.000   0.000      0.003
P-value                    0.948         0.846         0.510         0.560         0.037        0.068       0.815           0.988   0.993      0.807
Strata fixed effects         Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes     Yes        Yes
Patient controls                           Yes                        Yes                         Yes                        Yes                Yes

Observations                2802          2802         2802          2802          2802         2802        2802            2802    2802          2802
Mean in control group       0.507         0.507        0.299         0.299         0.073        0.073       0.016           0.016   0.105         0.105
Number replications         5000          5000         5000          5000          5000         5000        5000            5000    5000          5000

Panel B: Impact on treatment adherence (source: observation days)
                              Adherence 1:              Adherence 2:                 Compliance with          Compliance with
                          Patient came to the     Adh. 1 + Relative came to       treatment verified (as   treatment verified (as
                           center and took or     the center and picked up           per adherence 1)         per adherence 2)
                            picked up the pill      the pill, or patient or
                                                    relative was given pill
                                                     during a home visit

                             (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)             (8)
Treatment                   0.139         0.122        0.073         0.056         0.039        0.038       0.024           0.023
P-value                     0.000         0.000        0.052         0.062         0.002        0.002       0.145           0.159
Strata fixed effects         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes
Patient controls                           Yes                        Yes                        Yes                         Yes

Observations                12844         12844        12810        12810          3041         3041        3043            3043
Mean in control group       0.542         0.542        0.692        0.692          0.046        0.046       0.078           0.078
Number replications         5000          5000         5000         5000           5000         5000        5000            5000

Panel C: Impact on patient compliance (source: patient surveys)
                              Occasionally sent     Ever picked up medicine
                         someone else to get the for one week or more
                                    pills                during one visit
                              (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)
Treatment                   -0.218        -0.218      -0.079        -0.078
P-value                      0.000         0.000       0.005         0.005
Strata fixed effects          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
Patient controls                            Yes                       Yes

Observations                3352          3352         3295          3295
Mean in control group       0.367         0.367        0.283         0.283
Number replications         5000          5000         5000          5000

Notes: We use the pairs cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Esarey and Menger (2019) to allow for correlation of the error terms at the level of the
cluster and report the corresponding p-value. We use 5,000 bootstrap iterations. Other notes as in Table III.
              Table D4: Impact on Detections and Patient Selection (Pairs Cluster Bootstrap)

Panel A: Impact on number of verified detections (source: program data cross-checked with patient surveys)
                                            Verified detections per
                                               center per month
                                                (1)          (2)
Treatment                                     -0.103       -0.159
P-value                                       0.514        0.551
Strata fixed effects                            Yes          Yes
Baseline detection                              Yes          Yes
Health worker controls                                       Yes

Observations                                  1637         1637
Mean in control group                         1.762        1.762
Number replications                            5000         5000

Panel B: Impact on patient selection (patients enrolled after the beginning of the experiment)
                                              Control     Treatment      P-value Number of
                                               group         group     Treatment       obs.
                                               mean          mean       = Control
                                                  (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)
Male                                            0.586        0.576        0.475        2598
Age                                              34.4         33.1        0.168        2597
Caste
   Does not know                                0.048        0.053        0.874        2602
   General caste                                0.181        0.179        0.747        2602
   Other Backward Class                         0.357        0.352        0.997        2602
   Scheduled Caste                              0.231        0.267        0.207        2602
   Scheduled Tribe                              0.078        0.070        0.367        2602
   Minority                                     0.104        0.079        0.505        2602
Religion
   Hindu                                        0.832        0.870        0.405        2594
   Muslim                                       0.147        0.117        0.523        2594
   Other                                        0.021        0.013        0.269        2594
Literacy
   Cannot read or write                         0.304        0.294        0.381        2602
   Can read but not write                       0.043        0.044        0.652        2602
   Can read and write                           0.653        0.662        0.527        2602
Education
   Pre-primary                                  0.247        0.226        0.138        2593
   Primary                                      0.371        0.410        0.094        2593
   Secondary                                    0.333        0.325        0.923        2593
   Undergraduate and more                       0.049        0.039        0.313        2593
Household size                                    5.5          5.4        0.224        2593
Lives alone                                     0.025        0.017        0.106        2602
Assets
   Has electricty                               0.970        0.966        0.739        2532
   Has tap water                                0.562        0.544        0.909        2543
   Has a television                             0.819        0.822        0.696        2460
   Has a refrigerator                           0.264        0.258        0.794        2459
   Owns her house                               0.689        0.679        0.741        2538
Migration Status
   Has always lived in the area                 0.507        0.457        0.305        2600
   Has lived there for more than 6 years        0.227        0.269        0.145        2600
   Has lived there for less than 5 years        0.266        0.274        0.869        2600
Is currently working                            0.316        0.321        0.467        2388
Time to go to the center (in minutes)            11.0         11.8        0.330        1812
Distance to the center (in miles)                 2.9          3.0        0.651        1998

Notes: We use the pairs cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Esarey and Menger (2019) to allow for
correlation of the error terms at the level of the cluster and report the corresponding p-value. We use 5,000
bootstrap iterations. Other notes as in Table IV.
                                                            Table D5: Impact on Patients' Health (Pairs Cluster Bootstrap)

Panel A: Impact on patients' physical health (source: patient surveys)
                                   Cured            Patients' ranking of their Index of no difficulty in     Index of health      Index of severe health      Index of increased
                                                              health            performing activities          symptoms                 symptoms               health symptoms

                               (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)         (11)         (12)
Treatment                    0.015        0.012        0.012         -0.010       -0.022       -0.038      -0.008      0.001       -0.035       -0.026       -0.013       -0.011
P-value                      0.605        0.663        0.912         0.922        0.491        0.247       0.832       0.984       0.233        0.344        0.523        0.601
Strata fixed effects          Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Patient controls                           Yes                         Yes                       Yes                    Yes                       Yes                       Yes

Observations                 2395         2395          2430         2430          2458         2458        2459        2459        2459         2459         2458         2458
Mean in control group        0.400        0.400         7.431        7.431          --           --          --          --          --           --           --           --
Number replications          5000         5000          5000         5000          5000         5000        5000        5000        5000         5000         5000         5000

Panel B: Impact on patients' emotional health (source: patient surveys)
                           Thinks that household Has a project to improve         Index of emotional       Overall somewhat or   Overall satisfaction with
                          situation will improve in    their life and their            distress                very happy                their life
                                  the future               family's life

                               (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)
Treatment                    0.000        0.002        -0.017        -0.017       0.010        0.010       -0.019      -0.020      -0.082       -0.086
P-value                      0.985        0.903        0.294         0.301        0.755        0.742       0.195       0.183       0.365        0.346
Strata fixed effects          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Patient controls                           Yes                         Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes

Observations                 2077         2077          2375         2375          2454         2454        2435        2435        2426         2426
Mean in control group        0.890        0.890         0.120        0.120          --           --         0.942       0.942       7.259        7.259
Number replications          5000         5000          5000         5000          5000         5000        5000        5000        5000         5000

Notes : We use the pairs cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Esarey and Menger (2019) to allow for correlation of the error terms at the level of the cluster and report the
corresponding p-value. We use 5,000 bootstrap iterations. Other notes as in Table V.
                                                                 Table D6: Impact on Health Worker Effort (Pairs Cluster Bootstrap)


Panel A: Impact on health worker attendance
                               Center open          Total time center was Health worker present       Total time health       Visit by OpAsha           Center open         Health worker present
                                                             open               at the center       worker was present at                                                       at the center
                                                                                                      the center, net of
                                                                                                            breaks
                                                                         (source: observation days)                                                           (source: random spot checks)
                              (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)       (9)         (10)        (11)           (12)       (13)          (14)
Treatment                    0.000       0.001        -10.7        9.2       0.019        0.045        20.2        22.3      0.033       0.030       0.001          0.005      0.049         0.071
P-value                      0.929       0.806        0.515       0.631      0.533        0.145      0.044        0.054      0.020       0.047       1.128          0.851      0.403         0.068
Strata fixed effects          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes
Health worker controls                    Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes                    Yes                        Yes                      Yes

Observations                 2,749       2,749       2,414         2,414       3,063       3,063       2,987       2,987     2,855       2,855        916           916         916           916
Mean in Control Group        0.998       0.998       338.9         338.9       0.834       0.834       117.3       117.3     0.054       0.054       0.945         0.945       0.598         0.598
Number replications          5000        5000        5000          5000        5000        5000        5000        5000      5000        5000        5000          5000        5000          5000

Panel B: Impact on health worker activities
                            # home visits as % of    Intensity of default    Intensity of detection   Health worker gives       Frequency of           Health worker            Health worker
                           all patients scheduled      activities (index)       activities (index)    advice related to TB    interactions with       supports patient        sometimes or often
                            to come on that day                                                                                 health worker         during treatment          delivers pills at
                                                                                                                                                                                patient's home
                            (source: observation             (source: health worker surveys)                                          (source: patient surveys)
                                    days)
                               (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)        (9)        (10)        (11)          (12)       (13)           (14)
Treatment                     0.037       0.049      0.031         -0.103      -0.065      -0.071     0.014       0.014      -0.051      -0.045      -0.003        -0.004     0.073          0.087
P-value                       0.178       0.189      0.678         0.420       0.292       0.395      0.470       0.454      0.514       0.538       0.948         0.926      0.121          0.036
Strata fixed effects           Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes            Yes
Health worker controls                     Yes                       Yes                     Yes
Baseline control                                       Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
Patient controls                                                                                                    Yes                   Yes                       Yes                       Yes

Observations                 2341        2341          134           134         134            134    3280        3280      3193        3193        3293          3293        3295          3295
Mean in control group        0.115       0.115          --            --          --             --    0.894       0.894     1.749       1.749       0.213         0.213       0.454         0.454
Number replications          5000        5000         5000          5000        5000           5000    5000        5000      5000        5000        5000          5000        5000          5000

Notes: We use the pairs cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Esarey and Menger (2019) to allow for correlation of the error terms at the level of the cluster and report the corresponding
p-value. We use 5,000 bootstrap iterations. Other notes as in Table VI.
                               Table D7: Impact on Quality of Reporting on Default (Pairs Cluster Bootstrap)

                                           Actual likelihood to default      Defaults as reported in the       Default as reported in the
                                                                                   program data                  government registers
                                            (source: patient surveys)         (source: program data)        (source: government registers)
                                               (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)               (5)            (6)
Treatment                                    -0.018           -0.015           0.000          0.001             0.000           0.000
P-value                                      0.037            0.068           1.001           0.911             0.954          0.973
Strata fixed effects                           Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
Patient controls                                                Yes                                                              Yes
Baseline outcome                                                                Yes              Yes
Health worker controls                                                                           Yes

Observations                                 2802             2802             1832             1832            2913             2913
Mean in control group                        0.073            0.073            0.045            0.045           0.021            0.021
Number replications                          5000             5000             5000             5000            5000             5000

Test: Treatment = Treatment(1) (or (2))
  P-value                                      --               --             0.191            0.229           0.115            0.141
  F-statistic                                  --               --

Notes: We use the pairs cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Esarey and Menger (2019) to allow for correlation of the error terms at the
level of the cluster and report the corresponding p-value. We use 5,000 bootstrap iterations. Unlike in Table VII, we cannot compare
treatment effects on actual likelihood to default and on default as reported in the program data and in the goverment registers using a
seemingly unrelated regressions framework as the covariance matrix stored by the clusterbs Stata command cannot be used in any post-
estimation inference (see the Stata help file for clusterbs). Other notes as in Table VII.
                                      Table D8: Impact on Quality of Reporting on Patient Detection (Pairs Cluster Bootstrap)

Panel A: Impact on number of verified and reported detections
                                                    Verified detections                      Reported detections
                                          (source: program data cross-checked
                                                                                            (source: program data)
                                                  with patient surveys)
                                                 (1)                   (2)                  (3)                  (4)
Treatment                                      -0.103                -0.159               -0.744               -0.795
P-value                                        0.514                 0.551                0.008                0.032
Strata fixed effects                             Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Baseline outcome                                 Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Health worker controls                                                 Yes                                       Yes

Observations                                    1637                 1637                 1832                 1832
Mean in control group                           1.762                1.762                3.730                3.730
Number replications                              5000                 5000                5000                 5000

Test: Treatment = Treatment(1) (or (2))
  P-value                                         --                   --                 0.012                0.057
  F-statistic                                     --                   --

Panel B: Impact on survey outcomes, individual level (sources: program data, patient surveys)
                                          Patient verified          Survey not           Survey not      Survey not        Survey not        Survey not
                                            (found and         completed: Patient completed: Patient completed: Health completed: Patient completed: Other
                                             surveyed)         refused to answer        not found     worker warning        death             reasons

                                                 (1)                   (2)                  (3)                  (4)                  (5)                (6)
Treatment                                       0.058                -0.020               -0.011               -0.015               -0.004             -0.008
P-value                                         0.049                0.014                0.541                0.203                0.634              0.493
Strata fixed effects                             Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                Yes

Observations                                    3647                 3647                 3647                 3647                 3647               3647
Mean in control group                           0.685                0.068                0.106                0.059                0.031              0.049
Number replications                             5000                 5000                 5000                 5000                 5000               5000

Panel C. Impact on the fraction of patients reported in the government registers which are verified (sources: government registers, patient surveys)
                                          Fraction of verified
                                                patients
                                                   (1)
Treatment                                        0.075
P-value                                          0.030
Strata fixed effects                              Yes

Observations                                    2998
Mean in control group                           0.697
Number replications                              5000

Notes: We use the pairs cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Esarey and Menger (2019) to allow for correlation of the error terms at the level of the cluster
and report the corresponding p-value. We use 5,000 bootstrap iterations. Unlike in Table VIII, we cannot compare treatment effects on the number of verified
detections and reported detections using a seemingly unrelated regressions framework as the covariance matrix stored by the clusterbs Stata command cannot be
used in any post-estimation inference (see the Stata help file for clusterbs). Other notes as in Table VIII.
                                                      Table D9: Sustainability of the Intervention (Pairs Cluster Bootstrap)

Panel A: Impact on health worker salary and satisfaction
                            Monthly compensation         Monthly salary         # of challenges faced in # of challenges faced in   Excessive workload       Standardized job
                            for detection activities                               getting a patient to     detecting patients                               satisfaction index
                                                                                  complete treatment
                                                                                         course
                                     (source: salary data from OpAsha)                                           (source: health worker surveys)
                                 (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)         (10)       (11)         (12)
Treatment                      -324.3        -224.9       -428.5     -341.1       -0.220       -0.238      0.013        -0.167      -0.105       -0.199     0.123        0.140
P-value                         0.016         0.138        0.024      0.199       0.225        0.302       0.943        0.521       0.106        0.033      0.221        0.328
Strata fixed effects             Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes
Health worker controls                         Yes                     Yes                       Yes                      Yes                      Yes                    Yes
Baseline control                                                                    Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes

Observations                    693         693          936          936          121          121          117         117         118          118        132         132
Mean in control group           1321        1321         5791         5791        3.309        3.309        2.746       2.746       0.222        0.222        --          --
Number replications             5000        5000         5000         5000        5000         5000         5000        5000        5000         5000        5000        5000

Panel B: Impact on patients' satisfaction with healthcare received
                                Satisfied with their       Would refer a TB     # of challenges faced by
                              interaction with their     suspect to an OpAsha     patients to complete
                                  health worker              health worker          treatment course
                                          (source: patient surveys)             (source: health worker
                                                                                         surveys)
                                 (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)
Treatment                      0.005        0.003       0.034        0.033         -0.053       -0.212
P-value                        0.735        0.818       0.177        0.182         0.728        0.496
Strata fixed effects            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes
Patient controls                             Yes                      Yes
Health worker controls                                                                          Yes
Baseline control                                                                    Yes         Yes

Observations                   2378         2378         2441        2441          119          119
Mean in control group          0.957        0.957        0.178       0.178        2.500        2.500
Number replications            5000         5000         5000        5000         5000         5000

Panel C. Technology presence over time (source: observation days)
                             Center has biometric      Share of all devices       Share of all devices
                                  equipment            (fingerprint reader,       (fingerprint reader,
                                                         laptop, USB key)           laptop, USB key)
                                                              present            present and working
                                (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)
# weeks since beginning       -0.002      -0.002       -0.006        -0.006       -0.006        -0.006
  of the experiment           0.103       0.153        0.000         0.001        0.000         0.001
Center fixed effects            Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
Health worker controls                      Yes                        Yes                        Yes

Observations                   1414         1414         1403        1403         1398         1398
Mean in first month            0.921        0.921        0.909       0.909        0.899        0.899
Number replications            5000         5000         5000        5000         5000         5000

Notes: We use the pairs cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Esarey and Menger (2019) to allow for correlation of the error terms at the level of the cluster and report the
corresponding p-value. We use 5,000 bootstrap iterations. Other notes as in Table IX.
