                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        TAXING BILLIONAIRES:
 ESTATE TAXES AND THE GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION OF THE ULTRA-WEALTHY

                                          Enrico Moretti
                                         Daniel J. Wilson

                                       Working Paper 26387
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26387


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 2019, Revised September 2020




We thank Alan Auerbach, Sebastien Bradley, Isabel Martinez, Emmanuel Saez, Gabriel Zucman,
and seminar participants at the University of California, Berkeley; the Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco; the University of Nevada; the 2019 NBER Taxation conference; the 2019 Utah
Tax Invitational; and the 2019 IIPF annual meetings for useful suggestions. We are grateful to
Annemarie Schweinert and Amber Flaharty for excellent research assistance. The views
expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Enrico Moretti and Daniel J. Wilson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Taxing Billionaires: Estate Taxes and the Geographical Location of the Ultra-Wealthy
Enrico Moretti and Daniel J. Wilson
NBER Working Paper No. 26387
October 2019, Revised September 2020
JEL No. H0,J01,R1

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the effect of state-level estate taxes on the geographical location of the Forbes 400
richest Americans and its implications for tax policy. We use a change in federal law to identify
the tax sensitivity of the ultra-wealthy's locational choices. Before 2001, estate tax liabilities for
the ultra-wealthy were independent of where they live due to a federal credit. In 2001, the credit
was eliminated and their estate tax liabilities suddenly became highly dependent on where they
live. We find the number of Forbes 400 individuals in estate tax states fell by 35% after 2001
compared to non-estate tax states. We also find that billionaires' sensitivity to the estate tax
increases significantly with age. Overall, billionaires' geographical location appears to be highly
sensitive to estate taxes. When we estimate the effect of billionaire deaths on state tax revenues,
we find a sharp increase in revenues in the three years after a Forbes billionaire's death, totaling
$165 million for the average billionaire. In the last part of the paper, we estimate the revenue
costs and benefits for each state of having an estate tax. The benefit is the tax revenue gain when
a wealthy resident dies, while the cost is the foregone income tax revenues over the remaining
lifetime of those who relocate. Surprisingly, despite the high estimated tax mobility, we find that
the benefit exceeds the cost for the vast majority of states. Of the states that currently do not have
estate taxes, all but California would experience revenue gains if they adopted estate taxes.


Enrico Moretti
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and CEPR
and also NBER
moretti@econ.berkeley.edu

Daniel J. Wilson
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market St.
Mail Stop 1130
San Francisco, CA 94105-1530
Daniel.Wilson@sf.frb.org
1       Introduction
    The United States exhibits vast geographical differences in the degree to which personal
income, corporate income and wealth are taxed. There has been much debate in recent years
on the costs and benefits of state and local governments imposing high taxes on their richest
residents and most profitable firms, especially in light of the potential for tax flight (Kleven
et al., 2019; Slattery and Zidar, 2019). But despite the strong interest of policymakers and
voters, the effect of state and local taxes on the geographical location of wealthy individuals
and businesses is not fully understood. Although there have been some important recent
advances, there is still too "little empirical work on the effect of taxation on the spatial
mobility of individuals," especially among high income individuals (Kleven et al., 2013a).
    In this paper, we study the effects of state-level estate taxes on the geographical location
of the Forbes 400 richest Americans between 1981 and 2017 and the implications for tax
policy. The estate tax is essentially a wealth tax imposed on the very wealthy at the time
of death (Kopczuk, 2009). We use the 2001 federal tax reform to identify the tax sensitivity
of the ultra-wealthy's locational choices. We then use the estimated tax mobility elasticity
to quantify the revenue costs and benefits for each state of having an estate tax. We find
that billionaires' geographical location is highly sensitive to state estate taxes. Billionaires
tend to leave states with an estate tax, especially as they get old. But despite the high
tax mobility, we find that the revenue benefit of an estate tax exceeds the cost for the vast
majority of states.
    Estate taxes on the ultra-wealthy have potentially important consequences both for tax-
payer families and for state governments. Given the rise of wealth owned by those at the top
of the distribution, taxes on large estates have a growing potential to significantly impact
states' entire budgets. Consider, for example, David Koch who died in August 2019 with
an estimated net worth of $50.5 billion. He was a resident of New York state, which has
an estate tax. Given our estimate of the effective state estate tax rate (which accounts for
typical charitable deductions and sheltering), New York should eventually expect to receive
revenues of around $4.17 billion.1 For the richest of the Forbes 400, the effect is even larger.
Jeff Bezos is currently the richest person in the U.S., according to Forbes, with an estimated
net worth of $114 billion. He resides in Washington state, which has an estate tax. If he
died today, his estate could expect to incur a state tax bill of around $11.97 billion, raising
Washington state's total tax revenues from all sources by 52.1% in a single year. The median
person in the 2017 Forbes 400 has estimated net worth of "only" $3.7 billion, and the typical
    1
    In practice, the timing of estate tax payment depends on marital status and the time of the death of the
spouse.



                                                     1
impact of a Forbes 400 death on state revenues is of course smaller.
    We begin the empirical analysis by investigating the quality of the Forbes 400 data. While
prior research has found that individual net worth reported by Forbes is consistent with IRS
confidential tax return data (Saez and Zucman, 2016), there has been no previous assessment
of Forbes data on state of residence. We conduct an audit using published obituaries of
deceased Forbes 400 individuals. State of death is likely to be highly correlated with the
true state of residence, as people are more likely to die in their true primary residence state
than in any other state.2 We find that the state of residence listed by Forbes matches the
state listed in obituaries in 90% of cases.
    Furthermore, for each billionaire death, we estimate the effect on estate tax revenues of
the state that Forbes identifies as the one of residence. We find a sharp and economically
large increase in estate tax revenues in the three years after a Forbes billionaire's death. We
estimate that, on average, a Forbes billionaire death results in an increase in state estate
revenues of $165 million. Our estimate implies an effective tax rate of 8.25% after allowing
for charitable and spousal deductions, and tax avoidance--a rate that is about half of the
statutory rate. This rate is consistent with IRS estimates of federal estate tax liability for
this group of taxpayers.
    Having validated the Forbes data, we then turn to the core of our empirical analysis,
namely the sensitivity of the ultra-wealthy's locational choice to estate taxes. We exploit
the sudden change created by the 2001 EGTRRA federal tax reform. Before 2001, some
states had an estate tax and others didn't. However, there was also a federal credit against
state estate taxes. For the ultra-wealthy, the credit amounted to a full offset. In practice,
this meant that the estate tax liability for the ultra-wealthy was independent of their state
of residence. As part of the Bush tax cuts of 2001, the credit was eliminated. The estate
tax liability for the ultra-wealthy suddenly became highly dependent on state of residence.
    We first use a double-difference estimator to estimate the differential effect of having
an estate tax before versus after 2001 on the number of Forbes 400 individuals in a state,
allowing for state and year fixed effects. We find that before 2001, there is a slight positive
correlation between estate tax status and the number of Forbes 400 individuals in the state,
after conditioning on state fixed effects. After 2001, the opposite becomes true: the number
of Forbes 400 individuals in estate tax states becomes significantly lower. On average, estate
tax states lose 2.35 Forbes 400 individuals relative to non-estate tax states. Given the
pre-2001 average baseline Forbes 400 population in estate tax states, which is near 8, the
   2
     For estate tax purposes, what matters is the primary domicile state; the physical location of death is
irrelevant and thus individuals have no incentive to strategically die in a state other than their residence
state for tax purposes.



                                                     2
implied semi-elasticity is -0.33. Instrumenting contemporaneous estate tax status with estate
tax status as of 2001 yields very similar results, confirming that the OLS result is not due
to endogenous estate tax adoption or repeal after the 2001 reform.
    We then turn to a triple-difference estimator based on the notion that a billionaire's
sensitivity to the estate tax should increase as they age. In terms of identification, the triple-
differenced models allow us to control for the interaction of estate tax state X post-2001.
Any correlation between changes in the unobserved determinants of Forbes' 400 geographical
locations and changes in estate status after 2001 is accounted for. We find that the number
of old Forbes billionaires in estate tax states drops after 2001 relative to the number of
younger Forbes billionaires. The elasticity of location with respect to estate taxes of the old
billionaires is significantly higher than the elasticity of the young billionaires.3
    As an alternative way to quantify the effect of estate taxes on Forbes billionaires locational
choices, we study the probability that individuals who are observed residing in estate tax
states before the reform move to a non-estate tax states after the reform; and, inversely, the
probability that individuals who are observed living in non-estate tax states before the reform
move to an estate tax states afterwards. Among billionaires observed in 2001, we find a high
probability of moving from estate tax states to non-estate tax states after 2001 and a low
probability moving from non-estate tax states to estate tax states. By year 2010--namely 9
years after the reform--21.4% of individuals who originally were in a estate tax state have
moved to a non-estate tax state; while only 1.2% of individuals who originally were in a
non-estate tax state have moved to an estate tax state. The difference is significantly more
pronounced for individuals 65 or older, consistent with the triple-difference models.
    Overall, we conclude that billionaires' geographical location is highly sensitive to state
estate taxes. The 2001 EGTRRA Federal Reform introduced large differences in billionaires'
estate tax burdens among states where there had been none. These ultra-wealthy individuals
appear to have responded by leaving states with estate taxes in favor of states without estate
taxes. One implication of this tax-induced mobility is a large reduction in the aggregate tax
base subject to subnational estate taxation. We estimate that tax-induced mobility resulted
in 23.6 fewer Forbes 400 billionaires and $80.7 billion less in Forbes 400 wealth exposed to
state estate taxes.
    In the final part of the paper, we study the implications of our estimates for state tax
policy. States face a trade-off in terms of tax revenues. On the one hand, adoption of an
estate tax on billionaires implies a one-time estate tax revenue gain upon the death of a
   3
    This is consistent with Kopczuk (2007), who finds that the onset of a terminal illness leads to a large
reduction in the value of estates reported on tax returns and that this reduction reflects "deathbed" estate
planning. He interprets this as evidence that wealthy individuals care about disposition of their estates, but
that this preference is dominated by the desire to maintain control of their wealth while young and healthy.


                                                      3
billionaire in the state. On the other hand, our estimates indicate that the adoption of
an estate tax lowers the number of billionaires residing in the state. In terms of state tax
revenue, the main cost is the foregone income tax revenues over the remaining lifetime of
each billionaire who leaves the state due to the estate tax (as well as any potential new
billionaires that might have moved to the state in the absence of an estate tax). The cost
of foregone income tax revenues is, of course, higher the higher is the state's top (average)
income tax rate. We estimate the revenue costs and benefits for each state of having an
estate tax, either just on billionaires or the broader population of all wealthy taxpayers.4
    To quantify costs and benefits of an estate tax on billionaires, we use our estimates of the
elasticity of mobility with respect to estate taxes and data on expected life expectancies and
the number and wealth of billionaires by age in each state. Surprisingly, despite the high
tax mobility elasticity, we find that for most states the benefit of additional revenues from
adopting an estate tax significantly exceeds the cost of foregone income tax revenue due to
tax-induced mobility.
    The cost-benefit ratio of 0.69 for the average state, indicating that the the additional
revenues from an estate tax exceed the loss of revenues from foregone income taxes by 31%.
The ratio varies across states as a function of the state income tax rate and, to a lesser extent,
the ages of the state's billionaires. In California, the cost-benefit ratio is 1.45, indicating
that if California adopted the estate tax on billionaires, the state would lose revenues by
a significant margin. (Currently, California does not have an estate tax.) The high cost
reflects the very high personal income top tax rate in the California, which implies that each
billionaire leaving the state has a high opportunity cost in terms of forgone personal income
tax revenue. By contrast, in Texas or Washington state the ratio is 0, since there is no income
tax. The adoption of an estate tax in these states increases tax revenues unambiguously.
We estimate that state revenues in Florida and Texas would increase by $7.67 billion and
$7.06 billion, respectively, if the states adopted an estate tax. Overall, we estimate that 28
of 29 states that currently do not have an estate tax and have at least one billionaire would
experience revenue gains if they adopted an estate tax on billionaires, with California the
lone exception.
    We caution that in our cost-benefit analysis, our measure of costs only includes the
direct effects on state revenues of losing resident billionaires, namely the foregone taxable
   4
    This is not the usual Laffer-curve style trade-off, where states with high tax rates are compared to states
with low tax rates. There is little empirical variation in estate tax rates--with virtually all states at either
zero or 16%. While states are free to set different rates, in practice they generally have stuck with 16%,
which is a historical carryover from the 16% maximum rate in the federal credit. Thus, in our calculations
we compare tax revenues in the case where a state adopts a 16% estate tax with the case where a state does
not adopt an estate tax.



                                                       4
income. It does not include potential indirect effects on states if billionaire relocation causes
relocation of firms and investments as well as a reduction of donations to local charities. A
comprehensive analysis of these indirect effects is beyond the scope of this paper.5
    Finally, we extend the analysis to consider the costs and benefits of adopting a broader
estate tax, modeled on the federal estate tax. The federal estate tax applies not just the
top 400 but all wealthy taxpayers with estate values above an exemption threshold, which
in 2017 was $5.5 million for individuals and $11 million for couples. For each state, we
compute the costs and benefits of an estate tax on this broader group of wealthy taxpayers
under alternative assumptions on the elasticity of mobility. Our findings suggest that that
the policy implications for states that we draw based on a billionaire estate tax generally
extend to a broad estate tax: for most states, the benefits of adopting an estate tax exceed
the costs, whether the tax is imposed on the ultra-wealthy or the merely wealthy.
    Our paper is not the first to study the geographic sensitivity of individuals to subnational
estate taxes. Bakija and Slemrod (2004) also looked at state estate taxes, but their analysis
pertained to the pre-2001 time period, before the elimination of the federal credit, and
focused on taxpayers with wealth far below that of the Forbes 400, finding mixed results
on tax-induced mobility.6 Br¨    ulhart and Parchet (2014) look at the effect of bequest tax
differences across Swiss cantons and, in contrast to our findings, estimate that high-income
retirees are relatively inelastic with respect to tax rates, while Br¨ulhart et al. (2017) study
differences across Swiss cantons in wealth taxes.7
    More generally, our paper relates growing body of work on the sensitivity of high income
individuals locational choices to subnational taxes. Kleven et al. (2019) have a recent survey
of the literature. Most of the literature has focused on personal income taxes. Moretti and
Wilson (2017) and Akcigit et al. (2016) find evidence that top patenters, which have very
high income, are quite sensitive to income taxes in their choice of location. Rauh and Shyu
(2020) find similar results for high income taxpayers in California. On the other hand, Young
et al. (2016) and Young and Varner (2011) find limited evidence of tax-induced mobility of
millionaires. There is also a related literature on taxes and international mobility. Akcigit
   5
     There could also be an additional effect on those who do not leave the state, in the form of increased
tax avoidance and reduced saving (beyond what has already occurred in response to the nationwide federal
estate tax). Increased tax avoidance is already incorporated in our estimates of the effective estate tax rate,
but some of the response may show up as reduced capital income.
   6
     Bakija and Slemrod use the fact that the combined federal and state estate ATRs varied across states
even prior to 2001 due to state differences in exemption levels and marginal rate schedules. The pre-2001
federal credit effectively offset any cross-state ATR differences for estates far above $10 million.
   7
     See Kopczuk (2009) for a review of the literature on national estate taxes and Slemrod and Gale (2001)
for a discussion of the equity and efficiency of national estate taxes. More recently, Jakobsen et al. (2018)
study the effect of wealth taxation on wealth accumulation using individual level data from Denmark, finding
a sizable response for the ultra-wealthy.



                                                      5
et al. (2016) find modest elasticities of the number of domestic and foreign inventors with
respect to the personal income tax rate. Kleven et al. (2013b) study a specific tax change in
Denmark while Kleven et al. (2013a) focus on European soccer players. Both find substantial
tax elasticities.


2       Background and Key Facts on State Estate Taxes
2.1     History and Structure
    State level estate taxes in the United States date back to the early nineteenth century,
pre-dating the 1916 adoption of the federal estate tax. In 1924, a federal estate tax credit
was enacted for state estate tax payments, up to a limit. This credit remained in place for
the rest of the twentieth century.8 The credit rate schedule prevailing from 1954 to 2001 is
shown in Appendix Table A1 (based on Table 1 of Bakija and Slemrod (2004)). The top
marginal credit rate of 16% applied to all estate values above $10,040,000. Thus, for estates
far above this value ­ such as those of the Forbes 400 ­ both the marginal and average credit
rate was 16%.
    In the period 1982-2001--which is the part of our sample period before the reform--
between 10 and 27 states had an estate tax, depending on the year.9 These estate taxes had
progressive rate schedules, with a top marginal tax rate at or slightly below 16%, applying
to estate values above a threshold. The threshold varied across states but never exceeded
$10 million (Bakija and Slemrod (2004)) ­ very far below the wealth of even the poorest
member of the Forbes 400. Thus, for very high net worth estates, such as those of the Forbes
400, the state tax liability was fully offset by the federal credit.10 This was not necessarily
the case for lower wealth estates, for which the federal credit could be much lower than the
state tax liability.11
    For our purposes, the key implication is that, prior to 2001, the combined federal and
    8
     The credit was for "estate, inheritance, legacy, or succession taxes paid as the result of the decedent's
death to any state or the District of Columbia" (IRS Form i706 (July 1998)).
   9
     See Conway and Rork (2004) for a analysis of the factors behind estate tax status in this period.
  10
     The convergence between the federal estate average credit rate and state estate ATR for the highest
value estates dates back to at least 1935 (Cooper (2006)).
  11
     In addition to state taxes, before 2001 all states imposed "pick-up" taxes. These taxes were designed
to take advantage of the existence of the federal credit and were identical for all states, so for our purposes
they can be ignored. Specifically, they were structured such that any estate eligible for the federal credit
would face a state tax exactly equal to their maximum federal credit amount. In effect, the arrangement
amounted to a transfer of funds from the federal government to the state government, leaving the estate
taxpayers unaffected. Hence, state pick-up taxes effected no variation across states in tax liability for any
taxpayer and thus we exclude them from our definition of the ET "treatment" variable used in the analyses
below. Pick-up taxes became effectively void after the elimination of the federal credit.


                                                      6
state tax liability of the ultra-wealthy was independent of their state of residence. Thus, state
estate taxes should not have had any influence on the locational decisions of ultra-wealthy
households during that period.
    This situation changed completely with the 2001 Economic Growth Tax Relief and Rec-
onciliation Act (EGTRRA). The EGTRRA phased out the credit over 2001 to 2004 and
eliminated it completely after 2004.12 For our purposes, the main effect of the reform was
that combined federal and state tax liability of the ultra-wealthy became highly dependent
on their state of residence. Thus, after the reform, state estate taxes could potentially affect
the locational decisions of ultra-wealthy households.
    The estate tax provisions of the 2001 reform were largely unexpected. In the years since
2001, some of the states that had estate taxes repealed them, while other states chose to
enact new estate taxes (see Michael (2018)).


2.2     Estate Tax Planning and Avoidance
    State estate taxes are primarily owed to single domicile state, which is the one determined
to be the decedent's primary state of residence. Specifically, intangible assets ­ financial and
business assets ­ are taxed solely by the primary domicile state (if the state has an estate
tax). The tax base for tangible property, which is primarily real estate, is apportioned to
states in proportion to property value. Tangible property is generally a small share of the
net worth of Forbes 400 individuals. Raub et al. (2010)'s study of federal estate tax returns
of Forbes 400 decedents reported that real estate accounted for less than 10% of total assets
on average, while financial assets accounted for 85%. (The other 5% was "other assets,"
which could be tangible or intangible.)
    States consider a long list of both quantitative and qualitative indicators in order to
determine the primary domicile state of a decedent. According to Bakija and Slemrod (2004),
relevant criteria include "physical location in the state for more than six months of the year,
how many years the taxpayer had lived in the state, strength of ties to the local community,
and where the taxpayer was registered to vote and maintained bank accounts, among many
other factors. Disputes sometimes arise over which state can claim the decedent as a resident
for state tax purposes. Most states subscribe to an interstate agreement that provides for
third-party arbitration in such situations." Note that location of death is irrelevant for tax
  12
     The credit was replaced with a deduction, which effected large cross-state differences in the combined
federal and state estate ATRs depending on whether or not each state had an estate tax. The EGTRRA
also legislated changes to the federal estate tax over the subsequent decade, gradually increasing the exemp-
tion amount, gradually decreasing the maximum estate tax rate, and scheduling a one-year repeal in 2010
(though 2011 legislation retroactively reinstated the estate tax to 2010). These changes did not affect states
differentially.


                                                      7
purposes.
    In practice, not all estate wealth is taxed (either by federal or state authorities). First,
wealth bequeathed to a spouse is deducted from the taxable estate prior to estate taxation,
though the spouse will need to pay estate taxes when they die if the wealth is still above
the estate tax threshold. Wealth bequeathed to others, including children, is fully subject
to the estate tax. Inter-vivos gifts to children generally are also subject to the estate tax.
    Second, charitable bequests are not taxed. IRS Statistics on Income data (SOI 2017)
show that estates worth $20 million or more deducted 24% of their taxable wealth due to
charitable bequests. Third, estate taxpayers have some latitude to make valuation discounts
on assets that do not have transparent market prices. For example, artwork and the value of
privately-held companies can be difficult to appraise. Note that assets in trusts are subject
to estate taxation as long as the decedent was the trustee (that is, if she controls where
assets were invested and who were the beneficiaries).13
    A recent study (Raub et al., 2010), utilizing confidential estate tax returns for deceased
individuals that had been in the Forbes 400, found that the average ratio of net worth
reported on tax returns to that reported by Forbes was 50%. Accounting for spousal wealth,
which is excluded from the estate tax base but is often included in the Forbes wealth estimate,
brings the ratio up to 53%. The authors attributed the remaining gap primarily to valuation
discounts.
    In our empirical analysis, we estimate the elasticity of the number of billionaires in a
state with respect to state estate taxes. The elasticity that we quantify is to be interpreted
as inclusive of any sheltering and evasion. This is the reduced-form parameter relevant
for policy. In the post-EGTRRA world, without the federal credit to offset state estate
tax liabilities, an ultra-wealthy individual's potential combined estate tax liability became
hugely dependent on their domicile state. For instance, Washington state enacted an estate
tax in 2005 with a top rate of 20%, the highest in the nation. Thus, an individual with a $1
billion estate could potentially save up to $200 million in their eventual estate tax liability
simply by moving from Washington to Oregon, or any other of the over 30 states without
an estate tax. In other words, one's state estate average tax rate (ATR) could vary across
states from 0% to 20%. Such variation is much greater than the variation in ATRs across
states for personal income, sales, or property. Moreover, the estate tax applies not to a single
year of income or sales, but to a lifetime of accumulated wealth. Moving to avoid a high
personal income tax will lower one's tax liability resulting from the flow of income in that
year and each subsequent year they remain in the state. But moving to escape an estate tax
  13
    Slemrod and Kopczuk (2003) investigate the temporal pattern of deaths around the time of changes in
the estate tax system and uncover some evidence that there is a small death elasticity.



                                                  8
effectively avoids estate taxation on a lifetime of income flows net of consumption. Hence, it
is quite conceivable that state estate taxes would factor into the tax and estate planning of
ultra-wealthy individuals and could potentially affect decisions of the ultra-wealthy regarding
where to live, especially as they get older.


2.3     Which States Have Estate Taxes
    Data on adoption and repeal dates of state estate taxes came from Michael (2018),
Walczak (2017), Conway and Rork (2004) and Bakija and Slemrod (2004), augmented as
needed with information from individual state tax departments.
    For the billionaires in the Forbes 400, the primary geographic variation in the combined
federal and state estate tax burden after the 2001 EGTRRA elimination of the federal credit
is due simply to which states have an estate tax and which do not. The top marginal estate
tax rate ­ which approximates the average tax rate for the ultra-wealthy ­ is nearly uniform
across states that have an estate tax. Of the 13 states (including D.C.) with an estate tax
in 2018, 8 had a top credit rate of exactly 16%, 2 had a top rate between 15 and 16%, two
had 12%, and one (Washington) had 20%.
    Given this uniformity in the estate ATR for billionaires across estate tax states, we simply
construct a state-by-year indicator variable for whether or not the state has an estate tax in
that year.14 The maps in Figure 1 show which states had a estate tax, and for how many
years, both before and after the elimination of the federal credit. Though there is within-
state variation over time, it is clear that most states with an estate tax after 2001 already
had an estate tax prior to then, likely due to historical precedence and policy inertia.
    It's important to note that states with estate taxes are not necessarily the states with
high personal income taxes. California, for example, has the highest top personal income
tax rate in the nation, but has no estate tax, while Washington state has no income tax but
the highest estate tax rate in the nation.
    Appendix Figure A1 shows the distribution of top personal income tax rates across all
states by state estate tax status in 2001 (top) and in 2017 (bottom). In both years, estate
tax states and non-estate tax states have wide dispersion in top income tax rates, indicating
a less than perfect correlation between estate status and income tax rates on high income
taxpayers. The vertical red line indicates the average. On average, the mean income tax
rate of estate tax states in 2001 is slightly above that of non-estate tax states. However,
  14
     We do not include state inheritance taxes, which a handful of states have had during our sample period,
in this indicator variable because they typically have a zero or very low tax rate on inheritances by lineal
heirs (parents, children, grandchildren, etc.). As we show in Section 5, our results are not sensitive to this
choice. As mentioned earlier, we also do not include in the indicator the separate pick-up taxes that all
states had prior to 2001.


                                                      9
the mean rates in the two groups of states are almost unchanged between 2001 and 2017.
Overall, Figure A1 suggests that while there is some correlation between estate status and
personal income tax rates, it is not very strong and, more importantly, it has not changed
much over the years.
    To see more formally if adoption of estate taxes is correlated with changes in other types
of state taxation or the state business cycle, we use a a linear probability model to estimate
how the probability that a state has an estate tax relates to other major tax policies and
state economic conditions. Specifically, using our full 1982-2017 state panel data set, we
estimate a linear probability model of the estate tax indicator on the personal income tax
rate, the corporate income tax rate, and real GDP growth, allowing each coefficient to differ
pre- and post-2001. The results are provided in Appendix Table A2. None of the coefficients
is statistically significantly different from zero. Controlling for state and year effects yields
similar results. We conclude that estate taxes are not systematically correlated with other
taxes and the state business cycle ­ both in levels and in changes over time.


3       Data and Facts About the Location of Forbes 400
        Billionaires
3.1       Data
    Forbes magazine has published a list of the 400 wealthiest Americans every year since
1982. Forbes defines Americans as "U.S. citizens who own assets in the U.S.". They construct
these lists as follows: Forbes reporters begin with a larger list of potential candidates. They
first interview individuals with potential knowledge of the person's assets, such as attorneys
and employees, as well as the candidates themselves whenever possible. They then research
asset values using SEC documents, court records, probate records and news articles. Assets
include "stakes in public and private companies, real estate, art, yachts, planes, ranches,
vineyards, jewelry, car collections and more." Forbes also attempts to estimate and net out
individuals' debt, though they admit that debt figures can be difficult to obtain, especially for
individuals associated with privately-held businesses. For more details on their methodology,
see: www.forbes.com/forbes-400.
    We collected the published Forbes 400 tables from 1982 to 2017. Data for the years 1982 to
1994 were originally in paper format and were digitized by us; the reminder was in electronic
format. These tables include each individual's name, net worth, age, source of wealth, and
residence location.15 The listed residence location is typically a single city and state, though
 15
      The Forbes 400 data we obtained for 2002 did not include state of residence and hence 2002 data are

                                                    10
there are many instances of multiple listed locations. We record all listed locations, though in
our empirical analyses we assume the first listed state is the primary residence. Our results
are robust to dropping observations with multiple states of residence. Because the name
string for a given individual often has slight variations in the Forbes list from year to year
(e.g., William vs. Bill or including vs. omitting a middle initial), we performed extensively
cleaning of the name variable in order to track individuals longitudinally.
    As has been noted elsewhere (e.g., Saez and Zucman (2016) and Smith et al. (2019)),
there has been a stark increase over time in the wealth of the super rich in the US in general,
and Forbes 400 in particular. Figure 2 plots average wealth over time, in both real and
nominal dollars. (Throughout the remainder of the paper, dollars values are in constant
2017 dollars.) The Figure shows that in real terms, the wealth of the average Forbes 400
billionaire has increased tenfold since 1982.16
    Panel A of Appendix Table A3 shows summary statistics. We have 13,432 individual-
year observations, covering 1,755 unique individuals. Over the 1982-2017 sample period, the
median age of a Forbes billionaire was 65 and their median real wealth (in 2017 dollars) was
$1.6 billion. Mean wealth, however, was much higher, at $3.02 billion, reflecting the highly
skewed wealth distribution among the Forbes 400. For example, Panel B shows selected
percentiles of the wealth distribution in 2017. Wealth increases gradually as one goes from
the 1st percentile to the 10th, 25th, 50th, and 75th. It more than doubles going from the
75th to the 90th and increases another sixfold from the 90th to the 99th. Lastly, in Panel
C, we provide summary statistics at the state-year level given that most of our analysis is
done at that level. The average state in this period was home to 7.68 Forbes billionaires and
statewide wealth of $22.63 billion.


3.2     Location of Forbes 400 Billionaires
    The Forbes 400 live throughout the United States. However, they tend to be concentrated
in some states, such as California, Texas, New York, and Florida. The geographic distribution
is not fixed over time. Figure 3 shows a map of the number of Forbes billionaires in 1982
and 2017.
    Table 1 shows in more detail the number of Forbes billionaires by state in 2017 (column
1), their mean wealth in 2017 (column 2) and the change in the number between 1982 and
2017 (column 3). The maps and the table point to some significant shifts in the population
not used in our analyses. Also, data for some years (1995-1998 and 2001) did not include age, though we
were able to calculate it using age information for the same individuals from other years.
  16
     The wealth tax base of the Forbes 400 is a non-trivial share of total wealth in the U.S. Saez and Zucman
(2016) estimate that as of 2013 the Forbes 400 owned about 3% of total wealth.



                                                     11
of Forbes billionaires. Between 1982 and 2017, California has become home to an increasing
share of the Forbes 400 while Texas has comprised a smaller share. By 2017, the former
has added 37 Forbes billionaires, while the latter has lost 30. This shift likely reflects the
shift in wealth generated from the technology sector relative to the oil industry boom of the
early 1980's. Within California, the San Francisco MSA has gained 37 Forbes billionaires,
confirming the role that new wealth generated in the high tech sector plays, while Los Angeles
added only 3. A relative decline in fortunes in the Rust Belt states of Pennsylvania (-12)
and Ohio (-7) is apparent. On the other hand, Florida has gained 14 new Forbes billionaires,
most of them in Miami, while Wyoming has added 3 in Jackson Hole.
    While the geographical unit of analysis in the paper is the state, in order to provide
further geographical detail Table 2 reports the 2017 levels in number and mean wealth and
the 1982-2017 change in number for the 40 cities (consolidated metro areas (CMAs)) with
the largest 2017 number of Forbes billionaires. The Table indicates that, despite its losses,
New York city remains the metro area with the largest number of billionaires in 2017 (80),
followed by the San Francisco Bay Area (54), Los Angeles (31), Miami (25), and Dallas (18).
Chicago, Houston and Washington, D.C. are the other metro areas with 10 or more Forbes
billionaires.


3.3    Quality of the Forbes 400 Data
    Forbes data on billionaires net worth and their residence are estimates produced by
Forbes' researchers. As such they are likely to contain measurement error. Forbes' estimate
of the total net worth of individuals in our sample were found by Saez and Zucman (2016) to
be consistent with IRS data. Using a capitalization method to estimate wealth from income
reported on tax returns they conclude that "the top 400 wealthiest taxpayers based on our
capitalized income method have a wealth level comparable to the Forbes 400 in recent years"
(p.573).
    Data on location have not been previously validated. In the next section we provide two
pieces of evidence on the quality of the Forbes 400 location data. First, we conduct an audit
of obituaries of deceased Forbes 400 individuals, and compare state of residence reported by
Forbes with state of death. We find that the state of residence reported by Forbes generally
matches the state of death listed in obituaries. Second, for each death, we estimate what
happens to estate tax revenues in the state of residence listed in Forbes, in the years following
the death. If state of residence reported by Forbes is the same as the true state of residence
for tax purposes, we should see an increase in estate tax revenues in the state that Forbes
identifies as state of residence. We find a significant spike in estate tax revenues in the state


                                               12
that Forbes identified as the state of residence of the deceased.
   Overall, the amount of measurement error in state of residence reported by Forbes appears
to be limited.17


4      Location of Forbes Billionaires Deaths and Effect on
       Estate Tax Revenues
    Before studying the effect of estate taxes on the location of Forbes billionaires, in this
section we present the findings of an audit using obituaries of deceased Forbes 400 individuals
in which we assess how close state of residence reported by Forbes matches the state listed
in obituaries. We then use the same data to quantify the impact of billionaires' deaths on
state estate tax revenues. The objectives are to assess the quality of the Forbes data and
to empirically estimate what fraction of wealth at the time of death ends up being actually
taxed. We use this effective tax rate in our cost-benefit analyses in Section 6.


4.1     Location of Billionaire Deaths
    For estate tax purposes, what matters is the primary domicile state. The physical location
of death is irrelevant and thus individuals have no incentive to strategically die in a state
other than their residence state for tax purposes.18 Yet, state of death is likely to be highly
correlated with the true state of residence, as people are more likely to die in their true
primary residence state than in any other state. The correlation between state of death and
true residence state need not be one, as individuals in our sample who die may die in a
different state due to travels, vacations or other idiosyncratic reasons.
    To identify potential deaths, we first identified individuals in our sample who were in the
Forbes 400 for at least 4 consecutive years before permanently exiting and that, as of their
last observation, were older than 50 and in the top 300 of wealth. The top 300 requirement
is useful because some less wealthy individuals may disappear from the sample due to their
wealth falling below the top 400 threshold rather than due to death. For this subsample of
  17
     Since our models relate the number of Forbes billionaires in a state to its estate tax status, random
measurement error in the number of billionaires in each state would result in increased standard errors but
would not affect the consistency of the point estimates. It is in principle possible that the error in billionaire
location in Forbes is not just random noise but is systematically correlated with changes in state estate taxes.
This might happen, for example, if following an estate tax adoption by a given state, the existing resident
billionaires tend to report to Forbes researchers that they have changed their residence to a non-estate tax
state (and the Forbes researchers take them at their word), even if their actual residence has not changed.
  18
     As noted above, intangible assets comprise the vast majority of Forbes 400 estates and a decedent's
intangible assets are taxable by a single domicile state.



                                                       13
152 individuals, we searched online for obituaries. Forbes 400 individuals are often known
to the general public, and their obituaries are typically published in major newspapers such
as the New York Times and the Los Angeles Times. 128 of these 152 individuals were found
to have died; the other 24 had dropped out of the Forbes 400 for other reasons.
    The resulting 128 deceased individuals are listed in Appendix Table A4.19 From the
obituaries, we recorded both the state in which the death physically occurred as well as
the state of primary residence mentioned in the obituary. We find that for 103 of the 128
cases (80%) the state where death physically occurred was the same as the primary residence
state listed in Forbes. Moreover, the mismatches were frequently due to deaths occurring at
out-of-state specialized hospitals such as the Mayo Clinic or while on vacation, as indicated
in the obituaries and reported in the last column of Appendix Table A4. After accounting
for these factors, the state indicated by the obituary was the same as the primary residence
state listed in Forbes in 115 deaths, or 90%. Overall, it appears that in the vast majority of
cases, the primary residence of the individuals in our sample matched that listed by Forbes.20
    We have done a similar analysis comparing the state of residence (as opposed to state
of death) reported in the obituaries to the Forbes state of residence. It seems unlikely that
newspaper obituaries, when listing one's primary state of residence, would take into account
which potential state of residence would imply the lowest estate tax. However, it is possible
that Forbes magazine could influence what gets reported in the obituary, making the two
sources of information not completely independent. With this caveat in mind, we find that
the state of primary residence listed in the obituaries matched that listed in Forbes for 107
(84%) of the 128 deaths.


4.2     Effect of Billionaire Deaths on State Estate Tax Revenues
    For each death, we estimate what happens to estate tax revenues in the state of residence,
as listed in Forbes, in the years following the death.21 If Forbes location is accurate, and
Forbes 400 billionaires pay estate taxes, we should see an increase in estate tax revenues in
the state that Forbes identifies as the state of residence. If Forbes location is inaccurate, or
Forbes billionaires are able to shelter most of their wealth from estate taxation, we should
see limited effect on state estate tax revenues in the state that Forbes identifies as the state
  19
      It is worth noting that 123 out of the 128 (96%) individuals had at least one child according to the
obituaries, underscoring the likelihood of strong bequest motives for the Forbes 400 population.
   20
      Forbes publishes its list in April of each year. If a death occurs between January and April, it is
conceivable that Forbes reported state of death is a function of location of death. Our results do not change
if we correlate state of death with a one-year lag in Forbes location.
   21
      The data on estate tax revenues comes from the Census Bureau's Annual Survey of State Tax Collections,
item T50 ("Death and Gift Taxes"). We deflate to 2017 dollars using the national CPI-U price index.



                                                     14
of residence. If Forbes location is accurate, and Forbes billionaires are able to shelter part
of their wealth from estate taxation, the estimated effect will be informative of the effective
tax rate for this group.
    Since we are using the time of death to empirically estimate its effect on state estate tax
revenues, we focus our analysis on the subset of deaths of unmarried individuals. The reason
is that if the deceased is married at the time of death, estate taxes are not due until the time
of death of the spouse. To be clear, estate taxes will ultimately need to be paid, irrespective
of the marital status of the deceased. However, in the case of married taxpayers, the timing
of the payment is a function of the time of death of the spouse, which we don't observe. In
our sample of deaths, there are 41 decedents who were unmarried at the time of death.
    Figure 4 shows two case studies. The top panel shows estate tax revenues in Arkansas
leading up to and after the death of James ("Bud") L. Walton, co-founder of Walmart along
with his brother Sam Walton. Bud Walton died in 1995 and was unmarried at the time.
The dashed vertical line in the figure indicates the year of death. As can be clearly seen in
the figure, estate tax revenues in Arkansas were generally stable in the years leading up to
his death, averaging around $16 million in inflation-adjusted 2017 dollars between 1982 and
1994. In the year after Walton's death, Arkansas estate tax revenues increased 425%, from
$34.8 million to $183.2 million ­ an increase of $148.3 million.22
    Forbes estimated Bud Walton's net worth in 1994 to be $1 billion, or $1.65 billion in 2017
dollars. Thus, assuming the $148 million jump in Arkansas estate tax revenues in 1996 was
due solely to Walton's death, this implies that the effective average tax rate on the Walton
estate was approximately 9.0%.
    The fact that this effective ATR is below Arkansas' top statutory tax rate of 16% is to be
expected. Recall from Section 2.2 that in practice estate taxpayers are able to reduce their
effective tax rates by reducing their estate tax base through a combination of charitable
bequests, asset valuation discounts, and other tax sheltering measures. In fact, the 9%
effective tax rate on the Walton estate is close to what we would expect from IRS data for
this population. Specifically, Raub et al. (2010) found that the estate values of Forbes 400
decedents reported on federal estate tax returns is about 50% of the net worth estimated
by Forbes, and IRS Statistics on Income data indicate that for estates with wealth above
$20 million, on average 24% is deducted for charitable bequests. This implies an effective
average tax rate in practice of around 38% (50% × (1 - .24)) times the statutory tax rate of
16%, which is 6.1%.23
  22
     Arkansas had a "pick-up" tax of the type described earlier, not a separate estate tax. The Arkansas
pick-up tax expired in 2005 when the federal credit to which it was tied was eliminated. This explains the
near-zero estate tax revenues in Arkansas after 2004 shown in the figure.
  23
     According to IRS rules, federal estate taxes are not subtracted from the base before state taxes are


                                                   15
    The bottom panel of Figure 4 shows estate tax revenues in Oklahoma before and after
the 2003 death of Edward Gaylord, a media and entertainment mogul. In the years leading
up to and including his death, state estate tax revenues were declining. They jumped in the
year after Gaylord's death by approximately $44 million (in 2017 dollars). The last estimate
by Forbes (in 2001) of Gaylord's net worth was $1.8 billion, equivalent to $2.49 billion in
2017 dollars. This implies an effective tax rate of just 2%. The low effective rate can be
attributed to some combination of Forbes' estimate being too high, an usually high share of
Gaylord's estate going to charity, and/or an usually high degree of tax sheltering.
    Of course, these are just two selected cases. We now turn to our full sample of deaths
to estimate the average response of state estate tax revenues to a Forbes 400 death. Figure
5 shows the average across all 41 deaths of unmarried individuals in our sample. The
figure plots state estate tax revenue from 5 years before a death to 5 years after a death.
State revenues are demeaned by national yearly means to account for aggregate year-to-year
variation (e.g., due to business cycle and other aggregate movements in asset values).24
    The figures shows that in the five years leading up to a death there is no obvious pre-
trend. The horizontal line marks the average revenue between t - 5 and t - 1 for a death
occurring in year t. In the years after a death, we uncover an economically large increase in
estate tax revenues. In the year of the death, state estate tax revenues exceed the pre-death
average by around $45 million (in 2017 dollars). The peak is in the year following the death,
year t +1, when state estate tax revenues exceed the pre-death average by around $65 million.
The corresponding estimates for t + 2 and t + 3 are $30 and $25 million, respectively.
    The average effect does not all occur in a single year (relative to the death year). The
timing of estate tax payments can vary from decedent to decedent based on the particular
situation. Some payments may occur in the year of the death if the death occurred early
in the year and asset valuation was relatively straightforward. In other cases, especially if
estate asset valuation is particularly complicated or there are legal disputes, payment may
occur a few years after the death. Figure 5 depicts the average response over cases.
    By summing the difference between the pre-death mean and the tax revenues in the
5 years after death, we estimate that, on average, a Forbes billionaire death results in an
increase in state estate revenues of $165 million. This estimate, combined with the fact the
average net worth of the deceased individuals that we included in Figure 5 is $2.01 billion,
implies that this group of individuals paid an effective estate tax rate of 8.25%. This rate
is about half of the typical 16% statutory average tax rate, suggesting that about half of
calculated.
  24
     In case a state has multiple deaths in different years, we treat them as separate events. There is one
case ­ Florida in 1995 ­ with two deaths in the same state and year. We code this as a single event, though
the results are very similar if we code it as two separate events.


                                                    16
their Forbes estimated wealth ends up taxed. This effective rate is close to the 6.1% back-of-
the-envelope effective rate we calculated above based on IRS federal estate tax data (Raub
et al., 2010).25
    We draw two main conclusions. First, following a death of a Forbes billionaire, we see
a measurable increase in estate tax revenues in the "right" state, i.e. the state that Forbes
identifies as the state of residence. Second, the magnitude of the increase is similar to what
we would expect based on IRS data. Having validated the Forbes data, we turn to the core
of our empirical analysis, estimating the sensitivity of the ultra-wealthy's locational choice
to estate taxes.


5      Effect of Estate Tax on Location of Forbes 400
    We use the elimination of the federal credit for state estate taxes in 2001 for assessing
the locational sensitivity of the ultra-rich to estate taxes. Prior to the elimination, all states
had essentially the same average estate tax rate for billionaires, combining federal and state
liabilities. After the elimination, there was stark geographical variation in estate tax liability
depending on whether a state has an estate tax or not.
    Figure 6 shows the unconditional share of Forbes 400 billionaires living in states that in
year 2001 had an estate tax. The vertical line marks 2001 ­ the year when the tax reform was
passed ­ and the shaded area marks the phase-in period 2001-2004. The dashed horizontal
lines are the mean before 2001 and after 2001.26 The Figure shows that in the years 1977-
2001 the ET state share fluctuates between 17.5% and 19.5%. In the years after the end of
the phase-in period, the share declines significantly, although not monotonically. In 1999,
2000 and 2001, the share was 19.5% and 19.2% and 19.1%, respectively. By year 2015, 2016
and 2017, the share has dropped to 12.8%, 13.5% and 13.4%­ a decline of about a third.
    There are no controls in Figure 6. To quantify more systematically the effect of the
reform, we start with a difference-in-difference estimator that compares the change in the
number of billionaires (or their wealth) prior to the 2001 credit elimination and after the
elimination in estate tax states and non-estate tax states. Our main empirical specification
is based on a triple-difference estimator, where we add a third difference (across age) to
the differences across states and before/after 2001. Because estate taxes only apply at
death and are only based on the domicile state at that time, billionaires should become
  25
     In the cost-benefit analysis in Section 6, we will use the 8.25% to compute the benefit in terms of tax
revenue that states can expect from adoption estate taxes. The qualitative results are similar using the 6.1%
rate instead.
  26
     Splitting observations by 2001 ET status, rather than current year ET status, ensures that any post-2001
break in the probability of living in an ET state is not driven by ET adoption or repeal by states.


                                                     17
more locationally sensitive to estate taxes as they age. Kopczuk (2007), for example, finds
evidence that wealthy individuals care about disposition of their estates significantly more
when they are closer to death. In addition, billionaires who work for or run a firm are
probably more constrained by firm location than older billionaires who have retired or are
not anymore involved in day to day firm activities.
   We also look at the probability that after 2001 individuals switch state of residence
away from ET states toward non-ET states. In particular, we estimate the probability that
individuals observed in an ET state in 2001 are observed in a non-ET state after the reform;
and the probability that individuals observed in a non-ET state in 2001 are observed in an
ET state after the reform.
   Finally, we quantify the aggregate losses for the state tax base caused by geographical
mobility of Forbes billionaires from estate tax states to non estate tax states.


5.1     Difference-in-Difference Estimates
    Table 3 shows the double-difference estimates. The level of observation is a state-year
pair, and the sample includes a balanced sample of 50 states observed for 35 years for a
total of 1,750 state-year observations. The dependent variables are the number of Forbes
400 individuals in that state in that year or the total wealth of Forbes 400 individuals in that
state in that year. Because the total across states is approximately a constant 400 every
year, the estimates based on number of billionaires would be proportional if we used the
share of the Forbes 400 in a state in that year.27
    We regress the number of Forbes 400 individuals in the state-year on only an indicator for
whether or not the state has an estate tax and its interaction with an indicator for whether
or not the year is post-2001. (Throughout the paper, the phase-in period 2001 to 2004 is
included in the estimation sample. Results don't change significantly if it is dropped or
if treatment is defined as starting in 2004.) We include state and year fixed effects in all
regressions. The post-2001 indicator itself is absorbed by the year fixed effects.
    In column 1, the coefficient on the estate tax state indicator is positive, indicating that
before 2001 the Forbes 400 population was slightly higher in the average ET state than in
the average non-ET state.28 By contrast, the coefficient on the interaction term is negative,
indicating that the average estate tax state saw a drop of billionaires after 2001 compared
  27
     Some years have slightly less than 400 individuals due to missing values for state or age.
  28
     Since before 2001 billionaire estate tax liability does not depend on location, one may expect this
coefficient to be zero. The fact that it is positive might suggest that states adopting estate taxes before 2001
tend to have amenities that are more attractive for billionaires than states not adopting estate taxes. Put
differently, i there is any unobserved heterogeneity across states in amenities, it would seem to be positively
correlated with estate tax status.


                                                      18
with the average non-estate tax state. The coefficient on the interaction term in column
1 is -2.358 (with a standard error of 0.683), suggesting that after 2001 the average estate
tax state lost 2.36 billionaires relative to non-estate tax states. Since the average number of
billionaires in an estate tax state in 2001 was 7.2 (7.01 over the full sample), a drop of 2.36
billionaires represents a 32.8% decline, as reported at the bottom of the Table.29
    One possible concern is that states that change their estate tax status might also change
other forms of taxation. In column 2 we control for the top marginal personal income tax
(PIT) rate, by state-year, by including both the rate and its interaction with the post-2001
indicator. For billionaires, the top PIT rate will approximately equal the average tax rate.
We find that the negative post-2001 effect of the estate tax is robust to controlling for the
PIT. This reflects the limited correlation between estate taxes and PIT taxes across states
over time that we discussed in the data section above and lends credibility to the notion that
it is changes in estate taxes that affect the changes in the number of billionaires in estate
tax states, not other changes in fiscal policies.
    The 2001 EGTRRA federal reform was common to all states and exogenous from the
point of view of states. However, in the years following the EGTRRA reform, states were
free to adopt new estate taxes or repeal existing ones, and some did. One possible concern is
that changes in estate tax status after 2001 may be correlated with unobserved determinants
of location choices of billionaires. In column 3, we instrument estate tax status after 2001
with estate tax status in 2001. The first-stage coefficient is 0.653 (0.097) and the first-stage
F statistic is 45.7, indicating a high degree of persistence in estate tax status. The point
estimate in column 3 is -3.019 (1.635). One cannot reject the null hypothesis that the IV
estimate is equal to the corresponding OLS estimate in column 3, although the IV estimate
is not very precise. The Hausman test statistic is 1.654 and the p-value is 0.437.30
    In column 4, the dependent variable is the per capita number of Forbes billionaires in a
state. The difference-in-difference coefficient is -0.662 (0.333). In column 5, the dependent
variables is Forbes reported wealth (in billions of 2017 dollars). The coefficient on the
interaction term is -16.52 (2.442), suggesting that after 2001 the average estate tax state lost
$16.5 billion relative to non-estate tax states. The implied elasticity is -39.7%.31
  29
     Since there is a fixed number of Forbes billionaires, treatment of one state comes at the expense of the
control group (the other 49 states). Thus models where the dependent variable is the number of billionaires
in a state suffer from a small source of bias. The bias, however, is likely to be negligible since for a treated
state there are 49 potential destination states.
  30
     The reduced form coefficient is -1.457 (0.449) (not reported in the table).
  31
     Note that, as we discussed above, if a decedent owned tangible property (eg, real estate) in multiple
states, they actually pay estate taxes to each of those states in proportion to the property value in each.
By contrast, intangible property (eg, financial assets) get taxed solely by the primary domicile state. The
Forbes wealth estimates are for total wealth of an individual and do not distinguish between tangible and
intangible assets. A separate issue is the fact that there is a very strong increase in the wealth of the average


                                                       19
    In columns 6 to 8 we probe the robustness of the estimates. In column 6, the indicator
for estate tax status is expanded to include states that have a inheritance tax. In column
7 we drop New York state, which is the state with the most Forbes billionaires. Dropping
California, which is the state that has gained the most billionaires in our sample period,
yields a point estimate of -1.694 (0.514) (not shown in the table). Dropping Pennsylvania,
a state that has lost many billionaires in our time period, yields a point estimate of -1.579
(0.640) (not shown in the table). In column 8, we drop the years 2002 to 2004, which is the
period where the federal credit for estate taxes was being phased out. Our estimates are
robust to dropping these years.
    One concern is that some of the variation over time in the geography of the Forbes
400 individuals reflects changes in the sample. Every year, there is entry and exit from the
sample, as some of less wealthy individuals in the sample are replaced by wealthier individuals
and some individuals die. To assess the sensitivity of our estimates to different definitions
of the sample, Panel A in Appendix Table A5 shows estimates based only on the wealthiest
100 individuals (column 1); the wealthiest 200 individuals (column 2); the wealthiest 300
individuals (column 3); and those who are in the sample for at least 10 years. Models in
this Panel correspond to the model in column 3 of the previous table. For the wealthiest
300 individuals and those who are in the sample for at least 10 years, the coefficient on
the estate tax status interacted with the post-2001 indicator appears similar to that for the
full sample, and larger than estimates for the wealthiest 100 and 200 individuals. However,
because the baseline pre-reform number of billionaires in the latter two samples are much
smaller, the implied elasticities (shown at the bottom of the table) are not very different
from those estimated in the full sample. If anything, the elasticity for the top 100 group and
for those who are in the sample for at least 10 years appear larger than the corresponding
elasticity for the full sample.
    In principle, our results have implications about the elasticity of wealth with respect to
a state wealth tax. For example, Poterba (2000) suggests multiplying the estate tax rate by
mortality rate to arrive at a measure of annual burden. Using a mortality rate of 1% for
illustration, a 16% estate tax change would then be approximately equivalent to a 0.16%
wealth tax change and a wealth tax elasticity of -0.2 equivalent to an estate tax elasticity
of -20. In our context, Chetty et al. (2016) estimates a the mortality rate for a 75 year old
Forbes billionaire in our sample period: As shown in Figure 2, after adjusting for inflation, the mean Forbes
billionaire is 10 times wealthier in 2017 than in 1982. This complicates the calculation of the elasticity, as
the baseline average computed in the the years before 2001 is significantly lower than the average in the
later years. To compute the elasticity entry in column 5, we conservatively deflate mean real wealth to be
constant over the sample period (by dividing pre-2001 wealth by 2017 mean wealth). The estimated elasticity
obtained using non-adjusted wealth (in 2017 dollars) is larger.



                                                     20
male in the top 1% of income is 1.6%, making a 16% estate tax equivalent to a wealth tax
of 0.26% and making our estimated estate tax elasticity of -39.7 equivalent to a wealth tax
elasticity of -0.65.


5.2     Triple-Difference Estimates
    If billionaires are sensitive to the estate tax, we expect the probability of a billionaire to
live in an estate tax state to be independent of the billionaire's age prior to 2001, but to
decrease with age in 2001 onward.
    In Figure 7, each point represents a 1-year age group. Its y-axis value is the fraction of
billionaires of that age that live in an estate tax state. This fraction can be interpreted as
the probability that a billionaire in the Forbes 400 sample of that age was living in an estate
tax state at that time. Hence, this is equivalent to estimating a linear probability model as a
function of age. Panel A shows the relationship with age over the pre-reform (2001) sample,
while Panel B shows the relationship over the post-2004 sample (after the federal credit was
fully phased out). The solid red line in each figure shows the estimated linear relationship
between the probability of a billionaire living in an estate tax state and age.
    The figure suggests that the probability of a billionaire to live in an estate tax state
increases slightly with billionaire's age prior to credit phase-out, and decreases with age
after the credit phase-out. The reversal in the age gradient is especially apparent for those
above 70 to 75 years old, consistent with the notion that estate tax are most salient for
older individuals. Appendix Figure A2 shows the same exercise using personal income taxes
instead of estate taxes. In that case one observes a positive age gradient both in the early
period and in the later period, suggesting that the effect uncovered in Figure 7 is specific of
estate taxes.
    Figure 8 shows the estimated age gradient separately for every year of our sample. The
two horizontal dashed lines are the mean pre-reform and mean post-reform age gradients.
For any given year the confidence interval is fairly large, but it is clear that there is a decline
in the age gradient after the reform. The slope coefficients before 2001 tend to be near zero
or slightly positive, while the slope coefficients after 2001 tend to be negative.32
    Table 4 shows estimates of triple-differenced models that include the difference between
  32
    The dip in 2009 appears to be driven by outliers. In particular, there were 3 billionaires moving from
estate tax (ET) to non-ET states in that year. We stress that year-to-year variation is volatile due to the
relatively small number of individuals (especially movers) in the Forbes 400, which is why we focus not on
year-to-year changes but the overall change from pre-reform to post-reform. Our main estimates are robust
to dropping 2009. We also note that the small positive age-gradient on average in the pre-reform period could
be attributable to a correlation between age and the amenities that happen to be present in non-estate tax
states ­ a correlation that our baseline models address with state fixed effects as well as triple-differencing.



                                                      21
young and old. We split the Forbes 400 into young and old, with the latter defined by age
greater than or equal to 65, the median age of the Forbes 400 in our sample. We regress
the number of billionaires by state, year, and age group on indicators for post-2001, "old,"
estate tax state, the interactions estate tax state X post-2001, estate tax state X old, old X
post 2001 and estate tax state X post-2001 X old. The coefficient on that last interaction
tests whether older billionaires (relative to younger) are more sensitive to state estate taxes
after 2001 than before.
    In terms of identification, the main advantage of triple-differenced models over the
difference-in-difference models is that the former allow us to control for the interaction of
estate tax (ET) status X post-2001. Thus, threats to validity stemming from the correlation
between unobserved differences across states in the determinants of Forbes' 400 geographical
locations and estate status after 2001 are accounted for. For example, if non-estate tax states
become more attractive to wealthy taxpayers after 2001 because of policy changes correlated
to estate status--whether personal income taxes, corporate taxes, or any other factor that
may affect attractiveness of a state to the ultra-wealthy--the interaction of ET status X
post-2001 would absorb such differences.33
    We find that older billionaires, compared with younger billionaires, are less likely to live
in an estate tax state after 2001. The coefficient on the triple interaction in column (1) is
-0.991 (0.330), indicating that the negative effect of estate taxes after 2001 is greater for
older billionaires than younger billionaires. This remains true when we condition on PIT
(column 2); when we instrument current estate tax status with 2001 status (column 3); when
the dependent variable is the per capita number of Forbes billionaires in a state (column 4)
or wealth (col 5). Estimates appear robust to variants of the specification in columns (6) to
(8).
    As we did for the difference-in-difference models, we assess the sensitivity of our estimates
to different definitions of the sample. Panel B in Appendix Table A5 shows estimates based
only on the wealthiest 100 individuals (column 1); the wealthiest 200 individuals (column
2); the wealthiest 300 individuals (column 3); and those who are in the sample for at least
10 years. Models in this Panel correspond to the model in column 3 of the previous table.
Estimates for the wealthiest 300 individuals and those who are in the sample for at least 10
years appear larger than estimates for the wealthiest 100 and 200 individuals. In terms of
  33
     Moreover, the triple difference model allays concerns about systematic measurement error. Consider the
case where state of residence as reported in Forbes is systematically biased, and more so after 2001 because
Forbes 400 individuals become more likely to mis-report their state of residence to Forbes reporters after
2001 in order to minimize the chance that state tax authorities perceive them as resident of estate tax states.
This may introduce bias in the difference in difference models. The triple difference estimates are unbiased
if the difference in the measurement error that exists in Forbes estimated location of old billionaires and
young billionaires is uncorrelated with changes over time in state estate taxes.


                                                      22
elasticities, however, the elasticity for the top 100 group is by far the largest.
    The level of observation in Table 4 is a state*year*age-group and the dependent variable
is the number of Forbes billionaires. As an alternative way to look at the same question is
use individual-level data and estimate how the probability of living in an estate tax state
varies with age before versus after 2001. In particular, Table 5 reports estimates from a linear
probability model where the dependent variable is the probability of living in an estate tax
state and the level of observation is an individual-year. Unlike Table 4, where we split
individuals into just two age groups, here age enters linearly. The standard errors are based
on two-way clustering by state-year and by individual.
    Consistent with Table 4 and Figure 7, the coefficients from the linear fit regressions in
column (1) indicate that there was no systematic relationship between estate taxes and age
prior to 2001. After 2001, however, the estimates in column (2) reveal a strong negative
relationship.34 Column (3) estimates the difference in the age gradient from before 2001
to after 2001. It is strongly negative and significant. The estimated slope coefficients in
column (4), which control for state fixed effects, indicate that over 2001 to 2017, with each
additional year of age, the probability of living in an estate tax state falls by -0.23 percentage
point. Given the unconditional probability of a 40-year old billionaire in our sample living
in an estate tax state after 2001 is about 22%, this age gradient implies that, for example,
a 50-year old, 70-year old and 90-year billionaire would be expected to have only a 19.4%,
14.2% and 9.0% probability of living in an estate tax state after 2001, respectively.
    In column (5) we add individual fixed effects. The estimated slope coefficient is 0.00213,
not very different from column (4), although the precision of our estimate drops.35 Overall,
columns (1) to (5) confirm the findings from the triple-differenced models: older billion-
aires tend to shift from estate tax states and to non-estate tax states, relative to younger
billionaires.
    In the last column, we perform a falsification test by assessing whether there is any similar
before- vs. after-2001 difference in age-dependence for the personal income tax. We divide
states into a "high income tax" group and "low/zero income tax" group according to whether
or not the state has a top marginal tax rate above 3%, which is close to the median. We
repeat the prior age-dependence regressions but now using the fraction of each age group in
a high income tax state as the dependent variable. We find no difference in age-dependence
before versus after 2001. In other words, the negative differential age-dependence after 2001,
  34
      The coefficients from the linear fit regressions in Figure 8 are provided in columns (1) and (2) of Table
5, Panel A.
   35
      In this specification the coefficient on age turns negative. It is possible that these results reflect a general
preference of older individuals for non-ET states that then strengthened after 2001, though we caution that
these results are based on the relatively small sample of individuals that switched states at some point.



                                                         23
compared to before 2001, appears to be specific of the estate tax.


5.3     Probability of Moving from an Estate Tax State to a Non-
        Estate Tax State and Vice-Versa
    An additional way to assess how estate taxes affect Forbes billionaires' locational choices
is to look explicitly at individual-level mobility. Here, we focus on the probability that
individuals who are observed residing in ET states before the reform physically move to
a non-ET state after the reform; and, inversely, the probability that individuals who are
observed living in non-ET states before the reform move to an ET state afterwards. If
Forbes billionaires were indeed induced to move away from ET states after the 2001 reform,
we expect to observe a high probability of moving from ET states to non-ET states after
2001 and a low probability of moving from non-ET states to ET states. We also expect this
to be particularly true for older individuals.
    For this analysis, we focus on the set of individuals in the Forbes 400 in 2001 that were
observed in a different state at some point between 1993 and 2009. For those living in an
estate tax (ET) state in 2001, we ask what share of them lived in a non-estate tax (non-ET)
state in each year t from 1993 to 2009.36 Similarly, for those living in a non-ET state in 2001,
we ask what share of them lived in an ET state in each year from 1993 to 2009. These yearly
share are shown in Panel A of Figure 9. For each year other than 2001, the blue line is the
probability of switching from a ET state to a non-ET state. The red line is the probability
of switching from a non-ET state to an ET state.
    Three aspects of the Figure are important for its interpretation. First, the focus here is
on geographical mobility. If a state switches ET status after 2001, and a billionaire does not
move, we are not counting that as a move. Second, the sample is unbalanced. Third, recall
that data on state of residence is missing in the Forbes 400 for 2002.
    The Figure shows that after 2001, billionaires living in ET states increasingly moved to
non ET-states. By contrast, after 2001, billionaires living in non-ET states did not move to
ET states in significant numbers. Of all of the Forbes billionaires living in ET states in 2001
(and who had not exited the sample by 2003), 6.67% were living in a non-ET state 2 years
later; and of all the Forbes billionaires living in non-ET states in 2001, 0.73% are observed
living in an ET state 2 years later. The difference, 5.94%, is the net migration toward non-
ET states. As the Figure shows, this difference tends to grow over time, as individuals have
more time to contemplate and initiate moving, although the increase is not monotonic. By
  36
     The share is calculated as the number living in a non-ET state divided by the number of ET state
residents in 2001 that are also observed in year t. Condition on being observed in year t prevents these
moving probabilities from mechanically falling due to sample attrition as t gets further away from 2001.


                                                  24
year 2010--namely 9 years after the reform--21.43% of individuals who originally were in
a ET state were in a non-ET state; while only 1.2% of individuals who originally were in a
non-ET state were in an ET state.
    Panels B and C, respectively, report probability of moving for Forbes billionaires who were
65 and older in 2001 and who were younger than 65. Consistent with the triple-differenced
models in table 4, these two panels show that most of the switching away from ET to non-
ET states is among older individuals. Among all the old Forbes billionaires in ET states
in 2001, 11.43% are observed living in a non-ET state 2 years later, while among all of the
old Forbes billionaires living in non-ET states in 2001, only 0.76% are observed in a non-ET
state 2 years later. The Figure shows that the difference grows over time. By contrast,
the mobility of young individuals is much lower, and not systematically correlated with ET
status. Overall, the findings in Figure 9 confirm the findings from our difference-in-difference
and triple-difference models above.


5.4    Effect of Tax-Induced Mobility on State Aggregate Tax Base
    The 2001 EGTRRA Federal Reform introduced potential tax competition among states
where there was none and induced some billionaires to relocate from estate tax states to non-
estate tax states. One first-order effect of such mobility was that it reduced the aggregate
tax base for states. Here we use our estimates of the effect of estate taxes on the number
of billionaires in a state to quantify the magnitude of the decline in the aggregate tax base
caused by mobility.
    Table 6 shows the effect of the tax induced mobility on the total number of Forbes
billionaires subject to state estate taxes (row 1) and their aggregate wealth (row 2). In
particular, Column (1) shows the total number of Forbes billionaires subject to state estate
taxes in 2001 and their total wealth. Column (2) shows the estimated changes due to mobility,
obtained by multiplying the baseline number of Forbes billionaires in 2001 and their 2001
wealth by -0.328 and -0.397, respectively--the estimated elasticities from columns (3) and
(7) of Table 3.
    Entries indicate that there were 72 Forbes billionaires subject to state estate taxes in
2001, and that tax induced mobility after 2001 resulted in 23.1 fewer Forbes billionaires
subject to state estate taxes. Moreover, $203.3 billion of Forbes billionaires' wealth was
subject to state estate taxes in 2001, and that tax induced mobility resulted in a drop of
$80.7 billion in wealth subject to state estate taxes. This appears to be a large aggregate loss
in the estate tax base of states. The way to interpret these numbers is that they represent
the long-run effect of mobility stemming from state tax differences on the stock of billionaires


                                              25
and the stock of wealth subject to state estate taxes, rather the annual flow of tax revenues.
If we assume an effective estate tax rate of 8.25% as estimated in Section 4 above, the loss
of $80.7 billion implies an aggregate long term loss of tax revenues of $6.66 billion. Since
11 states had an estate tax in 2001, this amounts to a mean loss per state equal to $605
million.37


6      Costs and Benefits for States of Enacting an Estate
       Tax
    In section 5, we found a high elasticity of Forbes billionaires' state of residence with
respect to state estate taxes, especially for older individuals. In this section, we study what
that estimated elasticity implies for state tax policies. Should estate tax states repeal estate
taxes? Should non-estate tax states adopt estate taxes?
    States face a trade-off. On the one hand, adoption of the estate tax implies a one-time
estate tax revenue gain for the state when a resident billionaire dies. As discussed in the
introduction, the magnitude of this revenue can be substantial, and in some cases it can
amount to a significant fraction of a state's overall annual revenue. On the other hand,
our estimates indicate that the adoption of an estate tax reduces the number of billionaires
residing in the state. In terms of state tax revenue, the main cost is the foregone income
tax revenues over the remaining lifetime of each billionaire who leaves the state due to the
estate tax, as well as any potential new billionaires that might have moved to the state in the
absence of an estate tax. The cost of foregone income tax revenue from a given billionaire
is different for different states: it is higher the higher is the state's income tax rate on
billionaires, which is approximately equal to the state's top marginal rate.
    This trade-off is not the usual Laffer-curve style trade-off that the literature typically
focuses on, where states with high tax rates are compared to states with low tax rates.
There is little empirical variation in estate tax rates--with virtually all states at either zero
or 16%. While states are free to set different rates, in practice they generally have stuck
with 16%, which is a historical holdover from the 16% maximum rate in the federal credit
that existed until 2001. Thus, in our calculations we compare tax revenues in the case where
a state has a 16% estate tax with tax revenues in the case where the state has no estate tax
at all. This is consistent both with the binary nature of state estate tax choices in practice,
and with the variation that is used to identify our empirical estimates of the effect of estate
taxes on billionaires' geographical location.
  37
    Again, this is not the change in the annual tax revenue flow. Rather it is the overall change in (undis-
counted) revenues over all future years from the pool of Forbes 400 billionaires observed in 2001.

                                                    26
    We seek to compare the magnitude of the costs and the benefits for different states of
adopting estate taxes in 2017. We use estimates of the elasticity of location with respect to
estate taxes from the previous section. We consider two types of estate tax in turn. First,
we provide an analysis of the costs and benefits for states of an estate tax that specifically
targets billionaires. Second, we generalize our findings and provide costs and benefits of
an estate tax on the full population of wealthy taxpayers, defined as taxpayers with wealth
above the 2017 federal estate tax exemption. This latter analysis is more speculative, as it
inevitably depends on an assumption of how the elasticity that we have estimated for the
ultra-wealthy maps to the analogous elasticity for the broader population of the "merely"
wealthy.



6.1    An Expression for Costs and Benefits
    To fix ideas, consider the simplest possible case of a representative Forbes billionaire in a
representative state. For state s that does not have an estate tax in 2017 and that adopts an
estate tax in 2017, we can write the benefit as the present discounted value of additional tax
revenues due to the estate tax at the time of death of billionaires who remain in the state
after the tax adoption. We can write the cost as the present discounted value of the stream
of personal income tax revenues that the state would have received, in absence of the estate
tax, from billionaires that were deterred from residing there. The expressions for the benefit
and cost are thus as follows:

                                          1 T                       W
                         Benef its = (       ) · Ns · (1 -  ) · W · s                        (1)
                                         1+r

                                         T
                                                   1 i                 Y
                              Costs =         (       ) · Ns ·  · Y ·  s                     (2)
                                        i=1       1+r
where Ns is the initial number of billionaires in state s before adoption of an estate tax; Y
and W are the taxable income and taxable wealth of the average billionaire; and  is our
estimate of the elasticity of the Forbes 400 population in a state with respect to the estate
tax indicator. Thus, (1 -  )Ns in equation (1) is the number of billionaires left in the state
after adoption and Ns in equation 2 is the number of billionaires who leave the state because
               W         Y
of adoption. s     and s   are the state estate tax rate and the personal income tax rate that
applies to Forbes billionaires, respectively; T is remaining lifetime for a billionaire or their
spouse, whichever is longer (recall that estate taxes are paid when the surviving spouse of a
couple dies.); r is the real discount rate for states.


                                                     27
    In practice, the benefits and costs are more complicated because the effect of estate tax
adoption on the number of billionaires was found to vary significantly depending on age.
Thus, we use a more general expression of costs and benefits that allows for the elasticity 
to vary by age and for states to differ in the the age structure of their billionaire population:

                                        100   ñ                                      ô
                                                  1 Ta                       W
                         Benef its =           (     ) · Na,s W · (1 - a ) · s                            (3)
                                       a=0       1+r

                                         100      Ta
                                                             1 i                 Y
                              Costs =                   (       ) · Na,s Y · a · s                        (4)
                                        a=0       i=1       1+r
where a indexes age; a is the estimated elasticity at age a; Na,s is the initial number of
billionaires of age a in the state in the before adoption of the estate tax; and Ta is remaining
life expectancy of a billionaire at age a or his spouse, whichever is longer.
     We use our estimates from the previous section to set a . In particular, based on Table 5,
column 3, we set a = 0.002 - 0.00332  a, where 0.002 is the estimated intercept and -0.00332
is the estimated elasticity age gradient. Na,s is measured as the number of billionaires of age
a observed in the state in 2017 in our data. We set W equal to 51.6% of the mean wealth
of the Forbes 400 in 2017 ($6.69 billion). 51.6% is the average fraction of Forbes wealth
ultimately subject to estate tax according to our earlier estimation of the effective estate
tax rate (8.25/16 = 51.6) in section 4. This ratio accounts for Forbes mismeasurement,
tax sheltering, and charitable bequest deductions. We set Y equal to 10.3% of taxable
wealth, which is $365 million. 10.3% is the ratio of taxable income to taxable estate value
for federal estate taxpayers under 70 (given that the median age of the Forbes 400 is 65),
according to IRS statistics on income data for 2008.38 State personal income tax rates s       Y

are from the National Bureau of Economic Research's TAXSIM. In particular, we use the
top marginal income tax rate in each state in 2017. Recall that for this high-wealth, high-
income population the average tax rate will be approximately equal to the top marginal tax
                                                                              W
rate. Empirically, the top rate in 2017 varies from 0 to 14%. We set s          = 16%. For Ta ,
we use 2017 age-specific life expectancy tables from the IRS (Publication 590-B, Appendix
B). These tables are for use by IRA owners and take account of the life expectancy of the
last survivor for couples within 10 years of age. Of course, it is possible that many spouses
of the Forbes 400 are more than 10 years younger.39 We consider how this would affect our
  38
      In Appendix Table A6, we provide results based on an alternative assumption whereby, following Saez
and Zucman (2019), Y is set equal to the 50% of the mean taxable income of the top 400 income taxpayers
from IRS Statistics on Income data.
   39
      IRS Publication 590-B, Appendix B, contains three separate life expectancy tables. Table III is the
uniform life expectancy table for IRA owners that are either unmarried or have a spouse within 10 years of
age. However, it only provides life expectancies for ages 70 and above. Table II provides life expectancies by



                                                              28
cost-benefit ratios below, and in Appendix Table A6 we adjust age-specific life expectancy
to account for evidence from Chetty, et al. (2016) that life expectancy increases with wealth.
Specifically, they find that in 2014 (their latest year of data) male life expectancy was 8.7%
higher at the top of the income distribution than at the median.40 Lastly, for r, we use 0.02
because it is close to the real interest rate on state and local municipal bonds in 2017.
    Costs and benefits are measured in dollars, and their ratio tells us whether a state that
does not have an estate tax in 2017 would experience an increase or a decrease in the net
present value of tax revenues if it adopted an estate tax in 2017. For states that do have
an estate tax in 2017, we use the same expression to estimate whether the state would
experience an increase or a decrease in tax revenues if it repealed the tax. For both groups,
we present costs and benefits defined as costs and benefits of having an estate tax relative
to not having one.41
    We stress that in interpreting our estimates, some important caveat should be recognized.
First, our measures of costs only include the direct costs to state revenues, namely the
foregone taxable income of the billionaires who relocate due to the estate tax. The relocation
of billionaires may have additional, indirect costs for states. This may happens, for example,
if a billionaire's change of residence causes relocation of firms and investments or reduces
local charitable giving. In addition, adoption of an estate tax could cause intensive-margin
adjustments, such as increased tax avoidance and/or reduced savings. However, it should
be kept in mind that billionaires in all states are subject to the federal estate tax and so
they likely already have taken advantage of most feasible tax avoidance measures. Any
additional tax avoidance only affects the estate tax and arguably is already incorporated in
our estimates of effective estate tax rate, while reduced savings may result in lower capital
income. An analysis of these indirect effects is a paper in itself, and outside the scope of the
current analysis. A separate caveat is that our measure of revenue costs exclude sales tax
and property tax revenues, which are mostly local (city and county).
    Second, all calculations are done state-by-state. The state-level parameters affecting the
fiscal externality are the state personal income tax rate, and the initial number of billionaires
in that state. We assume a constant elasticity of mobility across all states. In practice, this
assumption may be violated, as elasticities may differ greatly across locations, and will be
an important driver of state-level fiscal externalities.
age of IRA owner and age of spouse. Table III's life expectancies for age 70 matches that of Table II for an
IRA owner of age 70 with a spouse of age 60. Thus, for ages between 30 and 70, we assume a spousal age
of 10 years younger. For ages below 30, we use Table I, which applies to single IRA owners.
  40
     Data obtained at https://healthinequality.org/
  41
     For states that do not have ET in 2017, a Na,s is the estimated long-run loss in the number of billionaires
caused by adoption. For states that do have ET in 2017, a Na,s is the estimated long-run gain in the number
of billionaires caused by repeal. Similarly for (1 - a )Na,s .


                                                      29
6.2    Estimates of Costs and Benefits of an Estate Tax on Billion-
       aires
    Based on these assumptions, we estimate that the cost-benefit ratio of having a billionaire
estate tax in 2017 is 0.47 for the average state (with at least one billionaire), indicating that
the the additional revenues from the estate tax exceeds the cost of foregone income tax
revenues by a significant margin. Remarkably, despite the high elasticity of billionaires to
state estate taxes, the gain for the average state from taxing the estates of the remaining
billionaire population exceeds the loss of income tax flows from those billionaires that flee.
    The cost-benefit ratio varies greatly across states due to the variation in state income tax
rates. Table 7 shows estimates of costs and benefits for each state. Panel A includes states
that had an estate tax as of 2017. The first row indicates that Connecticut had 7 Forbes
billionaires in 2017, with an aggregate wealth of $47.2 billion. Based on the state personal
income tax rate, we estimate the revenue benefit of having an estate tax to be 26% larger
than the revenue cost, with a cost-benefit ratio equal to 0.74. In the last column we show
that net expected present value (EPV) of having an estate tax is $376 million. We stress
that entries in column 5 are not annual figures, but the expected present value computed
over the expected remaining lifetimes of the 2017 Forbes 400.
    By contrast, for Hawaii the benefit of having an estate tax is 43% larger than the cost,
with a cost-benefit ratio equal to 1.43. The expected present value of having an estate tax is
-$73 million. The difference between Connecticut and Hawaii is largely due to the difference
in their personal income tax (PIT) rate. Hawaii's PIT is higher than Connecticut's. The
higher PIT rate in Hawaii means a higher opportunity cost of foregoing billionaires' income
tax streams.
    In general, we find that states with high personal income tax rates tend to have higher
cost-benefit ratios, while states with low personal income tax rates tend to have low cost-
benefit ratios. Indeed, for the state of Washington, which has no PIT, the cost-benefit
ratio is 0. We estimate that for this state expected present value of having an estate tax
is $2.005 billion, the largest in this group. Maryland, Massachusetts and Pennsylvania are
other examples of states with benefits much larger than costs, with cost-benefit ratios equal
to 0.56, 0.50 and 0.35, respectively. New York has a cost-benefit ratio of 0.66, and an EPV
of having an estate tax equal to $5.18 billion.
    Overall, of the 10 states that currently have an estate tax and have at least one billionaire,
9 states have a cost-benefit ratio below one and only Hawaii has a ratio above one. The last
row in panel A indicates that for the average state in this group, the benefit of having an
estate tax is 39% larger than the cost.


                                               30
    Panel B shows results for states that did not have an estate tax in 2017. In this group,
California has by far the largest cost-benefit ratio--1.45--because it has the highest PIT
rate. We estimate that if California adopted the estate tax, it would lose $8.26 billion in
EPV of revenue. However, California is more the exception than the rule. For most other
states in this panel, we estimate that the cost-benefit ratio is well below 1, indicating that
estate tax adoption would increase their tax revenues. For example, Florida and Texas have
no personal income tax and therefore the cost-benefit ratio for them is 0. We estimate that
they would gain $7.68 and $7.06 billion, respectively, in EPV of revenues if they adopted
estate tax. The two other states with the largest absolute estimated gains from adoption in
this group are Nevada and Tennessee.
    The last row indicates that on average, the cost-benefit ratio for this group is 0.42,
indicating that for the average non-adopting state the tax revenue benefit of having an estate
tax on billionaires would significantly exceed the cost from foregone income tax revenues.
Overall, of the 28 states that currently do not have estate tax and have at least one billionaire,
27 states would increase their revenues if they adopted estate taxes. However, the relative
magnitude of costs and benefits varies widely, and depends strongly on the personal income
tax rate, as the cost of adoption tends to be much higher in states with high income tax
rates.
    In Panel A of Appendix Table A6 we probe the sensitivity of our results to alternative
parameterizations. First, we allow for wealth and income to grow over time. Recall that the
baseline estimates are based on wealth and income set at their 2017 levels. But historically,
wealth and income of Forbes billionaires have grown significantly, as we saw in Figure 2.
Alternative 1 in the table assumes that real wealth and income grow beyond 2017 at 7.0%
per year, which is the average annual growth rate of Forbes 400 real wealth from 1982­2017.
Next, we increase the assumed longevity of the surviving spouse. In the baseline we used
IRS life expectancy tables that implicitly assume that one's spouse is within 10 years of
age. Alternative 2 uses IRS surviving spouse life expectancies, by age of older spouse, for
a couple 20 years apart in age. Alternative 3 assumes states discount future revenues using
a real interest rate of 1% (vs. 2% in the baseline). Alternative 4 assumes states discount
using a real interest rate of 3%. Alternative 5, following Saez and Zucman (2019), assumes
that the Forbes 400 have income equal to half of the gross adjusted income reported by the
top 400 income taxpayers according to IRS SOI data (vs. the baseline where we assume it
is 10.3% of Forbes 400 taxable wealth). All other parameter assumptions are the same as in
the baseline scenario. The finding that benefits exceed costs for most states is found to be
robust to these alternative assumptions.



                                               31
6.3     Estimates of Costs and Benefits of a Broad Estate Tax
    Above we calculated costs and benefits for states of adopting an estate tax on billionaires'
estates. Here, we extend the analysis to consider the costs and benefits of adopting a broader
estate tax, one modeled on the current federal estate tax. That tax applies to taxpayers with
estate values above an exemption threshold that in 2017 equaled $5.5 million for individuals
and $11 million for couples. Many estate-tax states follow this federal exemption level in
2017.42
    For each state, we compute the costs and benefits of an estate tax on this broader
group of wealthy taxpayers using the same approach that we used above for billionaires.
In particular, we use the same formula for costs and benefits--equations (3) and (4)--with
different parameters and data.
    The key parameter that we need is the elasticity of mobility with respect to the estate
tax. It is not clear how the elasticity that applies on average to all wealthy taxpayers--those
with wealth above $5.5-$11 million--compares to the elasticity that we have estimated for
the ultra-wealthy--the Forbes 400 billionaires. We present estimates of costs and benefits
under two alternative assumptions about the elasticity: (a) the elasticity for taxpayers with
wealth above $5.5-$11 million is the same as the elasticity that we estimated for Forbes
billionaires or (b) it is half of what we estimated for billionaires. We note that within the
sample of Forbes billionaires, we did not find major differences for those in the top 100 group,
top 200 or top 300.
    To quantify the cost-benefit analysis for the broad group of wealthy taxpayers, we also
need state-by-state data on (1) the estate tax base ((Was Nas ) ­ i.e., the total wealth of all
state residents with wealth above the exemption level, (2) the income tax base for potential
estate taxpayers ((Yas Nas ) ­ i.e., the total income of all state residents with wealth above
                                                                                  W
the exemption level; and (3) the average tax rates (ATRs) on estate wealth (s        ) and income
  Y
(s ) for potential estate taxpayers. We discuss the data sources for each of these variables
in Appendix A.
                                                                       W
    One important aspect to note here is that the estate ATR (s          ) is lower than that for
the billionaire estate tax considered above because of a progressive rate schedule. Unlike
for billionaires, for the population of federal estate taxpayers progressivity leads to a lower
average ATR than the top MTR. We assume the same degree of progressivity as that of the
federal estate tax.43
  42
    The lowest is $1 million in Massachusetts and Oregon (see Michael (2018)).
  43
    Specifically, we set the effective equal to 16% times 0.625 (=10%), which is the ratio of the effective
average tax rate (25%) to the top statutory rate (40%) for the federal estate tax according to IRS Statistics
on Income data for 2017.



                                                     32
    Table 8 shows estimates of costs and benefits under each of the two alternative assump-
tions on the elasticity of tax mobility. Starting with estimates based on the baseline elasticity,
Panel A shows that among the 14 states that had an estate tax as of 2017, the benefits of
having it exceed the costs in all but four high PIT states: Hawaii, Minnesota, Oregon and
Vermont. Maine is close to the indifference. The last row in panel A indicates that for the
average state that in 2017 had an estate tax, the benefit of having the estate tax are 9%
larger than the costs.
    Panel B shows results for states that did not have an estate tax in 2017. California
remains the state with the largest cost-benefit ratio by far: 1.94. However, the estimated
cost-benefit ratio is below 1 for most other states. In particular, of the 36 states that in
2017 did not have estate tax, the benefit of the tax exceeds the cost in 32 states. The last
row indicates that on average, the cost-benefit ratio for this group is 0.60 indicating that the
average non-adopting state would benefit from adoption.
    A comparison of Panels A and B with the Panels A and B in the previous Table indicates
that the general pictures that emerges is qualitatively similar­with benefits higher than costs
in most cases--but the cost-benefit ratios found for an estate tax on the wealthy are slightly
higher than those found for a billionaire estate tax. The reason stems primarily from the
fact that the assumed estate tax ATR is lower due to progressivity.44
    Entries in the last two columns of the Table report estimated costs and benefits when
we use an elasticity of mobility with respect to an estate tax for the population of wealthy
taxpayers that is equal to half of the elasticity estimated for Forbes billionaires. The cost-
benefit ratios are much lower. This is to be expected: lower elasticity means that the
adoption of the tax causes a smaller loss in the number of wealthy taxpayers, and therefore a
smaller decline in personal tax revenues. In this scenario, the cost-benefit ratio is below one
for every state, including California. In Panel B of Appendix Table A6 we show estimates
under alternative assumptions on the parameters. As with the billionaire-only estate tax,
our baseline finding of a cost-benefit ratio below one for most states is generally robust. Not
surprisingly, the two alternatives (2 and 4) in which the cost-benefit ratio averages above one
correspond to increasing the life expectancy of surviving spouses (hence allowing for more
years of income taxes and further discounting the future estate tax revenue) or assuming a
higher discount rate (hence discounting more the future one-time estate tax revenue relative
to the annual stream of income tax revenues).
    Overall, we conclude that the implications that states can draw from our estimates of
the costs and benefits of a broad estate tax are not qualitatively very different from the
  44
    If we instead assume the same ATR as we did for the billionaire estate tax ­ that is, 16% instead of 10%
­ the resulting cost-benefit ratios are very similar to those found in Table 8.



                                                    33
implications that states can draw from our estimates of costs and benefits of an estate tax
only on billionaires. In most cases, benefits exceed costs, although the exact magnitude of
benefits and costs varies widely across states. For the broad estate tax, we can't be certain of
the exact benefits and costs since the true elasticity of mobility with respect to estate taxes
is unknown. But we found that if wealthy taxpayers in general are less mobile in response
to taxes than billionaires, the case for a broad state estate tax is stronger.


7    Conclusion
    Estate taxes are a form of wealth taxation that takes place at death. The 2001 federal
tax reform introduced stark cross-state variation in estate tax liabilities for wealthy tax-
payers. Our findings indicate that the ultra-wealthy are keenly sensitive to this variation.
Specifically, we find that billionaires responded strongly to geographical differences in estate
taxes by increasingly moving to states without estate taxes, especially as they grew older.
Our estimated elasticity implies that $80.7 billion of 2001 Forbes 400 wealth escaped estate
taxation in the subsequent years due to billionaires moving away from estate tax states.
    Yet, despite the high elasticity of geographical location with respect to the estate tax, we
find that for most states the benefit of additional revenue from the estate tax exceeds the cost
of foregone income tax revenue by a significant margin. Adoption of an estate tax implies a
one-time tax revenue gain for the state when a resident billionaire dies, but it also reduces
its billionaire population and thus their flow of income tax revenue over remaining lifetimes.
For the average state the benefit of additional revenue from the estate tax exceeds the cost of
foregone income tax revenue by 31%. While the cost-benefit ratio varies substantially across
states, most states that currently do not have estate taxes would experience revenue gains if
they adopted estate taxes. California, which has the highest personal income top tax rate,
is the main exception.
References
Akcigit, U., Baslandze, S., and Stantcheva, S. (2016). Taxation and the international mobility
  of inventors. American Economic Review, 106(10):2930­81.

Bakija, J. and Slemrod, J. (2004). Do the rich flee from high state taxes? evidence from
  federal estate tax returns. Working Paper 10645, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Br¨
  ulhart, M., Gruber, J., Krapf, M., and Schmidheiny, K. (2017). The elasticity of taxable
  wealth: Evidence from switzerland. NBER Working Paper, (22376).

Br¨
  ulhart, M. and Parchet, R. (2014). Alleged tax competition: The mysterious death of
  bequest taxes in switzerland. Journal of Public Economics, 111:63­78.

Chetty, R., Stepner, M., Abraham, S., Lin, S., Scuderi, B., Turner, N., Bergeron, A., and
 Cutler, D. (2016). The association between income and life expectancy in the united
 states, 2001-2014. Jama, 315(16):1750­1766.

Conway, K. S. and Rork, J. C. (2004). Diagnosis murder: The death of state death taxes.
  Economic Inquiry, 42(4):537­559.

Cooper, J. A. (2006). Interstate competition and state death taxes: A modern crisis in
  historical perspective. Pepp. L. Rev., 33:835.

Jakobsen, K., Jakobsen, K., Kleven, H., and Zucman, G. (2018). Wealth taxation and wealth
  accumulation: Theory and evidence from denmark. Technical report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Kleven, H. J., Landais, C., Mu~
                              noz, M., and Stantcheva, S. (2019). Taxation and migration:
  Evidence and policy implications. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33(4).

Kleven, H. J., Landais, C., and Saez, E. (2013a). Taxation and international migration
  of superstars: Evidence from the european football market. American economic review,
  103(5):1892­1924.

Kleven, H. J., Landais, C., Saez, E., and Schultz, E. (2013b). Migration and wage effects of
  taxing top earners: Evidence from the foreigners' tax scheme in denmark. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 129(1):333­378.


                                             35
Kopczuk, W. (2007). Bequest and tax planning: Evidence from estate tax returns. Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 122(4).

Kopczuk, W. (2009). Economics of estate taxation: A brief review of theory and evidence.
 Tax Law Review, 63(1).

Kopczuk, W. and Saez, E. (2004). Top wealth shares in the united states, 1916­2000:
 Evidence from estate tax returns. National Tax Journal, 57(2).

Michael, J. (2018). Survey of state estate, inheritance, and gift taxes. Technical report,
 Research Department, Minnesota House of Representatives.

Moretti, E. and Wilson, D. J. (2017). The effect of state taxes on the geographical location of
 top earners: Evidence from star scientists. American Economic Review, 107(7):1858­1903.

Poterba, J. M. (2000). The estate tax and after-tax investment returns. Does Atlas Shrug?:
  The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich, page 329.

Raub, B., Johnson, B., and Newcomb, J. (2010). A comparison of wealth estimates for
  america's wealthiest decedents using tax data and data from the forbes 400. In National
  Tax Association Proceedings, 103rd Annual Conference on Taxation, pages 128­135.

Rauh, J. D. and Shyu, R. (2020). Behavioral responses to state income taxation of high
  earners: Evidence from california. Stanford Graduate School of Business.

Saez, E. and Zucman, G. (2016). Wealth inequality in the united states since 1913: Evidence
  from capitalized income tax data. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(2):519­578.

Saez, E. and Zucman, G. (2019). Progressive wealth taxation. Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity.

Slattery, C. and Zidar, O. (2019). Evaluating state and local business tax incentives. Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 85(4).

Slemrod, J. and Gale, W. G. (2001). Rethinking the estate and gift tax. Brookings.

Slemrod, J. and Kopczuk, W. (2003). Dying to save taxes: Evidence from estate tax returns
  on the death elasticity. Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(2).

Smith, M., Zidar, O., and Zwick, E. (2019). Top wealth in the united states: New estimates
  and implications for taxing the rich. Working Paper.

Walczak, J. (2017). State inheritance and estate taxes. Technical report, Tax Foundation.

                                              36
Young, C. and Varner, C. (2011). Millionaire migration and state taxation of top incomes:
  Evidence from a natural experiment. National Tax Journal, 64(2):255.

Young, C., Varner, C., Lurie, I. Z., and Prisinzano, R. (2016). Millionaire migration and
  taxation of the elite: Evidence from administrative data. American Sociological Review,
  81(3):421­446.




                                           37
Appendix A ­ Data Used in Cost-Benefit Calculations
    In this appendix, we discuss the data that we use in section 6.3 to compute the costs
and benefits of a broad-based estate tax on wealthy taxpayers. We use equations (3) and
(4). We need state-by-state data or estimates on (1) the estate tax base ((Was Nas ) ­ i.e.,
the total wealth of all state residents with wealth above the exemption level, (2) the income
tax base for potential estate taxpayers ((Yas Nas ) ­ i.e., the total income of all state residents
with wealth above the exemption level, (3) the average effective tax rates on estate wealth
   W                  Y
(s   ) and income (s    ) for potential estate taxpayers.
    Estate tax base.          In 2017, the federal estate tax applies to estate values above
$5.5 million for individuals and $11 million for couples. Most current estate-tax states
follow this federal exemption level, while some had lower exemptions. (The lowest is $1
million in Massachusetts and Oregon (see Michael (2018)). In our calculations, we use
for simplicity the same exemption threshold that applies U.S. federal estate tax and same
degree of progressivity ­ except with a 16% top marginal rate, which is the top rate nearly
all estate-tax states have currently.
    To estimate the potential estate tax base in each state, we start with IRS Statistics on
Income (SOI) data on total estate values reported on federal estate tax returns by state
of residence.45 Because the wealth by state on federal estate tax returns can be volatile
from year to year, especially for small states, we use the average over 2015-2017 rather
than just 2017. To fully utilize age-specific IRS data on income to wealth ratios discussed
below, we apportion the statewide estate values to three broad age group (under 70, 70-79,
and over 79) using national shares of estate tax returns by age group. Following the estate
multiplier technique of Kopczuk and Saez (2004) and others, we estimate the underlying
living population of wealthy taxpayers in each state by dividing the total estate values by
the mortality rate for each age group from the Social Security Administration.46 Given that
mortality rates have been found to be considerably lower for the wealthy than for the general
population, we adjust the mortality rates based on the mortality differentials provided in
Saez and Zucman (2019).
    Income tax base. The income tax base for the population of potential estate taxpayers,
by state and age group, can be estimated by multiplying the state-specific taxable estate tax
values (Was Nas ) obtained above by the aggregate ratio of taxable income (Ya Na ) to taxable
                                                                           Ä       ä
                                                                             Ya Na
estate value (Wa Na ) over all federal estate taxpayers: Yas Nas = Was Nas W  a Na
                                                                                    . The national
aggregates of Ya Na and Wa Na , by age group, are provided by the IRS Statistics on Income.
Specifically, for 2008, the IRS matched all federal estate tax returns to the Form 1040 income
  45
       https://www.irs.gov/statistics/soi-tax-stats-estate-tax-statistics-filing-year-table-2.
  46
       https://www.ssa.gov/oact/STATS/table4c6.html#ss.


                                                38
tax returns filed by the decedent in the year prior to death. They report both taxable estate
value and prior-year taxable income across taxpayers within each broad age group.47 In
aggregate, these taxpayers had taxable estate values of $117.1 billion and prior-year taxable
incomes of $7.9 billion ­ an income/wealth ratio of 0.074. The ratio falls with age (due
primarily to labor income falling sharply over these three age groups): It is 0.103 for those
under 70, 0.071 for ages 70 to 79, and 0.058 for those over 79.
    Average tax rates. For the average income tax rate, we use the top marginal tax rate,
as we did in the previous section. Top income tax brackets among states generally start at
incomes well below the income levels of individuals with wealth above the federal estate tax
exemption ($11 million for couples). Given that we seek to estimate the costs and benefits
of states adopting an estate tax with the same degree of progressivity as the federal estate
tax, albeit with a lower top rate (16%), we need to take account of this progressivity when
estimating the average effective estate tax rate. To estimate this average rate, we multiply
the top marginal rate in state estate taxes, 16%, by the ratio of the average tax rate to
the top marginal tax rate in the federal estate tax. The federal top marginal rate in 2017
was 40%. The average effective tax rate, based on 2017 IRS SOI data on total estate tax
payments as a percentage of taxable estate values (adjusted for spousal deductions), was
25%. Hence, we estimate the state average estate tax rate would be 16%*(25/40) = 10%.




  47
     We add back spousal bequest deductions to taxable estate value because our cost estimates are based
on revenues collected when the surviving spouse dies.


                                                  39
                 Table 1: Forbes 400 by State, 2017
                  Forbes Population   Mean Wealth     1982-2017 Change
State                  in 2017        in 2017 (mil) in Forbes Population
Alabama                   0                                   0
Alaska                    0                                   0
Arizona                   5              2780                4
Arkansas                  5              16800                3
California               92              6715               37
Colorado                  5              8540                0
Connecticut               7              6743                 3
Delaware                  0                                 -14
Florida                  35              4229               14
Georgia                   9               4767                1
Hawaii                    1               9600                0
Idaho                     1              2700                -2
Illinois                 14              3443                -2
Indiana                   3              4300                1
Iowa                      1               3900                1
Kansas                    2              25800                0
Kentucky                  1               2700               -1
Louisiana                 1               2800                0
Maine                     0                                  -1
Maryland                  7               3371                3
Massachusetts             8               5988               0
Michigan                  6               4417               -1
Minnesota                 3               3500               -5
Mississippi               0                                   0
Missouri                  5              5700                 2
Montana                   3              4700                 3
Nebraska                  2              41100                1
Nevada                    8               7475                5
New Hampshire             0                                  -1
New Jersey                6               5083               0
New Mexico                0                                  -1
New York                 71               6256              -10
North Carolina            3               5800                3
North Dakota              0                                   0
Ohio                      3               3467               -7
Oklahoma                  5               6860               -2
Oregon                    1              25200               -2
Pennsylvania              5              3500               -12
Rhode Island              0                                  -1
South Carolina            1               3500               0
South Dakota              1               2200               1
Tennessee                 8               3813               5
Texas                    34               5600              -30
Utah                      0                                   0
Vermont                   0                                  -2
Virginia                  4               8775               -2
Washington               10              24590                9
West Virginia             0                                  -1
Wisconsin                 9               5122                8
Wyoming                   4              11700                3
Average                   8               7988                0
            Table 2: Forbes 400 by Consolidated Metro Area (Top 40), 2017
                                                      Forbes Population   Mean Wealth       1982-2017 Change
City                                                       in 2017        in 2017 (mil)   in Forbes Population
Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Gainesville, GA-AL                     9               4767                   2
Austin-Round Rock-Marble Falls, TX                            4              8025                   4
Boston-Worcester-Manchester, MA-RI-NH                         8              5988                  -2
Chicago-Naperville-Michigan City, IL-IN-WI                   14              3443                  -2
Columbia, MO                                                  2              6800                   2
Dallas-Fort Worth, TX                                        18              5950                  -9
Denver-Aurora-Boulder, CO                                     4              9900                  -1
Detroit-Warren-Flint, MI                                     3               4400                  -1
Fayetteville-Springdale-Rogers, AR-MO                         4              20375                  3
Houston-Baytown-Huntsville, TX                               11               4464                -10
Indianapolis-Anderson-Columbus, IN                           2               2700                   0
Jackson, WY                                                   4              11700                  4
Kalamazoo-Portage, MI                                         2               3950                  0
Knoxville-Sevierville-La Follette, TN                         2               3050                  2
Las Vegas-Paradise-Pahrump, NV                                7              7471                   4
Los Angeles-Long Beach-Riverside, CA                         31              4806                   3
Miami-Fort Lauderdale-Pompano Beach, FL                      25              4416                 13
Milwaukee-Racine-Waukesha, WI                                 4              3800                   3
Minneapolis-St. Paul-St. Cloud, MN-WI                         2               4100                 -5
Naples-Marco Island, FL                                       3               5033                  2
Nashville-Davidson­Murfreesboro­Columbia, TN                  4               4275                  3
New York-Newark-Bridgeport, NY-NJ-CT-PA                      80               6368                 -9
Oklahoma City-Shawnee, OK                                     3               7867                 -2
Omaha-Council Bluffs-Fremont, NE-IA                           2              41100                  1
Philadelphia-Camden-Vineland, PA-NJ-DE-MD                     5               3500                -16
Phoenix-Mesa-Glendale, AZ                                     5               2780                  5
Port St. Lucie-Sebastian-Vero Beach, FL                       1               4100                 -1
Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro, OR-WA                           2              14450                  0
Raleigh-Durham-Cary, NC                                       2               6700                  2
Rochester-Batavia-Seneca Falls, NY                            2               2850                  2
San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos, CA                             2               3750                 -2
San Jose-San Francisco-Oakland, CA                           54               8154                 37
Santa Barbara-Santa Maria-Goleta, CA                          2               4250                  2
Seattle-Tacoma-Olympia, WA                                    8              29775                  7
St. Louis-St. Charles-Farmington, MO-IL                       2               5450                  1
Stockton, CA                                                  1               2400                  1
Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL                           4               2375                  3
Tulsa-Bartlesville, OK                                        2               5350                  0
Washington-Baltimore-Northern Virginia, DC-MD-VA-WV          10               5490                  4
Wichita-Winfield, KS                                          1              48500                  0
Average                                                       9               8366                  1
                                             Table 3: Difference-in-Difference
                                       Dependent Variable: Population of Forbes 400

                                (1)           (2)         (3)       (4)               (5)              (6)              (7)             (8)
                                                          IV    Per Capita          Wealth      Incl. inher. tax     Drop NY       Drop 2002-04
ET-State X post-2001        -2.358        -2.387        -3.019   -0.660            -16.52          -2.269            -2.339          -2.558
                             (0.683)       (0.810)      (1.635)  (0.333)            (2.442)          (0.657)          (0.718)         (0.700)

ET-State                     1.345         1.243         -0.466      0.343          11.67            1.156            1.028          1.215
                             (0.512)       (0.513)      (0.395)      (0.106)        (6.596)          (0.417)          (0.372)        (0.528)

PIT X post-2001                           0.0000430
                                          (0.00101)

PIT                                      0.00320
                                         (0.000940)
Observations                   1750         1750          1750         1750          1750             1750              1715          1650
Semi-elasticity                -.328        -.331         -.419        -.539         -.397            -.315             -.325         -.355
  Std. Error                    .095         .112          .227         .272         .059              .091               .1           .097
State Fixed Effects             Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes              Yes               Yes           Yes
Year Fixed Effects              Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes              Yes               Yes           Yes
Driscoll-Kraay (with 10-year bandwidth) standard errors in parentheses. IV regression instruments for ET-States,t
and its interactions using a variable (and its corresponding interactions) equal to ET-States,t for t<2001 and to ET-States,2001
for t2001.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
                                          Table 4: Triple-Difference
                                 Dependent Variable: Population of Forbes 400

                                       (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)       (5)                   (6)              (7)              (8)
                                                                IV        Per Capita Wealth            Incl. inher. tax     Drop NY        Drop 2002-04
ET-state X post-2001 X old         -0.991       -0.798       -1.907        -0.658    -22.65               -1.056            -1.179           -1.161
                                    (0.330)      (0.282)      (0.549)       (0.214)   (4.611)               (0.360)          (0.416)          (0.269)

ET-state X old                      0.335         0.159       3.073         0.476         6.643             0.399            0.560            0.335
                                    (0.185)      (0.225)      (0.459)       (0.158)       (2.427)           (0.169)          (0.180)          (0.185)

ET-State X post-2001               -1.567        -0.794        -0.556      -0.000977        3.065          -0.631            -0.580           -0.699
                                    (0.416)      (0.445)      (1.001)       (0.0797)       (2.777)         (0.284)           (0.252)          (0.349)

old X post-2001                     1.717        2.953        2.066         0.330         18.59            1.738             1.472            1.782
                                    (0.271)      (0.571)      (0.464)       (0.0742)      (3.084)          (0.294)           (0.271)          (0.265)

ET-State                            0.707         0.542      -1.769          -0.0665        2.513           0.421             0.234            0.440
                                    (0.248)      (0.336)     (0.0853)       (0.0783)       (4.189)          (0.228)          (0.248)          (0.323)

old                                -0.616       -1.803       -1.473         -0.0886       -7.344           -0.636           -0.625           -0.616
                                    (0.214)     (0.0922)      (0.459)       (0.0495)       (1.479)          (0.232)          (0.217)          (0.214)

PIT X post-2001 X old                           -0.273
                                                (0.0918)

PIT X old                                        0.262
                                                 (0.0201)

PIT X post-2001                                   0.138
                                                 (0.0631)

PIT                                               0.0289
                                                 (0.0457)
Observations                          3500         3500        3500           3500          3500             3500             3430              3300
Semi-elasticity, Young                -.560        -.284       -.199          -.002         .246             -.225            -.207              -.25
  Std. Error                           .149         .159       .358            .174         .223             .101               .09              .125
Semi-elasticity, Old                  -.582        -.362       -.560           -.86         -.672            -.383              -.4             -.423
  Std. Error                           .091         .094       .158             .35         .083               .1              .121              .091
Driscoll-Kraay (with 10-year bandwidth) standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include year fixed effects. Note state fixed effects are absorbed by
old-young differencing. IV regression instruments for ET-States,t and its interactions using a variable (and its corresponding interactions) equal to
ET-States,t for t<2001 and to ET-States,2001 for t2001..

  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
                                  Table 5: Linear Probability Model

                             Probability of Living in Estate Tax State

                                   (1)        (2)             (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                               1982-2001 2003-2017        1982-2017    1982-2017     1982-2017   High MTR
Age                            0.00200 -0.00132           0.00200       0.000641    -0.00453     0.0000502
                               (0.000445) (0.000360)      (0.000445)   (0.000470)    (0.00117)   (0.000258)

Age X post-2001                                           -0.00332     -0.00235     -0.00213      -0.000628
                                                          (0.000573)   (0.000571)   (0.00113)    (0.000552)
Observations                      7743             5689      13432        13432       13432         12910
Year Fixed Effects                Yes              Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
State Fixed Effects                No               No        No           Yes         Yes           Yes
Individual Fixed Effects           No               No        No           No          Yes            No
Driscoll-Kraay standard errors (in parentheses).

 p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
          Table 6: Effect of Tax Induced Mobility on State Aggregate Tax Base


                                              2001 Level         Estimated
                                         in Estate Tax States    2001-2017
                                                                Change Due
                                                                to Mobility
                                                 (1)                (2)
               Number of Billionaires            72                -23.6
               Total Wealth (Billions)          203.3              -80.7

Notes: Column (2) is based on the estimated semi-elasticities from columns 3 and 7 of Table
3. Dollars figures are in 2017 Dollars.
         Table 7: Cost-Benefit Calculations for Billionaire Estate Tax

                          Panel A. States with Estate Tax
                   Forbes       Forbes       Personal Income                 EPV Net Revenues
 State           Population   Wealth (mil)      Tax Rate     Cost/Benefit   from Adopting (mil)
 Connecticut         7          47,200            6.99           0.74               376
 Delaware            0              0             6.80                                0
 Hawaii              1            9,600          11.20           1.43               -73
 Illinois           14           48,200           4.35           0.48              1,403
 Maine               0              0             7.15                                0
 Maryland            7          23,600            5.83           0.56               649
 Massachusetts       8          47,900            5.10           0.50               865
 Minnesota           3           10,500          10.15           0.68               249
 New York           71          444,200           6.89           0.66              5,184
 Oregon              1           25,200           9.99           0.73                68
 Pennsylvania        5           17,500           3.07           0.35               627
 Rhode Island        0              0             5.99                               0
 Vermont             0              0             8.80                                0
 Washington         10          245,900           0.00           0.00              2,005
 Average             9          65,700            6.59           0.61               811
                         Panel B. States without Estate Tax
                   Forbes       Forbes       Personal Income                 EPV Net Revenues
State            Population   Wealth (mil)      Tax Rate     Cost/Benefit   from Adopting (mil)
Alabama               0             0              3.42                               0
Alaska                0             0              0.00                               0
Arizona               5         13,900            4.47           0.46               586
Arkansas              5          84,000            5.33          0.52               532
California           92         617,800           14.10          1.45              -8,259
Colorado             5          42,700            4.77           0.42               665
Florida              35         148,000           0.00           0.00              7,678
Georgia               9         42,900            6.18           0.55               917
Idaho                1           2,700             7.49          0.83                35
Indiana              3          12,900            3.23           0.33               421
Iowa                  1          3,900             6.38          0.54               111
Kansas                2         51,600             5.28          0.47               249
Kentucky              1          2,700            6.18           0.40               160
Louisiana             1          2,800            4.17           0.20               222
Michigan             6          26,500            4.25           0.34               948
Mississippi           0             0              5.07                               0
Missouri              5         28,500             6.08          0.58               473
Montana               3         14,100             6.11          0.58               279
Nebraska              2          82,200            7.71          0.45               299
Nevada                8         59,800            0.00           0.00              1,792
New Hampshire         0             0              0.00                               0
New Jersey           6          30,500            8.97           0.88               150
New Mexico           0              0              3.83                               0
North Carolina        3         17,400             5.50          0.46               382
North Dakota         0              0              2.34                               0
Ohio                  3         10,400            5.00           0.43               403
Oklahoma              5         34,300            2.59           0.21               953
South Carolina        1           3,500           5.55           0.58                89
South Dakota         1           2,200            0.00           0.00               258
Tennessee            8          30,500            0.00           0.00              1,704
Texas                34         190,400           0.00           0.00              7,062
Utah                 0              0              5.00                               0
Virginia              4          35,100            5.83          0.60               348
West Virginia         0             0              6.50                               0
Wisconsin             9          46,100            6.51          0.61               776
Wyoming               4          46,800            0.00          0.00               829
Average               7          46,783            4.38          0.42               557
             Table 8: Cost-Benefit Calculations for Broad Estate Tax

                               Panel A. States with Estate Tax
                                        Baseline Elasticity                 Lower Elasticity
                 Personal Income               EPV Net Revenues                   EPV Net Revenues
 State              Tax Rate     Cost/Benefit from Adopting (mil)   Cost/Benefit from Adopting (mil)
 Connecticut         6.99            0.96              500             0.41             9,556
 Delaware             6.80           0.94               86             0.40              977
 Hawaii              11.20           1.54            -1,346            0.65             1,009
 Illinois            4.35            0.60            11,101            0.25            24,389
 Maine               7.15            0.99               29             0.42             1,401
 Maryland            5.83            0.80             2,157            0.34             8,541
 Massachusetts       5.10            0.70             4,794            0.30            13,363
 Minnesota           10.15           1.40            -4,247            0.59             5,107
 New York            6.89            0.95             3,977            0.40            55,753
 Oregon              9.99            1.38            -2,170            0.58             2,825
 Pennsylvania        3.07            0.42            14,110            0.18            23,676
 Rhode Island        5.99            0.83              615             0.35             2,705
 Vermont              8.80           1.21             -233             0.51              628
 Washington          0.00            0.00            10,969            0.00            12,938
 Average             6.59            0.91             2,882            0.39            11,633
                              Panel B. States Without Estate Tax
                                        Baseline Elasticity                 Lower Elasticity
                 Personal Income               EPV Net Revenues                   EPV Net Revenues
State               Tax Rate     Cost/Benefit from Adopting (mil)   Cost/Benefit from Adopting (mil)
Alabama                3.42           0.47            2,773             0.20             4,955
Alaska                 0.00           0.00             970              0.00             1,144
Arizona                4.47           0.62            3,460             0.26            7,855
Arkansas               5.33           0.73            1,311             0.31             4,012
California            14.10           1.94          -141,167            0.82           31,066
Colorado               4.77           0.66            3,424             0.28            8,506
Florida                0.00           0.00           95,195             0.00           112,277
Georgia                6.18           0.85            1,901             0.36            9,670
Idaho                  7.49           1.03             -42              0.44              861
Indiana                3.23           0.45            4,552             0.19            7,851
Iowa                   6.38           0.88             612              0.37             3,753
Kansas                 5.28           0.73            1,460             0.31             4,373
Kentucky               6.18           0.85             635              0.36             3,232
Louisiana              4.17           0.57            2,006             0.24             4,209
Michigan              4.25            0.59            6,675             0.25           14,289
Mississippi            5.07           0.70             771              0.30             2,125
Missouri               6.08           0.84            2,558             0.36            12,012
Montana                6.11           0.84             364              0.36             1,752
Nebraska               7.71           1.06            -295              0.45             3,047
Nevada                 0.00           0.00           12,080             0.00            14,247
New Hampshire          0.00           0.00            3,150             0.00            3,715
New Jersey            8.97            1.24           -5,241             0.52            12,440
New Mexico             3.83           0.53             800              0.22             1,549
North Carolina        5.50            0.76            2,817             0.32            9,324
North Dakota           2.34           0.32             952              0.14             1,430
Ohio                  5.00            0.69            3,974             0.29           10,674
Oklahoma              2.59            0.36            4,216             0.15            6,558
South Carolina        5.55            0.77            1,363             0.32            4,622
South Dakota          0.00            0.00            1,859             0.00            2,193
Tennessee             0.00            0.00            7,049             0.00            8,314
Texas                 0.00            0.00           41,481             0.00           48,925
Utah                  5.00            0.69             865              0.29            2,324
Virginia              5.83            0.80            2,774             0.34           10,985
West Virginia         6.50            0.90             140              0.38              983
Wisconsin             6.51            0.90             826              0.38            5,847
Wyoming               0.00            0.00            3,349             0.00            3,950
Average               4.38            0.60            1,934             0.26           10,696
Figure 1: Percentage of Years with Estate Tax by State

                 Panel A. 1982-2001




                                                     All Years
                                                     More than half
                                                     Less than half
                                                     Never

                 Panel B. 2002-2017




                                                     All Years
                                                     More than half
                                                     Less than half
                                                     Never
                        Figure 2: Average Wealth of Forbes 400 Sample (1982 to 2017)
       7
       6
       5
  Billions ($)
   3   2
       1
       0   4




                 1980               1990              2000                 2010                  2020
                                                      year

                                            Real (2017 $)                Nominal

*Based on our sample of Forbes 400 individual-year observations, which excludes those with no data on age
or state of residence.
Figure 3: Population of Forbes 400 by State

              Panel A. 1982




                                              70 - 85
                                              60 - 70
                                              50 - 60
                                              20 - 50
                                              10 - 20
                                              5 - 10
                                              1-5
                                              0

              Panel B. 2017




                                              70 - 92
                                              60 - 70
                                              50 - 60
                                              30 - 50
                                              10 - 30
                                              5 - 10
                                              1-5
                                              0
          Figure 4: Impact of Billionaire Death on State Estate Tax Revenues
                                    Two Case Studies

                                                           Bud Walton of Arkansas, Died in 1995
                                            200
State E&I Tax Revenues (Millions of 2017 $)
        50        100  0        150




                                                  1980         1990          2000          2010     2020
                                                                             year



                                                         Edward Gaylord of Oklahoma, Died in 2003
                                            150
State E&I Tax Revenues (Millions of 2017 $)
            50         0   100




                                                  1980         1990          2000          2010     2020
                                                                             year
                      Figure 5: Impact of Billionaire Death on State Estate Tax Revenues
                                                  Event Study


                                                        250
            State E&I Tax Revenues (Millions of 2017 $)
                  50      100      150
                                   0          200




                                                               -5                     0                        5
                                                                            Years Since Death (t=0)

Notes: Horizontal line equals average coefficient over pre-death periods (-5 to -1). Dashed lines indicate 90%
confidence interval.


                                             Figure 6: Share of Forbes 400 Living in a 2001 Estate Tax State
                       20          30
                                   25
            Percentage
                15                 10
                                   5
                                   0




                                                              1980   1990            2000             2010   2020
                                                                                     year

Notes: Year 2002 is missing. Dashed horizontal lines are the mean before 2001 and after 2001.
                                                          Figure 7: Probability of living in Estate Tax State By Age

                                                                                     Panel A. 1982-2001


              Fraction of Age Group Living in State with Estate Tax
              0        .1       .2       .3        .4        .5




                                                                      40   45   50    55    60         65   70   75   80   85+
                                                                                                 Age


                                                                                     Panel B. 2003-2017
              Fraction of Age Group Living in State with Estate Tax
              0        .1       .2       .3        .4        .5




                                                                      40   45   50    55    60         65   70   75   80   85+
                                                                                                 Age

Notes: Age Groups below 40 are excluded. Individuals above 85 are pooled and displayed at Age "85+".
Note there is no data used for 2002 because Forbes did not report state of residence in that year.
      Figure 8: Estimated Age Gradient for Probability of Living in Estate Tax State

                                                                     Year-by-Year Regressions
                                  .01
             Age Gradient for Prob of Living in ET State
                   -.005          0
                                  -.01        .005




                                                           1985   1990    1995    2000    2005   2010   2015
                                                                                 year

Notes: Brackets indicate 90% confidence intervals (clustered on state-year). Regressions include all individu-
als over 39 years old. Dashed horizontal lines are the means of the yearly age gradients over the pre-2002 and
post-2002 periods. Note there is no age gradient for 2002 because Forbes did not report state of residence
in that year.
          Figure 9: Probability of Moving Between ET States and Non-ET States

                                                                                           Panel A. All




                              5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
                        % of Forbes 400 observed in both 2001 and t
                         0




                                                                      1993   1995   1997     1999    2001     2003   2005    2007     2009
                                                                                                    year(t)

                                                                               Prob moved ET to non-ET           Prob moved non-ET to ET



                                                                                    Panel B. 65 and Over
                              5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
                        % of Forbes 400 observed in both 2001 and t
                         0




                                                                      1993   1995   1997     1999    2001     2003   2005    2007     2009
                                                                                                    year(t)

                                                                               Prob moved ET to non-ET           Prob moved non-ET to ET



                                                                                      Panel C. Under 65
                              5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
                        % of Forbes 400 observed in both 2001 and t
                         0




                                                                      1993   1995   1997     1999    2001     2003   2005    2007     2009
                                                                                                    year(t)

                                                                               Prob moved ET to non-ET           Prob moved non-ET to ET


Notes: The blue line is the probability of moving from a ET state to a non-ET state. The red line is the
probability of moving from a non-ET state to an ET state. Year 2002 is missing. See text for details.
                          ONLINE APPENDIX
                            Table A1:
        Maximum Federal Credit Schedule for State Estate Taxes
                             1954-2001
Taxable Estate ($) Base Amount of Credit ($) Credit Rate on Excess (%)
     100,000                       0                    0.8
     150,000                      400                  1.6
     200,000                     1,200                  2.4
     300,000                     3,600                  3.2
     500,000                    10,000                 4.0
     700,000                    18,000                 4.8
     900,000                    27,600                 5.6
    1,100,000                   38,800                 6.4
    1,600,000                   70,800                 7.2
    2,100,000                   106,800                 8.0
    2,600,000                   146,800                 8.8
    3,100,000                   190,800                 9.6
    3,600,000                   238,800                10.4
    4,100,000                   290,800                11.2
    5,100,000                   402,800                12.0
    6,100,000                   522,800                12.8
    7,100,000                   650,800                13.6
    8,100,000                   786,800                14.4
    9,100,000                   930,800                15.2
   10,100,000                  1,082,800               16.0


     Source: Bakija and Slemrod (2004), Table 1
 Table A2: Probability of State Having an Estate Tax ­ Linear Probability Model

                                                     (1)                    (2)                    (3)
                                            Estate Tax Indicator   Estate Tax Indicator   Estate Tax Indicator
Top PIT Rate                                      0.00984                 0.0145                0.0486
                                                  (0.0225)               (0.0241)               (0.0282)

Top Corp. Income Tax (CIT) Rate                         3.721             3.145                  3.977
                                                       (2.536)           (2.649)                (3.187)

Log Change in real GDP                             -0.000176            -0.000147              -0.000148
                                                  (0.000332)           (0.000474)             (0.000322)

Top PIT Rate X post-2001                               0.00456          0.000769                0.00390
                                                       (0.0238)         (0.0244)                (0.0211)

Top CIT Rate X post-2001                                -0.663            0.204                  1.010
                                                       (2.770)           (2.954)                (3.066)

GDP Change X post-2001                            0.0000317             0.000326               0.000267
                                                  (0.000220)           (0.000604)             (0.000620)

Constant                                                0.185             0.361                  0.188
                                                       (0.320)           (0.394)                (0.323)
Observations                                            1333              1333                   1333
State Fixed Effects                                      No                No                     Yes
Year Fixed Effects                                       No                Yes                    Yes
Standard errors (clustered by state) in parentheses.

  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
                             Table A3: Summary Statistics

             Panel A. Individual-by-Year Observations. 1982 ­ 2017

                                     Mean Median        Standard Deviation       Minimum   Maximum
Age                                  64.31 65.00              13.11               23.00     96.00
Net Worth (billions, 2017 dollars)    3.02 1.60                5.73                0.19     125.06
Observations                         13432




                     Panel B. Distribution of Net Worth ­ 2017

                                              1st   10th    25th   50th   75th    90th   99th
        Net Worth (Billions, 2017 Dollars)    2.0     2.2   2.7    3.7    5.5     12.0   71.0




                Panel C. State-by-Year Observations. 1982 ­ 2017

                                     Mean    Median    Standard Deviation       Minimum    Maximum
Population of Forbes 400             7.68     3.00           15.07                0.00       98.00
Net Worth (billions 2017 dollars)    22.63    5.86           53.36                0.00      617.80
Estate Tax Indicator                  0.30    0.00            0.46                0.00        1.00
Top PIT Rate                          4.86    5.40            2.96                0.00       14.10
Observations                         1750
    Table A4: State of Deaths and State of Residence Reported by Forbes
Name                               Death   Death      Obituary       Forbes       Notes
                                   Year    State      Res. State     Res. State
Liliore Green Rains                1985    CA         CA             CA
Mary Belin Du Pont Faulkner        1985    MA         MA             MA
Abram Nicholas Pritzker            1986    IL                        IL
David Whitmire Hearst              1986    CA         CA             CA
Gordon Barton Mclendon             1986    TX         TX             TX
Howard Vollum                      1986    OR         OR             OR
Arnold Bernhard                    1987    NY         NY/CT          CT
Burton Green Bettingen             1987    CA         CA             CA
Henry Ford II                      1987    MI         MI             FL
Henry John Heinz II                1987    FL         PA             PA           Died at winter home.
Paul Kalmanovitz                   1987    CA         CA             CA
Ruth Chandler Von Platen           1987    CA         CA             CA
Sol Goldman                        1987    NY         NY             NY
John Wilmer Galbreath              1988    OH         OH             OH
Lawrence Arthur Wien               1988    CT         CT/NY/FL       NY
Pierre Samuel Du Pont              1988    DE         DE             DE
Henry Crown                        1990    IL         IL             IL
Mark Goodson                       1992    NY         NY             NY
Edward John Debartolo              1994    OH         OH             OH
Milton Jack Petrie                 1994    NY         NY             NY
Albert B Alkek                     1995    TX         TX             TX
Alpheus Lee Ellis                  1995    FL         FL             FL
Erskine Bronson Ingram             1995    TN         TN             TN
James Lawrence Walton              1995    AR         FL             AR           Died on fishing trip.
John Jeffry Louis                  1995    IL         IL             IL
Joseph R Coulter                   1995    FL         FL             FL
Walter A Haas                      1995    CA         CA             CA
Bob John Magness                   1996    CO         VA                          UVA hospital.
Daniel James Terra                 1996    WA         IL/WA/France   IL
David Packard                      1996    CA         CA             CA
Louis Larrick Ward                 1996    MO         MO             MO
Claude Bernard Pennington          1997    LA         LA             LA
Herbert Allen                      1997    NY         NY             NY
Jack Kent Cooke                    1997    DC         DC             VA
Roberto Crispulo Goizueta          1997    GA         GA             GA
Betsey Cushing Roosevelt Whitney   1998    NY         NY             NY
Dwight Lyman Stuart                1998    CA         CA             CA
John William Berry                 1998    OH         OH             OH
William Michael Cafaro             1998    OH         OH             OH
Curtis Leroy Carlson               1999    MN         MN             MN
Forrest Edward Mars Sr             1999    FL         FL             NV
Henry Earl Singleton               1999    CA         CA             CA
Jay Arthur Pritzker                1999    IL         IL             IL
Leon Hess                          1999    NY         NY             NJ
Paul Mellon                        1999    VA         VA             VA
Ruth Ray Hunt                      1999    TX         TX             TX
Ted Arison                         1999    Tel Aviv   Tel Aviv       FL
Bill Daniels                       2000    CA         CA             CO           Died in hospital.
Marshall Naify                     2000    CA         CA             CA
Randolph Apperson Hearst           2000    NY         NY             NY
Edmund Wattis Littlefield          2001    CA         CA             CA
Larry Fisher                       2001    FL         FL/ NY         NY
Malcom Purcell Mclean              2001    NY         NY             NY
Michel Fribourg                    2001    NY         NY             NY
Reese Mcintosh Rowling             2001    TX         TX             TX
William Redington Hewlett          2001    CA         CA             CA
Alfred Lerner                      2002    OH         OH             OH
Kathryn Mccurry Albertson          2002    ID         ID             ID
Millicent V Boudjakdji             2002    LA         LA             CA
Robert Henry Dedman                2002    TX         TX             TX
Victor Posner                      2002    FL         FL             FL
Walter Hubert Annenberg            2002    PA         PA/CA          PA
Edward Lewis Gaylord               2003    OK         OK             OK
Joan Beverly Kroc                  2003    CA         CA             CA
Laurence Alan Tisch                2003    NY         NY             NY
Samuel Jayson LeFrak               2003    NY         NY             NY
Charles B Benenson                 2004    FL         NY             NY           Died suddenly.
Jay Van Andel                      2004    MI         MI             MI
Laurance Spelman Rockefeller       2004    NY         NY             NY
Marvin Harold Davis          2004   CA       CA                      CA
Samuel Curtis Johnson        2004   WI       WI                      WI
Susan Thompson Buffett       2004   CA       WY                      CA   Died on vacation.
Franklin Parsons Perdue      2005   MD       MD                      MD
Jackson Thomas Stephens      2005   AR       AR                      AR
Peter E Haas                 2005   CA       CA                      CA
Preston Robert Tisch         2005   NY       NY                      NY
James R Cargill              2006   MN       MN                      MN
Lamar Hunt                   2006   TX       TX                      TX
Margaret Anne Cargill        2006   CA       CA                      CA
Raymond J Noorda             2006   UT       UT                      UT
Robert Edward Rich           2006   FL       FL                      FL
Barbara Cox Anthony          2007   HI       GA/HI                   HI
Helen Walton                 2007   AR       AR                      AR
James Martin Moran           2007   FL       FL                      FL
Margaret Hunt Hill           2007   TX       TX                      TX
James LeVoy Sorenson         2008   UT       UT                      UT
John Hugh Macmillan          2008   FL       FL                      FL
John Richard Simplot         2008   ID       ID                      ID
Carl Ray Pohlad              2009   MN       MN                      MN
Frank Batten                 2009   VA       VA                      VA
Melvin Simon                 2009   IN       IN                      IN
Samuel J Heyman              2009   NY       NY, FL, CN              NY   Died after surgery.
Trammell Crow                2009   TX       TX                      TX
William Morse Davidson       2009   MI       MI                      MI
Dolph Briscoe                2010   TX       TX                      TX
John Werner Kluge            2010   VA       VA                      FL
Paul Milstein                2010   NY       NY                      NY
Richard N Goldman            2010   CA       CA                      CA
Cargill Macmillan            2011   CA       CA                      CA
Carl Henry Lindner           2011   OH       OH                      OH
Jack N Mandel                2011   OH       OH                      OH
Jean Ellen Du Pont Sheehan   2011   DE       DE                      FL
John Charles Haas            2011   PA       PA                      PA
John Edward Anderson         2011   CA       CA                      CA
Malcolm Green Chace          2011   MA       MA                      RI
Robert Alan Pritzker         2011   IL       IL                      IL
William Alfred Cook          2011   IN       IN                      IN
Albert Lee Ueltschi          2012   FL       FL                      FL
Donald J Schneider           2012   WI       WI                      WI
Barbara Piasecka Johnson     2013   Poland   Italy, Poland, Monaco   NJ
Edgar Miles Bronfman         2013   NY       NY                      NY
Harold Clark Simmons         2013   TX       TX                      TX
Leonard Samuel Skaggs        2013   UT       UT                      UT
Robert Earl Holding          2013   UT                               ID   Res. state unclear.
James Edwards Stowers        2014   MO       MO                      MO
Malcolm Glazer               2014   FL       FL                      FL
Nelson Bunker Hunt           2014   TX       TX                      TX
Patrick Joseph Mcgovern      2014   NH       CA                      NH
Kirk Kerkorian               2015   CA       CA                      CA
Michael Birck                2015   IL       IL                      IL
Ralph J Roberts              2015   PA       PA                      PA
Forrest Edward Mars Jr       2016   WY       WA                      WY
Jack Crawford Taylor         2016   MO       MO                      MO
Joseph C Mandel              2016   FL       OH                      OH   Died at winter home.
Leandro Rizzuto              2017   FL       FL                      WY
Michael Ilitch               2017   MI       MI                      MI
Samuel Irving Newhouse       2017   NY       NY                      NY
Charles B Wang               2018   NY       NY                      NY
                           Table A5: Robustness

                   Panel A. Difference-in-Difference

                                     (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)
                                  Top 100      Top200       Top300      10+ Obs
      ET-State X post-2001        -0.625      -1.367       -1.936       -2.121
                                   (0.116)     (0.208)      (0.401)      (0.531)

      ET-State                     0.0915       0.522       0.922        0.913
                                   (0.210)     (0.322)      (0.469)      (0.365)
      Observations                  1575        1610         1680         1575
      Semi-elasticity               -.391       -.325        -.365        -.393
        Std. Error                   .073        .049         .076        .098
      Driscoll-Kraay (with 10-year bandwidth) standard errors in parentheses.
      All regressions include state and year fixed effects.
      
       p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01


                        Panel B. Triple-Difference

                              (1)                 (2)          (3)           (4)
                           Top 100              Top200       Top300       10+ Obs
ET-state X post-2001 X old -0.887              -0.987       -1.261        -1.202
                            (0.152)             (0.280)      (0.383)       (0.477)

ET-state X old                     0.302        0.353       0.538          0.526
                                   (0.0554)     (0.0637)    (0.106)        (0.217)

ET-State X post-2001                 0.131       -0.190     -0.337         -0.460
                                   (0.0833)     (0.143)     (0.167)        (0.271)

old X post-2001                    0.914        1.217       1.623          2.148
                                   (0.111)      (0.238)     (0.305)        (0.523)

ET-State                             -0.105     0.0844        0.192         0.194
                                    (0.102)     (0.160)      (0.239)       (0.223)

old                                -0.219      -0.373       -0.531         -0.477
                                   (0.0500)    (0.0773)      (0.145)       (0.230)
Observations                         3150        3220         3360           3150
Semi-elasticity, Young                .047       -.068        -.121          -.164
  Std. Error                           .03        .051          .06           .097
Semi-elasticity, Old                 -.687        -.49        -.484          -.475
  Std. Error                          .097        .083         .108          .122
Driscoll-Kraay (with 10-year bandwidth) standard errors in parentheses. All regressions
include year fixed effects. State fixed effects are absorbed by old-young differencing.

  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
                Table A6: Cost-Benefit Results Under Alternative Assumptions

                                  Panel A: Billionaires Estate Tax

                                         Baseline   Alt 1   Alt 2   Alt 3   Alt 4   Alt 5
                 ET States (10)
                 Average CB ratio          0.61      0.22   0.92    0.52    0.73    0.28
                 Number with CB1             1        0       4       1       1       0

                 Non-ET States (28)
                 Average CB ratio          0.42      0.18   0.66    0.37    0.49    0.20
                 Number with CB1             1        0       3       1       2       0

                 All States (38)
                 Average CB ratio          0.47      0.19   0.72    0.41    0.55    0.22
                 Number with CB1             2        0       7       2       3       0

                                     Panel B: Broad Estate Tax

                                         Baseline   Alt 1   Alt 2   Alt 3   Alt 4   Alt 5
                 ET States (14)
                 Average CB ratio          0.91      0.36   1.34    0.78    1.07    0.91
                 Number with CB1             4        0      11       4       8      4

                 Non-ET States (36)
                 Average CB ratio          0.60      0.24   0.89    0.52    0.71    0.60
                 Number with CB1             4        0      19       2       7      4

                 All States (50)
                 Average CB ratio          0.69      0.27   1.02    0.59    0.81    0.69
                 Number with CB1             8        0      30       6      15       8


Notes: Cost-benefit ratios in Panel A exclude states that had no Forbes 400 billionaires in 2017. Baseline
assumptions are described in the text. Alternative 1 assumes that wealth and income grow at 7.0% (vs. 0%
in baseline) per year beyond 2017; 7.0% is the average annual growth rate of Forbes 400 real wealth from
1982­2017. Alternative 2 assumes surviving spouse is 20 (vs. 10) years younger than decedent. Alternative
3 assumes states discount using a real interest rate of 1% (vs. 2%). Alternative 4 assumes states discount
using a real interest rate of 3%. Alternative 5, following Saez and Zucman (2019), assumes income of Forbes
400 is half of income reported by top 400 income taxpayers according to IRS SOI data (vs. assuming it
is 10.3% of Forbes 400 taxable wealth). All other parameter assumptions are the same as in the baseline
scenario.
                    Figure A1: Distribution of Top Personal Income Tax Rates by State Estate Tax Status

                        (a) 2001, Non-Estate Tax States                                        (b) 2001, Estate Tax States
       .6




                                                                              .5
                                                                              .4
       .4




                                                                            .3
 Density




                                                                     Density
                                                                              .2
       .2




                                                                              .1
       0




                                                                              0
            0   2   4          6        8      10         12   14                  0   2   4        6           8      10    12   14
                                Top PIT Rate                                                            Top PIT Rate


                        (c) 2017, Non-Estate Tax States                                        (d) 2017, Estate Tax States
       .4




                                                                          .6
       .3




                                                                          .4
                                                                    Density
 Density
  .2




                                                                          .2
       .1
       0




                                                                          0




            0   2   4          6       8       10         12   14                  0   2   4        6        8         10    12   14
                               Top PIT Rate                                                          Top PIT Rate



Note: red lines indicate means.
          Figure A2: Probability of living in High Income Tax State By Age

                                                                                Panel A. 1982-2001

           Fraction of Age Group Living in State with High MTR
           0         .2       .4         .6         .8       1




                                                                 40   45   50    55    60         65   70   75   80   85+
                                                                                            Age


                                                                                Panel B. 2005-2017
           Fraction of Age Group Living in State with High MTR
           0         .2       .4         .6         .8       1




                                                                 40   45   50    55    60         65   70   75   80   85+
                                                                                            Age


Notes: Age Groups below 40 are excluded. Individuals above 95 are pooled and displayed at Age 96.
