                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       A WELFARE ANALYSIS OF OCCUPATIONAL LICENSING IN U.S. STATES

                                        Morris M. Kleiner
                                         Evan J. Soltas

                                       Working Paper 26383
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26383


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




For helpful feedback, we thank Daron Acemoglu, Abi Adams, David Autor, Alex Bryson, Peter
Blair, Ashley Craig, Amy Finkelstein, Jon Gruber, Alan Krueger, Brad Larsen, Jim Poterba,
Ferdinand Rauch, Alex Tabarrok, Owen Zidar, and conference and seminar participants at
APPAM, ASSA, LERA, MIT, SITE, YES-NYU, and the Upjohn Institute for Employment
Research. This paper previously circulated under the title "Occupational Licensing, Labor
Supply, and Human Capital." Soltas gratefully acknowledges support from the National Science
Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. 1122374.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Morris M. Kleiner and Evan J. Soltas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Welfare Analysis of Occupational Licensing in U.S. States
Morris M. Kleiner and Evan J. Soltas
NBER Working Paper No. 26383
October 2019
JEL No. H0,J44,J78,K0

                                        ABSTRACT

We assess the welfare consequences of occupational licensing for workers and consumers. We
estimate a model of labor market equilibrium in which licensing restricts labor supply but also
affects labor demand via worker quality and selection. On the margin of occupations licensed
differently between U.S. states, we find that licensing raises wages and hours but reduces
employment. We estimate an average welfare loss of 12 percent of occupational surplus. Workers
and consumers respectively bear 70 and 30 percent of the incidence. Higher willingness to pay
offsets 80 percent of higher prices for consumers, and higher wages compensate workers for 60
percent of the cost of mandated investment in occupation-specific human capital.


Morris M. Kleiner
University of Minnesota
Humphrey School of Public Affairs
260 Humphrey Center
301 19th Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
kleiner@umn.edu

Evan J. Soltas
MIT Department of Economics
77 Massachusetts Avenue E52-300
Massachusetts
Cambridge, MA 02139
United States
esoltas@mit.edu
1    Introduction
Occupational licensing policies, a major category of labor market regulation in the United States
and other countries, have potential costs and benefits. Chief among the costs is that licensing
may reduce the supply of labor in licensed occupations. Among the potential benefits are gains
in product quality due to the resolution of ine ciencies from asymmetric information. Despite
the often heated debate over the trade-os posed by licensing, economists have thus far oered
little guidance on how to conduct a welfare analysis of such policies.1 This paper develops a
theoretical framework for evaluating the welfare eects of licensing and implements it empirically
for occupations that some U.S. states license and others do not.
    We introduce a model of licensing as a required upfront investment of time in training, to
which workers respond by adjusting their hours, occupation choice, and consumption. We allow
this investment to aect labor quality, both directly and indirectly via the selection of workers who
choose to enter an occupation. We prove that, within a set of assumptions that define a class of
models, the changes in employment and the wage bill are su cient statistics for welfare analysis
(Chetty, 2009). The change in the share of workers in the occupation reveals the change in worker
welfare, and the change in the wage bill--equivalent to consumption expenditure in our labor
trading economy--reveals the change in consumer welfare. Our model captures the fundamental
welfare trade-o in licensing policy between cost and quality and characterizes who, between workers
and consumers, bears the welfare costs and benefits from such policies in equilibrium.
    We estimate the model using variation among U.S. states and occupations in the share of
workers who hold an active government-issued professional license as a proxy for licensing policy.
In the United States, occupations are mostly licensed at the state level, yielding variation in how
the same occupation is licensed among states, as we show in Figure 1. Comparing similar workers
across states and occupations in a two-way fixed eect design, we estimate causal eects of licensing
on wages, hours, and employment that correspond to reduced-form moments of our model. We
further develop a method to estimate the opportunity costs of licensing from its eects on the age
structure of workers in occupations, and we substantiate these estimated costs with evidence that
licensing increases and reallocates human capital investment. We use these reduced-form eects to
estimate the welfare consequences of licensing and the structural parameters of our model.
    We conclude that, for marginal occupations licensed by U.S. states, the welfare costs of licensing
appear to exceed the benefits. We estimate that licensing an occupation reduces total surplus from
the occupation, defined as the welfare value of trade in its labor services, by about 12 percent
relative to no licensing. Workers and consumers respectively bear about 70 and 30 percent of these
welfare costs. For workers, wage increases compensate for only about 60 percent of the opportunity
   1
     See, for example, former U.S. Labor Secretary Alexander Acosta and Dennis Daugaard, "Make It Easier to Work
Without a License," Wall Street Journal, January 8, 2018: "[O]verly burdensome licensure requirements weaken
competition without benefiting the public." Similarly, according to a report prepared for the Obama administration,
"Too often, policymakers do not carefully weigh costs and benefits when making decisions about whether or how to
regulate a profession through licensing" (Department of the Treasury, O ce of Economic Policy, Council of Economic
Advisers, and Department of Labor, 2015).



                                                        1
  Figure 1: Interstate Variation in Occupational Licensing Policy for Six Example Occupations




Notes: This figure maps interstate variation in occupational licensing policy for six occupations. See Section 3 and
Appendix Table A4 for information on data sources.


cost of investments that licensing regulations mandate. For consumers, licensing slightly increases
prices adjusted for willingness to pay (WTP), as higher WTP osets 80 percent of the price increase.
    To reach these welfare conclusions, we first develop a model in which licensing is an entry barrier,
which imposes welfare costs, but also generates gains in worker quality and selection that imply its
net welfare consequences are ambiguous. Suppose a state government licenses an occupation. The
licensing costs cause labor supply in the occupation to contract on the extensive margin, raising
occupational wages and consequently labor supply on the intensive margin. Consumers respond
to the wage increase by reducing the consumption of labor services from the occupation. To the
extent that licensing raises consumer willingness to pay, however, the employment response can be
reversed. Since licensing aects both occupational labor supply and demand, its eects on the wage
bill and on total labor hours in the occupation are also ambiguous. Our model characterizes the
unlicensed and licensed equilibria in terms of wages, hours, and shares of employment by occupation.


                                                         2
It relates the division of the welfare costs and benefits of licensing among workers and consumers
to these reduced-form responses. As in the Summers (1989) model of mandated benefits, whether
a licensing policy raises welfare depends upon whether WTP for training mandated by the license
exceeds its social cost of provision. In our model, these quantities are determined by the discount
rate and responses to licensing via worker quality, worker selection, and consumer substitution.
       Our empirical strategy is to use variation in the licensed share of workers by state and occupation
to identify the eects of licensing. In particular, we implement a two-way fixed eect design
that compares an outcome of interest, such as employment, in state­occupation cells where a
relatively large or small share of workers are licensed relative to both the occupation and state.
Our identification assumption is that, relative to the occupation and the state, highly licensed state­
occupation cells are otherwise comparable to cells with lower licensed rates. Drawing on Figure 1,
we assume it is arbitrary that dental assistants are licensed in Minnesota but not in Wisconsin,
opticians are licensed in Texas but not in Louisiana, and electricians are licensed in Arizona but not
in New Mexico. This approach addresses two fundamental challenges in recent empirical research on
licensing. First, the policies are hard to measure in the data. A myriad of state-level institutions
set licensing policies (Kleiner, 2000), and they do so rarely, if ever, with statistical definitions
of occupations in mind. Second, much of the literature has used research designs that compare
individual outcomes between licensed and unlicensed workers. Such comparisons are vulnerable to
selection into licensing, a significant concern given the imperfect correspondence between regulatory
and statistical definitions of occupations and by analogy to selection into unions (Lewis, 1986) or
education (Card, 1999). Using the licensed share of workers in a state­occupation cell as a proxy
for policy naturally resolves the former problem and does much to address the latter. Our estimates
thus reflect average treatment eects of licensing occupations with interstate dierences in policy,
which approximates a margin intuitively relevant for policymaking. The data come from the U.S.
Current Population Survey, which since January 2015 has included questions on licensing.
       We find that licensing increases wages and hours per worker but reduces employment. In our
preferred specification, shifting an occupation in a state from entirely unlicensed to entirely licensed
increases state average wages in the licensed occupation by 15 percent, increases hours per worker
by 3 percent, and reduces employment by 29 percent.2 To assess the opportunity costs of licensing,
we estimate its eects on the distribution of educational attainment and worker age. Most licensing
regulations require workers to obtain specific credentials to be legally employed in an occupation
(Gittleman et al., 2018). We estimate that licensing an occupation increases average schooling by
about 0.4 years. This masks a dramatic reallocation in the types of human capital workers acquire:
We find large increases in the shares of workers whose highest degrees are vocational associate's
degrees or graduate degrees and decreases in high school degrees and bachelor's degrees. We also
find licensing delays the entry of younger workers into occupations. This delay is much greater
   2
    Per the Obama administration report: "While there is compelling evidence that licensing raises prices for con-
sumers, there is less evidence on whether licensing restricts supply of occupational practitioners, which would be one
way in which it might contribute to higher prices" (Department of the Treasury, O ce of Economic Policy, Council
of Economic Advisers, and Department of Labor, 2015).



                                                          3
than the increase in average years of education, suggesting opportunity costs beyond measured
schooling. Our results are consistent with actual requirements of licenses as well as substantial
opportunity costs of licensing that could plausibly account for the reduction in labor supply.
       Our findings have considerable policy implications relevant to marginal occupations. Conversely,
our results are uninformative about the welfare consequences of licensing physicians and lawyers--
occupations licensed everywhere in the United States--as well as licensing cashiers and waiters--
occupations licensed nowhere in the United States. Formal welfare analysis is potentially most
illuminating in marginal occupations, where policy disagreement persists and intuitions about costs
and benefits may be least determinative. We conclude that a shift of policy toward lower licensing
burdens in marginal occupations would raise welfare, particularly that of workers.3 Indeed, in the
U.S., policymakers appear increasingly favorable to deregulatory reforms (National Conference of
State Legislatures, 2017). For any such policy decision, the correct statistics for welfare analysis are
the occupation-specific responses of employment and the wage bill, as the WTP eect of licensing
may vary among occupations. Although our welfare framework is ripe for application in future case
studies, an important limitation of this paper is that our research design is not adequately powered
to evaluate licensing in individual occupations.
       Our paper contributes both theoretically and empirically to the literature on labor market in-
stitutions in labor and public economics. Our model of licensing takes as inspiration a classic
tradition of models (Akerlof, 1970; Leland, 1979; Shapiro, 1986) that portray how licensing may
correct market imperfections. We build more directly, however, upon recent structural models of
labor markets (Hsieh et al., 2013; Kline and Moretti, 2014; Su´
                                                              arez Serrato and Zidar, 2016; Red-
ding and Rossi-Hansberg, 2017), yielding a framework with testable comparative statics about the
eects of licensing on labor market outcomes and which maps directly to welfare and incidence.
Economists have recently focused on estimating eects of licensing on wages (Kleiner and Krueger,
2010, 2013), labor supply (DePasquale and Stange, 2016; Redbird, 2017; Blair and Chung, forth-
coming), migration (Kugler and Sauer, 2005; Johnson and Kleiner, 2017), and product quality
(Kleiner and Kudrle, 2000; Kleiner, 2006; Angrist and Guryan, 2008; Larsen, 2013; Anderson et al.,
2016; Kleiner et al., 2016; Barrios, 2018; Farronato et al., 2019). Our model provides a framework
of broad application across occupations, one that can organize this empirical evidence and explain
its implications for welfare and incidence. We show how, with the aid of several (admittedly strong)
assumptions, we can analyze the welfare consequences of licensing using the same readily available
data for any occupation--wages, hours, and employment--rather than custom, and potentially un-
available or incomplete, data on product prices and quality. Our paper is the first of the modern
literature to revisit and refocus upon the welfare questions that originally inspired the seminal
works by Kuznets and Friedman (1945) and Stigler (1971) on licensing.
       To guide our empirical analysis, we present the theoretical model of licensing in Section 2. We
introduce our data and empirical strategy in Sections 3 and 4 respectively. Section 5 reviews the
   3
    If incumbent workers are "grandfathered" by licensing regulations, these costs fall on potential entrants. Our
welfare results are therefore consistent with the observation that incumbent workers often support licensing.



                                                        4
results and finds evidence for the model's main testable predictions. Section 6 addresses several
threats to inference in our research design. Section 7 structurally estimates the model. Section 8
concludes.


2     A Model of Occupational Licensing
We model licensing as a mandatory upfront investment of time for individuals to enter an occupa-
tion and characterize the equilibrium responses of labor market outcomes to licensing. Our model
is of a labor trading economy: Individuals supply labor for others' consumption. They choose their
occupations, schooling investments, hours of work, and consumption expenditures on labor by occu-
pation, all given licensing requirements, wages, and their preferences for occupational employment,
leisure, and consumption. We capture potential benefits of licensing by allowing for changes in la-
bor quality and changes in worker selection into occupations, both of which may change consumers'
willingness to pay for licensed labor.
    In equilibrium, licensing raises wages and hours per worker, but its eect on employment is
ambiguous. Within a broad class of models, the eects of licensing on employment and the wage
bill are su cient statistics for welfare analysis. This class of models is defined by three conditions
(Adao et al., 2017): The model admits a normative representative consumer, production is constant
returns to scale, and markets are perfectly competitive. These conditions render it su cient to
consider a reduced factor demand system--here, for occupational labor services--rather than a
demand system in product space. In our model, workers are identical up to their idiosyncratic
occupational preferences, allowing us to focus on changes in equilibrium and abstract from changes
in the selection of workers.4 Our model shows how the changes in employment and the wage bill,
and thereby welfare, are determined by occupational labor supply and demand elasticities and in
turn by structural primitives. In Appendix B, we present a detailed solution.
    The labor market features a single and consequential imperfection: Workers cannot credibly
signal to consumers that they have individually invested in a form of human capital we call "train-
ing," and the ex-post quality of labor services is not contractible, as in Akerlof (1970). Even if
consumers value trained workers, workers will underinvest in training absent a mandate in the form
of licensing, as consumers' WTP reflects the average level of training of workers in the occupation.
Beyond this, our model abstracts from why consumers might value training, as gains in consumer
revealed WTP capture the welfare benefit of licensing if there are no externalities or behavioral
frictions. Throughout the paper, we assume both away, as must any revealed preference analysis.
    Externalities and behavioral frictions may represent compelling rationales for licensing in some
occupations. For example, some risks of construction activity are likely borne by third parties
(e.g., passersby), and so the private WTP for safety in construction may be below the social WTP,
    4
      In Section 6, we return to theoretical and empirical complexities introduced when workers are heterogeneous
and licensing changes the selection of workers who enter an occupation. Our su cient-statistics results survive this
generalization. Our empirical results are also robust to what we view as a plausible degree of selection. This paper
focuses upon the benchmark case with identical workers, but we view selection eects of licensing--and insights from
licensing into occupational selection more generally--as promising topics for future work.


                                                         5
potentially motivating the licensing of construction workers. Licensing may also raise welfare if
consumers mistakenly undervalue worker training. Many occupations for which such stories are
plausible are universally licensed in the United States, whereas our identifying variation comes from
occupations with interstate variation in licensing. These assumptions are ultimately necessary to
move beyond case studies and treatment eects to analyze the welfare consequences of licensing.

2.1     Preliminaries
Individuals are indexed by i = 1, . . . , N and occupations by j = 1, . . . , M . The government chooses
a training requirement j for each occupation. Entering an occupation with a requirement j
delays individuals' payos by a time interval j . Individuals also invest time yi in schooling, which
similarly delays their payo. Schooling and licensing, however, dier in two respects. First, the
former is an individual choice, whereas the latter is mandatory conditional on occupational choice.
Second, schooling raises individual productivity, whereas WTP eects of licensing depend upon
the average behavior of all workers in the occupation. After observing {j }, individuals solve their
respective problems. Individuals invest in schooling, enter one occupation, supply labor for other
individuals' consumption, and consume their entire labor income. We treat their payos from these
consumption and labor supply decisions as if occurring in a single period. For conceptual clarity, we
distinguish between individuals' roles as workers and consumers, especially in our welfare analysis.

2.2     Problem
Statement. Individuals maximize a utility function with preferences over consumption and labor
hours, the timing of this payo, and an idiosyncratic occupation-specific preference term aiJi :
                               8          20          1 "                   3                        9
                               >
                               <            X
                                                        " 1                                          >
                                                                                                     =
                                                  " 1
                                          6@                                 7
                    max               log 4   qj cij" A
                                                                         h1+
                                                                          i  5   (yi + Ji ) + aiJi
                {cij },hi ,yi ,Ji >
                                  :                                 1+                               >
                                                                                                     ;
                                               j                                                                  (1)
                                       X
                               s.t.          wj cij  AJi (yi )wJi hi .
                                         j


We model consumption as a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) composite good. Individual i
chooses consumption cij of labor services from each occupation j , labor hours hi , years of schooling
yi , and an occupation Ji in which to work. The consumption weights qj = q (j , E[aiJi |Ji = j ])
are endogenous to training requirements, accommodating potential labor quality and selection
eects that aect WTP for goods produced by licensed labor. The elasticity of substitution is ",
the intensive-margin elasticity of labor supply is 1/ , the annual discount rate is , and                      scales
labor   supply.5   The occupation preference term aij is distributed i.i.d. Type I Extreme Value with
dispersion parameter , with a larger                   implying less dispersion in occupational preferences. The
wage in occupation j is wj and is common across workers, and Aj (·) is an eective labor supply
   5
     A su cient condition for equilibrium uniqueness is 1 + (1 +  ) + " 6= 0. The economic content of this restriction
on the model parameters is to ensure that the occupational labor supply and demand curves cross.


                                                                6
function, with A0
                j (·) > 0 for all j , so that individual investments in schooling raise eective labor
supply. By contrast, training requirements j aect consumption weights qj and the equilibrium
wage wj but do not enter Aj (·).6 The quality-adjusted price index of the CES composite good is
    P              1
           "   1 " 1 "
P =     n qj w j       . We normalize the wage w0 = 1 of a reference occupation.
       Willingness to Pay. Licensing may raise welfare in our model insofar as it either directly raises
labor quality or induces selection into licensed occupations that raises WTP for labor provided by
licensed workers. For example, consumers may be willing to pay for barbers with more training, just
as they may gain from screening out bad barbers who would otherwise pool with good barbers and
thus whose services they might otherwise unwittingly purchase. We therefore capture the preceding
literature's two main proposed channels for welfare benefits of licensing--gains in quality and the
restoration of e ciency in markets with asymmetric information--in a model that is nevertheless
tractable for estimation and welfare analysis. We model the willingness to pay for licensed labor
as a log-linear function of training time and the average value of the idiosyncratic preference term
of workers in the occupation, capturing respectively quality and selection eects:

                                  log qj = 0j + 1 j + 2 log E[aiJi |Ji = j ],                                       (2)

where 1 and 2 are parameters governing the response of WTP to training time and to selection
with respect to occupation preferences. Licensing, of course, may aect the selection of workers
along many dimensions, but selection aects WTP only insofar as the attribute on which selection
occurs, aiJi , is itself valued by consumers or correlated with other valued attributes.7 This spec-
ification nests these explanations for the purpose of abstracting away from exactly why licensing
aects consumer preferences: We will simply let the data speak about the value consumers assign
to changes brought about by licensing in the nature of occupational labor services.
       Consumption. Individual i's consumption of occupation j 's labor is

                                                  AJi (yi )wJi hi (wj /qj )      "
                                          cij =                                      ,
                                                            P1 "

and so aggregate consumption of occupation j 's labor is

                                  X            N (wj /qj )   "   X
                                                                                
                           Cj =        cij =                         s j Aj ( y i :Ji =j )wj hi:Ji =j ,             (3)
                                                  P1 "
                                   i                             j

   6
      The distinction between licensing and schooling is a strict generalization of a model with one human capital stock
in which licensing is an occupation-specific mandated minimum for schooling. It is without loss of generality that we
do not allow private investment in training. However, our specification does assume yi and j to be separable. This
can be relaxed by a generalized eective labor supply function AJi (yi ; j ) and would allow for responses of yi to j .
In practice, our data do not tightly distinguish between the model concepts of yi and j .
    7
      This functional form implies that the WTP "returns" to training and selection are constant and is best viewed as a
local linear approximation. One of many possible microfoundations for a relationship between WTP and E[aiJi |Ji = j ]
is that a worker may exert some costly unobservable eort beyond labor hours which consumers value and which
reduces her probability of making a mistake that would cause the worker to lose her license. A high worker with high
aiJi will exert more of this eort in equilibrium. For example, a worker who has a preference for being an accountant
may be more unobservably diligent because he or she faces an idiosyncratically high cost of losing her license.



                                                             7
where sj denotes the share of workers in occupation j .
                                                satisfies
   Schooling. Individual i's schooling choice yi

                                                      1 +  A0        
                                                             J i ( yi )
                                                  =       ·          ) ,                                    (4)
                                                            AJ i ( y i

reflecting that, in equilibrium, individuals equate the marginal delay cost and the marginal individ-
                                                                     is constant among individuals
ual productivity benefit of schooling (Mincer, 1974). Furthermore, yi
                                       
grouped by occupation choice Ji , and yi :Ji =j is independent of j . Most importantly, the outside
option to invest in schooling at equilibrium return  enforces, in a sense we make precise below, a
required return on licensing requirements. We can also express the present value opportunity cost
of licensing requirements as `j = j , where `j is the share of the present value of lifetime labor
income dissipated by the requirement.
   Labor Supply. The individual's indirect utility conditional on entering occupation j and the
distributional assumption for occupational preferences imply that occupation shares are

                                                      + )
                                                                                    (1+ )
                                                   (yj                 )w             
                                          e            j
                                                               Aj ( y j   j
                              sj =                                                       (1+ )
                                                                                                    .       (5)
                                     P                + )
                                                   (yj 0 j0               )w 0             
                                         j0   e                  Aj 0 ( yj 0 j


Next, individual labor supply is

                                                                    1     1
                                                  hi:Ji =j =            wj ,                                (6)
                                                                               P
and we define total labor supply in occupation j as Hj =                           i:Ji =j   hi .

2.3   Equilibrium
Definition 1. Given occupation characteristics {0j }, parameters { , , ,  , ", 1 , 2 }, and a policy
choice {j }, an equilibrium is defined by endogenous quantities {{Ji , hi , {cij }}, {wj , qj }} such that

  1. Individuals optimize: For all i, occupation Ji , hours hi , and consumption {cij } solve Equation 1.

  2. Markets clear: For all j , the wage wj is such that labor markets clear:

                                                              
                                                    Cj = Aj (yi :Ji =j )Hj .                                (7)


  3. Beliefs are confirmed: For all j , willingness to pay qj is such that Equation 2 holds.

   We now present four equilibrium relationships in the model which, together, compose the system
of equations that we solve to obtain comparative statics. Equations 3 and 7 imply that
                                                                                                    
                            @ log Cj   @ log Hj                    @ log qj          @ log wj
                                     =          ="                                                      ,   (8)
                               @j         @j                         @j                 @j


                                                            8
which states that consumption falls if licensing raises wages by more than it raises WTP. The
partial derivative of Equation 5 with respect to j is
                                                                       
                                 @ log sj              1 +  @ log wj
                                          =                             ,                          (9)
                                   @j                          @j

and, dierentiating Equation 6, we obtain

                                      @ log hi:Ji =j   1 @ log wj
                                                     =            .
                                          @j            @j

The preceding equations show that the response of employment to licensing depends on whether
the response of wages to licensing is greater or less than the return to schooling--that is, on the
sign of the response of the present value of income to licensing. This is the sense in which worker
responses to licensing reflect a required return . The eect on hours per worker depends only on
the wage eect, showing that licensing distorts the intensive margin of labor supply only indirectly.
We will henceforth refer to the actual wage earned as the gross wage and the wage after licensing
costs (i.e., in present value) as the net wage.
   Next, we dierentiate Equation 2 and apply a result, which we prove in Appendix B, that

                                  @ log E[aiJi |Ji = j ]        1 @ log sj
                                                         =                 ,
                                          @j                        @j

yielding

                                   @ log qj               2 @ log sj
                                            = 1                       .
                                     @j                       @j

The first result relates the change in the conditional expectation of the idiosyncratic occupational
preference term aiJi to the change in the share of workers in the occupation. Intuitively, if licensing
drives out many workers from an occupation, only the "dedicated" types (i.e., high aiJi ) remain,
which may raise WTP. In the second result, we lack an empirical method to distinguish within-
or between-worker eects on E[aiJi |Ji = j ]--that is, to identify 1 and 2 --and henceforth we use
the constant  to summarize WTP eects. However, the WTP eect is a su cient statistic for
the welfare benefit of licensing, so welfare analysis does not require us to take a stance on the
mechanisms by which licensing changes labor demand.

2.4   Implications of Model
We summarize the model in four propositions. Proofs are in Appendix B.

Proposition 1. Consider the case  = 1 = 2 = 0 (licensing has no eect on WTP). An increase
in j has the following eects in equilibrium:
                                     @ log sj             (1+")
  1. Workers exit the occupation:      @j       =      1+ (1+ )+"   < 0.


                                                         9
                                                                          @ log wj            
  2. The occupation's gross wage rises, but its net wage falls:              @j      =   1+ (1+ )+"   2 (0, ).
                                                   @ log hi:Ji =j            
  3. Hours per worker in the occupation rise:           @j          =   1+ (1+ )+"       > 0.

   This proposition demonstrates that, when licensing purely restricts entry, the model yields
sensible predictions for outcomes in labor markets which follow from                      and  , which determine
the intensive and extensive margin labor supply elasticities, and ", the labor demand elasticity.
Licensing raises wages, but absent increases in WTP, these increases are insu cient to fully com-
pensate workers for the opportunity cost of licensing. In response to these changes in gross and
net wages, workers increase labor supply in the occupation on the intensive margin but reduce it
on the extensive margin. Appendix B contains comparative static formulae for the general case (
unrestricted), as summarized in the next proposition.

Proposition 2. The following inequalities hold for all j and :

                              @ 2 log wj      @ 2 log hj      @ 2 log sj
                                         > 0,            > 0,            > 0,
                               @j @            @j @            @j @

and there exists an ¯ < 1 such that, for all         ¯,

                                       @ log wj     @ log sj
                                                > ,          > 0.
                                          @j          @j

   This proposition states that, if licensing raises WTP, wages and hours per worker rise more, and
employment declines less, in response to licensing than under  = 0, as licensing now raises labor
demand in addition to reducing labor supply. If the WTP eect is su ciently large, employment
and the net wage rise. With Proposition 3, the employment result confirms that the sign of the
social welfare impact of licensing is ambiguous and depends on model parameters.
   In the subsequent propositions, we define social welfare as W = Eui , the ex-ante expectation of
individual utility, and Wj as the total surplus from occupation j . Total surplus from occupation j
is Wj = W (0, {j 0 })   limj !1 W (j , {j 0 }). This is the potential gain from trade in labor services
from the occupation, or equivalently, the dierence in social welfare between no licensing for j and
banning entry into j . Furthermore, we divide the social welfare eect of licensing into two mutually
exclusive and collectively exhaustive concepts: worker and consumer welfare. We show in Appendix
B that social welfare is an average of real net wages, real with respect to the quality-adjusted price
level and net of the licensing cost, and we define consumer welfare as the quality-adjusted price
level and worker welfare as an average of nominal net wages.

Proposition 3. The social welfare eect of licensing on occupational surplus is

                             @ log Wj   1 @ log sj    1 +  @ log wj Hj
                                      =            +                   ,
                                @j          @j        (" 1)    @j




                                                    10
which reflects a change in consumer welfare of

                                        @ log W C   sj (1 +  ) @ log wj Hj
                                                  =
                                           @j        (" 1)         @j

and a change in worker welfare of

                                             @ log W L   sj @ log sj
                                                       =   ·         .
                                                @j            @j

       This proposition states that the change in occupational surplus from licensing reflects two
considerations: the changes in consumer and worker welfare. The change in consumer welfare is
the change in the quality-adjusted price level, which is revealed by the change in the occupational
wage bill. The change in worker welfare is the change in the occupational nominal wage net of the
licensing cost, which is revealed by the change in employment.
       These results emerge from two revealed-preference arguments based on the responses to licensing
of consumers and workers in the licensed occupation. Licensing raises consumer welfare insofar as
the increase in WTP at least osets the increase in the occupation's wage, which reduces consumers'
real income--if, in short, licensing reduces the quality-adjusted price level. Lacking data on quality-
adjusted prices, we look to changes in the occupational wage bill to reveal changes in consumer
welfare: Holding all other prices fixed, the change in the quality-adjusted price level equals sj /(1 ")
times the change in j 's wage bill. Next, licensing raises worker welfare if the increase in wages at
least osets the licensing cost--if, in short, the nominal net wage rises. Lacking data on nominal
net wages, we infer them from employment shares, using a property of all discrete choice models
satisfying the "connected substitutes" condition of Berry et al. (2013): One can invert a choice-share
function to recover a value function.8

Proposition 4. Licensing reduces social welfare if

                                                        1 +  "
                                                   >           .
                                                           " 1

       This proposition provides a net-benefits test for licensing. It shows that whether the welfare
eect of licensing is positive or negative depends upon the relative magnitudes of the WTP eect,
the consumption substitution elasticity, and the intensive-margin labor supply elasticity, which
together determine the social benefit of greater WTP, and the return to schooling, which determines
the social cost of reduced occupational labor supply.9 In particular, the WTP eect cannot be too
   8
     Our results are also related to the "gains from trade" formula of Arkolakis et al. (2012). For large occupations, Ap-
pendix B proves the own-occupation employment eect remains a su cient statistic. Because of between-occupation
spillovers, the Herfindahl index of employment shares is also required to estimate the magnitude, but not the sign,
of the worker welfare eect. In our application, the Herfindahl term is negligibly small. Section 6 and Appendix B
discuss the robustness of our su cient statistics results to worker heterogeneity beyond occupational preferences.
   9
     To provide economic interpretations of the scalars on , the "/(" 1) term maps the WTP eect  into its eect
on the price level P , and the (1 +  )/ term captures that, because of the intensive-margin labor supply response,
the elasticity of welfare to the real wage exceeds one.



                                                           11
far below the equilibrium return to schooling if licensing is to raise social welfare. Increases in WTP
are the sole motive for licensing in the model: If  = 0, there are no values of the other parameters
for which licensing raises welfare. Moreover, this proposition illustrates the close connection of our
model to Summers (1989): Whether for employer-side benefits or worker training, the welfare cost
of a mandate reflects the dierence between willingness to pay and the social cost of provision.

Proposition 5. Workers and consumers respectively bear shares                L   and   C   of the incidence of a
change in licensing, where

                 L       WL   (1 +  ) "         (" 1)                              C            L
                     =      =             ·                ,                           =1           .
                         W    (1 +  ) " +  1 + (1 +  ) + "

A change in licensing raises consumer welfare but reduces worker welfare if
                                                                                        
                                                                (" 1)       (1 + ")
                         sj < 0 <   wj Hj ()  2                           ,                .
                                                            (1 + )(1 +  )" (1 +  )"

    The first part of this proposition shows the incidence of licensing. Workers bear a smaller share
of incidence when        is high (occupational choice is more elastic to net income),  is high (delay is
more costly), or " is low (consumers are inelastic). The second part of this proposition shows that,
in the model, licensing may raise consumer welfare while reducing worker welfare, and that this
case coincides with licensing reducing employment but raising the wage bill. It further shows that
the welfare eects can be partitioned into three regions of , given the other structural parameters.
If  is below the infimum of the interval, then licensing makes both workers and consumers worse
o. If  is in the interval, then licensing hurts workers but benefits consumers. If  is above the
supremum of the interval, then licensing makes both workers and consumers better o.
    The intermediate case corresponds to a common intuition about when licensing is beneficial:
Society might want to reduce employment in an occupation because the marginal worker is in-
competent, consumers dislike incompetents, and licensing will keep incompetents out. The model
accommodates this possibility. While lower employment implies lower worker welfare, whether
consumer welfare rises depends upon whether licensing actually keeps out incompetents and how
much more consumers are willing to pay a competent worker over an incompetent one. The model
leaves these questions to the data via , as their answers are revealed by consumer behavior.


3    Data
We use new survey questions in public microdata from the basic monthly U.S. Current Population
Survey (CPS) from January 2015 to December 2018.10 The CPS asks adults in survey households
three questions about certification and licensing. The questions are as follows:

Q1. "Do you have a currently active professional certification or a state or industry license?"
 10
    Appendix Table A9 conducts a self-replication of our main results using microdata from the 2010­2015 American
Community Survey. We do so by merging our CPS-based estimates of licensed shares with ACS microdata.


                                                       12
Q2. "Were any of your certifications or licenses issued by the federal, state, or local government?"

Q3. "Is your certification or license required for your job?"

To match the U.S. government definition of an occupational license,11 we say a worker is licensed
if he or she answers yes to both Q1 and Q2--that is, if the worker holds an active government-
issued professional certification or license--and say the worker is not licensed otherwise. We say
a worker is certified if he or she answers yes to Q1 but no to Q2--that is, if he or she holds an
active professional certification or license but it is not government-issued--and use certification
as a control in robustness checks. Our decision to use the CPS is informed by sample size, as
precise estimates of state­occupation licensed shares are an essential component of our research
design. The sample covers 624,697 unique workers, and Appendix Table A1 tabulates workers by
their answers to these survey questions: 27.5 percent are licensed or certified, and 22.6 percent are
licensed.12 These shares are consistent with those in other survey data (e.g., Kleiner and Krueger,
2013; Blair and Chung, forthcoming).
       Our analysis defines occupations according to 2010 Census categories. The sample contains
workers in 483 occupations.13 We measure licensing by the licensed share of workers in a state­
occupation cell as a proxy for policy. Informing our approach, state and local governments define
licensed occupations at their discretion and obey no occupational classification scheme. For ex-
ample, some states license occupations as specific as eyebrow threading (Carpenter et al., 2017).
The many regulatory bodies that license occupations across states, as well as the challenge of
harmonizing definitions of occupations, have made licensing particularly di cult to study.
       Our proxy naturally resolves this mapping of regulations to Census categories. Workers in
licensed occupations must by law be licensed themselves. Misalignment between regulatory and
statistical definitions of occupations, however, would result in Census occupational categories pool-
ing some unlicensed occupations with licensed ones as defined by state regulations. Other factors,
such as survey misresponse and individuals who hold licenses for occupations other than those
in which they work, may also contribute to this phenomenon. Appendix Figure A1 shows that,
because of these considerations, there is considerable mass of the cell licensed share distribution at
values between 0 and 1. The mass suggests much scope for within-cell worker-level selection into
licensing--that is, into "suboccupations" unobservable to the researcher that dier in both policy
and outcomes--that we resolve by using licensed shares as a measure of policy. Had we observed
  11
      According to the Interagency Working Group on Expanded Measures of Enrollment and Attainment, an occupa-
tional license is a "credential awarded by a government agency that constitutes legal authority to do a specific job."
See https://nces.ed.gov/surveys/GEMEnA/definitions.asp. We follow the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (Cunning-
ham, 2019) in using Q1 and Q2 to identify licensed workers. Requiring yes on Q3 leads to counterfactually low
licensed shares of workers, both overall and in universally licensed occupations.
   12
      All data are drawn from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (Flood et al., 2018). We limit the sample
to employed adults age 16 to 64, except for age regressions, and follow Autor et al. (2008) to address topcoding and
allocation of earnings by estimating hourly earnings for non-hourly workers and by winsorizing for earnings below
half the federal minimum wage. We also winsorize usual weekly hours above 100 and map educational attainment to
years of education using data from the Autor et al. (2008) replication materials.
   13
      The reciprocal of the Herfindahl index of occupation shares of employment--which measures the "eective"
number of occupations--is 109, indicating that workers are not concentrated in a few occupations.


                                                         13
licensing policy at the state­suboccupation level at which it is determined, one could view our cell
licensed share measure as approximating an employment-weighted average of policy.14
       Does self-reported license status reflect the truth? Given data limitations, we oer two tests.
First, we compare the probabilities with which workers self-report as licensed between occupations
that are and are not "universally licensed" by U.S. states, such as physicians and lawyers. In
the 32 occupations listed as universally licensed in Gittleman et al. (2018), we find 66.2 percent
of workers are licensed, as compared with 13.2 percent of workers in the other 451 occupations.
This dierence is highly significant and in the desired direction. In our main sample, we exclude
workers in universally licensed occupations, but in Appendix A, we show our results are robust
to their inclusion. Second, we collect cell-level data on actual licensing policies for 55 occupations
where interstate policy variation is substantial, policy data are readily available, and statistical and
regulatory occupational definitions coincide.15 Figure 1 provides six maps as examples.
       From this policy dataset, we find that policy variation is strongly correlated with variation in
self-reported cell licensed shares using the two-way fixed eect specification (Equation 10) we will
introduce in Section 4. Relative to other occupations in the same state and the same occupation in
other states, the self-reported licensed share is about 6.6 percentage points higher in cells that our
policy data say are licensed (see Appendix Table A5), an eect size of 0.71 standard deviations of
the residualized licensed share distribution for these 55 occupations. Furthermore, this correlation
of actual policy and the licensed share exists in cells with licensed shares much higher or much
lower than their state and occupation means, variation that a priori seems most likely to be related
to policy. Residualizing cell licensed shares and our policy measure with respect to these means,
we show in Appendix Figure A3 that a cell with a 10-percentage-point lower licensed share is
about 10 percentage points less likely to be licensed in our policy data. We conclude that self-
reported licensing shares are positively correlated with the truth, but some workers do self-report
as unlicensed in both licensed cells and universally licensed occupations.16 Given the considerations
discussed above, it is hard to determine whether or not such self-reports are misresponses.
       To address finite-sample bias (Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2018) and reduce sampling variance in
cells with few observations, we estimate licensed shares using the leave-out mean with an empirical
  14
     We decided not to collect such data in full for several reasons. First, even if licensing were entirely binary at
the cell level (i.e., no misalignment of occupational categories), this would still require collecting more than 20,000
cell-level observations of licensing regulations. Second, given some misalignment, constructing a cell-level measure of
policy would require employment by suboccupation to use as weights. Such data, to our knowledge, do not exist.
Third, the opaque wording of many occupation categories and the extensive amount of intermediate variation in
cell licensed shares mean that accurate guesses of these weights would be important but di cult to achieve. These
di culties aside, the benefit of such a measure would be analogous to the simulated-instruments approach of Currie
and Gruber (1996): It would purge from our licensed share any endogenous variation in suboccupations' shares of
cell employment. We discuss this concern in detail in Section 6.
  15
     We drew from Carpenter et al. (2017), National Conference of State Legislatures (2019), and other sources. We
provide the list of 55 occupations in Appendix Table A4 and detail our data collection procedure in Appendix D.
These occupations contain 8.8 percent of U.S. workers. We found that using our policy variable as as instrument for
the licensed share in this subsample yielded very imprecise estimates, and thus we do not pursue this approach.
  16
     This is true even in occupations that are very narrowly defined in the Census. For example, only 65.9 percent of
workers who are "licensed practical and licensed vocational nurses" (occupation code 3500) self-report as licensed.




                                                          14
Bayes adjustment:
                                                          P
                                                    c
                                                     o+        j 2Wos :j 6=i Licensej
                                    %Licensei =                                         ,
                                                        c
                                                             b
                                                         o + o + Nos           1

where worker j is in the set Wos if and only if j is in occupation o and state s. The term Nos is the
number of such workers. The terms     c        b
                                        o and o are occupation-specific constants that are derived
from a beta-binomial model that we explain in Appendix E; they reduce measurement error by
using prior knowledge of each occupation's distribution of cell licensed shares to e ciently shrink
the raw cell licensed shares toward the national licensed share for the occupation.17 To estimate
attenuation bias from sampling variance, we calculate for each cell the standard error of the licensed
share using the standard deviation of the posterior distribution:
                      v
                      u      P                                            P
                      u (co+
                                                          b
                      t        i0 2Wos ,i0 6=i Licensei )( o + Nos    1     i0 2Wos ,i0 6=i Licensei )
               ui   =                                                                                  .
                                       ( c       b
                                            o + o + Nos      1)2 (c     b
                                                                   o + o + Nos )


Bolstered by our empirical Bayes approach, we have su cient data to oer precise estimates of
licensed shares: The median worker is in a cell whose licensed share has a standard error of 1.7
percentage points, and the standard error for the 95th-percentile worker's cell is 4.7 percentage
points, ranked with respect to standard error. Appendix Table A2 shows that 90 percent of variation
in the licensed share is between occupations. By comparison, variation explained by overall state
licensed shares is negligible (<1 percent). The remaining 9 percent is our identifying variation--
within-occupation between-state dierences in licensed shares--and the standard deviation of these
residuals is 7.1 percentage points. Taken together, these results imply an attenuation bias of 7
percent from sampling variance, which we henceforth ignore due to its small magnitude.
    We also use other CPS data on worker characteristics, some as outcomes and others in our stan-
dard set of controls. These are the hourly wage (for the Merged Outgoing Rotation Group sample),
hours worked last week, age, schooling, sex, race (white, black, Asian, other), ethnicity (Hispanic
and non-Hispanic), and indicators for certification status, union status (covered and non-covered),
veteran status, marital status, disability status (any physical or cognitive), and metropolitan status
(MSA resident or non-resident), and the presence of children at home. Throughout our analysis, we
treat worker age, sex, race, ethnicity, veteran status, marital status, disability status, metropolitan
status, and the presence of children as demographic characteristics that are predetermined with
respect to licensing and thus use them in our controls. For our analysis of the opportunity costs of
licensing, we restrict controls to worker sex, race, and ethnicity.
    Splitting the sample on individual license status, we report summary statistics for these demo-
graphic variables in Appendix Table A3. Licensed and unlicensed workers dier along nearly every
observable characteristic: The licensed are older, more educated, more likely to be female, married,
non-Hispanic white, union members, U.S. citizens, non-disabled, veterans, and earn about 30 per-
 17
    The adjustment is only of consequence for estimating licensed shares in cells with very few observations. See
Appendix E. Results are similar without the correction, particularly if we simply drop such small cells.


                                                          15
cent more than the unlicensed on average. Our identification strategy is motivated by the concern,
suggested by these pervasive observable dierences, that individual licensed and unlicensed workers
are not obviously comparable even if observably similar.


4    Empirical Strategy
We use variation in the state­occupation cell licensed share to estimate the eects of licensing that
correspond to reduced-form moments of our model. We estimate specifications of the form

                                 yi = o + s +          · %Licensedi(o,s) + Xi0  + "i ,                            (10)

where o and s are occupation and state fixed eects and                          =     is the average eect of licensing
for some outcome yi for worker i, with  reflecting the average time cost of licensing in years and
reflecting the eect of licensing expressed per year. The independent variable %Licensedi(o,s) is the
estimated licensed share of workers in the same occupation and state as worker i. The state and
occupation fixed eects mean we identify the eect of licensing from occupations for which licensed
shares of workers dier among states. In controls Xi , we include fixed eects for the demographic
strata as well as industry and survey month­year fixed eects. We cluster standard errors by cell,
which we define to be a state­occupation pair.
    This specification identifies eects of licensing by a two-way comparison of a state­occupation
cell to the same occupation in other states and other occupations in same state. Abstracting from
covariates, the formal identification assumption for                   is that two-way dierences in licensed shares
are independent of two-way dierences in the error term. For any two occupations o1 , o2 and any
two states s1 , s2 , we require

           ["o1 ,s1   "o2 ,s1    "o1 ,s2 + "o2 ,s2 ]        [%Lo1 ,s1         %Lo2 ,s1   %Lo1 ,s2 + %Lo2 ,s2 ],
                                                       |=




where "os = E["i | i 2 Wos ] is the cell average value of the error term, as defined by Equation 10.
Relative to all occupations in a state and the occupation in all states, cell licensed shares must
therefore be uncorrelated with unobservable determinants of the outcome of interest. Following
de Chaisemartin and D'Haultfoeuille (2019), the estimator can be written as a weighted average of
heterogeneous treatment eects             os   of licensing occupation o in state s, weighted by the !os terms:
                                                           X
                                                       =         !os   os ,
                                                           o,s


where

                                       sos %Los (%Los %Lo %Ls + %L)
                                !os = P                                 ,
                                        os sos %Los (%Los %Lo %Ls + %L)

sos is a cell employment count, and %L(·) is a licensed share. Importantly, our approach requires


                                                             16
              Table 1: For Which Occupations Does Licensing Vary Among U.S. States?

                Occupation                                                                     % Licensed
Name                                  Code                Employment                  Mean                Std. Dev.
Panel A: High Interstate Variance
Brokerage Clerks               5200                               4,000                 40.0                     37.7
Dispensing Opticians           3520                              47,000                 30.8                     28.9
Elevator Installers            6700                              31,000                 41.4                     23.6
Electricians                   6355                             770,000                 43.9                     15.4
Panel B: Low Interstate Variance
Lawyers                        2100                           1,030,000                 82.8                      3.4
Registered Nurses              3255                           2,900,000                 83.2                      2.4
Economists                     1800                              29,000                  1.6                      2.3
Cashiers                       4720                           3,000,000                  2.1                      1.5
 Notes: This table presents statistics on selected occupations with high or low variance in state­occupation licensed
shares. In particular, we report their Census occupation code, their estimated average annual employment in our
sample, the estimated national licensed share, and the sample-weighted standard deviation of the state­occupation
licensed shares. See Appendix Table A6 for occupations ranked by their treatment-eect weights as in de Chaisemartin
and D'Haultfoeuille (2019) and the most overweighted occupations relative to their population share.


variation in licensing shares within an occupation between states, and so our results do not pertain
to occupations that are licensed by essentially all or no states. To reduce measurement error,
we also explicitly drop universally licensed occupations as determined by Gittleman et al. (2018).
We identify instead an average treatment eect that approximates the quantity relevant for policy
analysis, insofar as weights !os are large for occupations with much between-state "disagreements"
in licensing that may reflect areas of interest.18
       Which occupations have interstate variation in licensing and thus contribute most to empirical
identification? Table 1 provides guidance. Panels A and B respectively list four occupations with
high and low interstate variance in their licensed share. Many salient licensed occupations are
universally licensed (and thus explicitly excluded from our sample, but included here) or have low
interstate variance in the licensed share (and thus receive little weight). A characteristic marginally
licensed occupation is the dispensing optician (Timmons and Mills, 2018): It is licensed by 21 U.S.
states but unlicensed by 29. Though related to two health professions with universal licensing,
ophthalmology and optometry, opticians' scope of practice is narrower: They cannot diagnose eye
diseases or perform eye examinations but can dispense eyeglasses and contact lenses according to a
prescription. In such occupations, it is unclear whether the social gains from licensing compensate
for its social costs. The case for licensing as consumer protection, while arguable, is often weaker
  18
    See Appendix A6 for a list of occupations by their regression weight. In the standard two-way fixed eect design
(de Chaisemartin and D'Haultfoeuille, 2019), weights !os may be positive or negative. Each occupation necessarily
receives a positive weight in total over states, so assuming that occupation-specific treatment eects of licensing are
homogeneous across states,      can be viewed as a convex combination of such treatment eects. The assumption
of between-state homogeneity is necessary for our design: 30.3 percent of treatment-eect weights !os are negative,
where we calculate this fraction weighting by |!os |. Alternatively, one could estimate state- and occupation-specific
eects of licensing by saturating the regression, then assigning weights to each eect to compute an average.


                                                         17
in marginal occupations than for inframarginal occupations such as doctors or lawyers.
    Why does licensing vary among states and occupations? Mulligan and Shleifer (2005) show that
populous states are more likely to license occupations and interpret this as evidence for regulatory
capture as in Stigler (1971). Other research (Smith, 1982) examines state politics and occupational
characteristics as determinants. Our two-way fixed eect specification means these state- and
occupation-level explanations are absorbed away. What might explain within-occupation interstate
variation in licensing? Several analyses seek to explain interstate variation in licensing for specific
example occupations with ostensible measures of these occupations' local political power (Begun et
al., 1981; Graddy, 1991; Wheelan, 1998; Broscheid and Teske, 2003), but the evidence is limited and,
in some cases, rather dated in the empirical strategies used. We do not view policy endogeneity as
a major threat to our empirical analysis for several reasons. First, in our experience, the political
sources of variation in licensing policy are often so arcane and arbitrary as to be plausibly as
good as random. Second, our set of empirical results is parsimoniously explained as eects of
a restriction on occupational labor supply and is much less easily reconciled with an account of
political endogeneity. Third, we show in Section 6 that our results withstand a variety of robustness
checks to address these concerns.


5     Reduced-Form Eects of Licensing
Our reduced-form empirical analysis proceeds in several steps. First, we present evidence that
suggests that licensing regulations have substantial bite: that is, their costs appear on average
economically significant as a share of workers' present value lifetime incomes. Second, we show
that licensing raises average wages, compensating in part for licensing costs. Third, we show labor
supply increases on the intensive margin but contracts on the extensive margin, consistent with the
combination of licensing costs and higher wages.

5.1   Education and the Opportunity Cost of Licensing
We present several pieces of evidence consistent with economically significant licensing costs, moti-
vating our subsequent analysis of wage and labor supply responses. First, we show that licensing's
education requirements appear to bind, raising average investment in education. Second, we show
that licensing reallocates human capital investment toward occupation-specific credentials. Third,
we show that licensing appears to delay the entry into employment of young workers.
    In Panel A of Table 2, we estimate eects of licensing on mean years of education and find that
workers in highly licensed cells, relative to that occupation in other states and other occupations
in that state, have substantially more education than workers in less-licensed cells. Our estimate
in Column 3, in particular, implies that fully licensing a cell raises mean education by 0.4 years.
    Second, licensing reallocates human capital investment. Figure 2 displays the eects of licensing
on shares of educational attainment by degree level, using our two-way fixed eect specification
to compare distributions of educational attainment in cells with high and low licensed shares. We


                                                  18
                Figure 2: Eect of Licensing on Highest Level of Educational Attainment


                               Absolute Change (p.p.) in Probability of Educational Attainment


                   Less than high school


        High school diploma or equivalent


             Some college but no degree


        Associate's degree, occupational


           Associate's degree, academic


                       Bachelor's degree


                         Master's degree


              Professional school degree


                       Doctorate degree

                                            -10           -5                0                5               10

 Notes: This figure presents estimates from Equation 10 of the eects of licensing on the shares of workers in a cell
by their highest level of educational attainment. We collapse all grades below a high school diploma into "less than
high school," with details available in Appendix Figure A2. Standard errors are clustered at the state­occupation
cell level. Bars reflect 95-percent confidence intervals with standard errors clustered by cell.


see a striking pattern: Licensing increases the shares of workers with more occupation-specific
forms of educational credentials, such as occupational or vocational associate's degrees or master's
degrees, and decreases the shares of workers with educational credentials that are not specific
to occupations, such as high school degrees or bachelor's degrees. These results are consistent
with actual licensing policies, a majority of which impose specialized educational requirements
(Gittleman et al., 2018). Our estimates are noteworthy in magnitude, comparable to the G.I. Bill
(Bound and Turner, 2002) or modern grant-aid programs (Dynarski, 2003). We summarize the
extent of reallocation by estimating the total variation distance from fully licensing an unlicensed
occupation, which represents the minimum share of workers in an occupation whose education level
changes as a result of licensing policy: 10.7 percent.19 Licensing thus substantially increases the
occupational specificity of human capital.
       The CPS definition of education, however, excludes much training required by licensing. For
  19                                                                                  P
    For discrete random variables X, Y over event space , variation distance equals 1
                                                                                    2   x 2 | P ( X = x ) P (Y = x)|.
Our estimate reflects a bias correction for the eect of sampling variance on estimated variation distance that we
explain in Appendix E. This correction is inconsequential in magnitude for our application.



                                                          19
instance, legal entrance into the occupation of cosmetology requires, in a majority of U.S. states,
instructional or apprenticeship programs requiring at least 1,500 work hours (Reddy, 2017). To as-
sess the full opportunity cost of licensing--which, in our model, is the delay in entry to employment
due to mandated training--we also consider worker age as an outcome. In particular, we estimate
the horizontal shift in the age profile of employment with a specification

                  Ageos,a = o,a + s,a +     · %Licensedos + log Empos,a + "os,a ,

where a is the worker age (so Ageos,a = a), o is the occupation, and s is the state. Therefore, s,a
and o,a are respectively state­age and occupation­age fixed eects, and Empos,a is the employment
count in occupation o and state s for workers of age a. To focus on entry into employment, we
restrict the sample to workers below age 35.
   Panel B of Table 2 reports that licensing delays the entry into employment by about 1.1 years.
This suggests that time in formal education indeed understates the opportunity cost of licensing.
We also directly examine the eect of licensing on the age profile of employment, using a Poisson
regression specification of Equation 10 that splits cell employment counts by worker age in years:

                         E[Empos,a ] = exp(o,a + s,a +      · %Licensedos ).                    (11)

Figure 3 shows that there are fewer young workers in highly licensed state­occupation cells relative
to the same occupation in other states where the licensed share is lower, consistent with delayed
worker entry into occupations. Employment of workers who are 25 years old or younger, for
example, falls by 46 percent on average. Consequently, the opportunity costs of licensing appear
substantial and reflective of time spent in formal education as well as unmeasured investments.

5.2   Wages
To what extent are workers compensated in equilibrium for licensing costs via higher wages? Panel
C of Table 2 reports the estimated wage eects of licensing. Column 1 reports the specification
with demographic-strata controls and with individual license status as the treatment variable.
Comparing the average hourly wages of observably similar licensed and unlicensed workers after
state and occupation fixed eects, we find that licensed workers earn about 16 percent more per
hour than unlicensed workers.
   This comparison is vulnerable to selection on unobservables of workers into licensing according
to correlates of the wage. Column 2 replaces individual license status with the licensed share.
We thus identify the wage eect of licensing using state­occupation variation in licensing rates,
purging the comparison of within-cell selection. Since occupations that are highly licensed in a
state relative to the state's overall licensing rate and the occupation's overall licensing rate also
pay relatively high wages, the comparison finds positive wage eects of licensing. In Column 3, our
baseline estimate of the causal eect of licensing on wages, we reintroduce the demographic strata
controls and thus hold constant a list of predetermined covariates potentially related to wages. We

                                                 20
                                                            Figure 3: Eect of Licensing on Employment Age Profile



           Coefficient on State-Occupation Licensed Share
             -1.5        -1        -.5        0       .5




                                                             20           30           40                50         60
                                                                               Worker Age (in Years)

                                                                                Estimate               95% CI

 Notes: This figure shows the estimated eects of licensing on the number of workers by age in a state­occupation
cell as estimated by Equation 11. Gray dashed lines indicate 95-percent confidence interval with standard errors
clustered at the level of the state­occupation cell.


find licensing raises wages by 15 percent in this specification.

5.3    Hours and Employment
If licensing raises the gross wage but reduces the net wage, as Proposition 1 explains will occur when
licensing has little eect on WTP, licensing should raise hours per worker but reduce employment.
Panel D of Table 2 reports the eects of licensing on log weekly hours per worker. Columns 1 to
3 find that licensing increases average hours in the state­occupation cell by about 3 to 4 percent.
Reassuringly, the ratio of our estimated hours and wage responses to licensing are near benchmark
estimates of the intensive-margin labor supply elasticity (Chetty, 2012). Panel A of Appendix Table
A7 repeats these specifications using the level of hours and finds increases of about 1.4 to 1.8 hours
per week attributable to licensing.
    To evaluate the employment eects of licensing, we calculate sample-weighted employment
counts by cell and regress the log cell count on the cell licensed share:

                                                                  log Empos = o + s +      · %Licensedos + "os .

We report these results in Panel E of Table 2. Across specifications, we estimate a significant


                                                                                     21
                   Table 2: Reduced-Form Worker Eects of Occupational Licensing

                                           Licensed = 1                  % Licensed in Cell
                                                (1)                     (2)                  (3)
                 Panel A: Years of Education
                                             0.383***                0.418***             0.371***
                                              (0.011)                 (0.057)              (0.055)
                 Observations                1,865,209              1,865,209             1,865,209
                 Clusters                     20,321                  20,321               20,321

                 Panel B: Years of Age
                                             1.282***                1.135***             1.112***
                                              (0.039)                 (0.243)              (0.241)
                 Observations                 722,168                722,168               722,168
                 Clusters                      17,842                 17,842                17,842

                 Panel C: Log Hourly Wage
                                             0.159***                0.201***             0.155***
                                              (0.005)                 (0.025)              (0.023)
                 Observations                 317,142                317,142               317,142
                 Clusters                      18,753                 18,753                18,753

                 Panel D: Log Weekly Hours Per Worker
                                             0.039***                0.044***             0.032***
                                              (0.002)                 (0.010)              (0.010)
                 Observations                1,865,209              1,865,209             1,865,209
                 Clusters                     20,321                  20,321               20,321

                 Panel E: Log Employment
                                                                    -0.294***
                                                                     (0.065)
                 Observations                                         20,524

 Notes: This table reports estimates from Equation 10 of the eects of licensing on outcomes of interest that correspond
to reduced-form moments of the model. The estimate in Column 1 refers to individual-worker licensing status, whereas
those in Columns 2 and 3 refer to the state­occupation cell licensed share of workers. In Columns 1 and 3, we include
strata fixed eects for predetermined demographic observables. All specifications include fixed eects for occupation,
state, industry, and month, except for Panel E, which has only state and occupation fixed eects. We restrict the
sample in Columns 1 and 2 to observations for which all control variables are available and thus is the sample used
in Column 3. Standard errors are clustered at the level of the state­occupation cell. Appendix Table A8 includes
universally licensed occupations in the sample.  = p < 0.01.


disemployment eect of around 29 percent. Relative to the same occupation in other states and to
other occupations in the same state, highly licensed cells also have considerably lower employment
than less licensed cells. As our employment regressions cannot be meaningfully estimated at the
worker level or with worker-level controls, we present only one estimate in Column 2 of Table 2.
    These results, however, survive several checks. First, we estimate a Poisson regression spec-



                                                          22
ification on the employment counts, as reported in Panel B of Appendix Table A7. Second, in
Appendix Table A9, we repeat this exercise with American Community Survey (ACS) microdata
to calculate employment shares while using our CPS-based measure of licensing. In both, we find
disemployment eects of about 25 percent. The former confirms the OLS log-count specification
is not detectably biased because of heteroskedasticity, and the latter confirms that drawing both
measures of policy and outcomes from the CPS is not a source of bias.


6     Threats to Inference
In this section, we discuss what we view as the three main threats to causal inference in our research
design. First, is the license share a valid proxy measure of licensing policy? Second, do other
labor market institutions or other confounding variables covary with cell licensed shares? Third,
what are the consequences for our analysis of selection into licensed occupations when workers are
heterogeneous? Appendix C reports additional robustness checks.

6.1   Licensed Shares as Proxy for Licensing Policy
Due to data limitations discussed in Section 3, we use the cell licensed share as a measure of policy.
A problem with this approach is that cell licensed shares may be contaminated with variation
in relative labor demand for "suboccupations" assigned the same occupation code. For example,
suppose there are licensed and unlicensed suboccupations for animal trainers, and the former pays
higher wages on average than the latter. In states with high relative demand for the licensed
suboccupation, we would observe a high licensed share and a high average wage, and from this
infer that licensing raises wages. We oer two answers to this concern. First, this explanation does
not predict our finding of lower employment in such cells. Second, we present an instrumental-
variables approach that is quite robust to this threat.
    We instrument for the cell licensed share using two indicator variables for cells with high or low
residual values of the licensed share--that is, after removing state and occupation fixed eects. The
instruments indicate that a cell has a residual share more than one standard deviation from zero,
either above or below. We show in Section 3 that this variation is strongly associated with known
variation in policy, and a priori we expect that the more-extreme variation in licensed shares is more
likely to be policy variation. This transformation of the licensed share preserves such variation while
purging possible suboccupation demand variation and sampling variance. Our results, reported in
Column 1 of Table 3, are unchanged. Using only the large dierences in cell licensed shares most
suggestive of policy variation does not change the estimated eects of licensing.

6.2   Potential Confounding Variables
Our research design identifies the eects of licensing using dierences in licensed shares across states
and occupations. A confounding variable must therefore correlate with the outcome of interest and
the licensed share in a state­occupation cell relative to other cells in the same state or in the same

                                                  23
                       Table 3: Robustness Checks for Reduced-Form Estimates

                           (1)                 (2)                (3)                   (4)                 (5)
                         Likely              Unions             Occ. &              State­Occ.           Div.­Occ.
                      Policy Dis.            & Cert.           Demo. Mix            Group FE                FE
Panel A: Years of Education
% Licensed              0.453***             0.410***            0.366***             0.308***            0.255***
                         (0.071)              (0.055)             (0.056)              (0.053)             (0.053)
Observations            1,865,209            1865,209           1,859,356            1,865,209           1,865,206
Clusters                 20,321               20,321              19,470               20,321              20,318

Panel B: Years of Age
% Licensed              1.112***             1.137***            1.152***             0.941***            0.615**
                         (0.241)              (0.244)             (0.243)              (0.237)            (0.260)
Observations             722,168             722,168             720,225              722,168             722,143
Clusters                  17,842              17,842              17,397               17,842              17,817

Panel C: Log Hourly Wage
% Licensed              0.153***             0.124***            0.158***             0.138***            0.146***
                         (0.030)              (0.024)             (0.024)              (0.024)             (0.024)
Observations             317,142             317,142             316,123              317,141             317,045
Clusters                  18,753              18,753              18,164               18,752              18,657

Panel D: Log Weekly Hours Per Worker
% Licensed               0.025*              0.031***            0.034***             0.028***            0.024**
                         (0.014)              (0.010)             (0.010)              (0.010)            (0.010)
Observations            1,865,209           1,865,209           1,859,356            1,865,209           1,865,206
Clusters                 20,321               20,321              19,470               20,321              20,318

Panel E: Log Employment
% Licensed              -0.202**            -0.320***           -0.176***              -0.084            -0.193***
                         (0.085)             (0.067)             (0.062)              (0.052)             (0.052)
Observations             20,321               20,524              19,481               20,524              20,435

 Notes: This table reports estimates from variations on Equation 10 as explained in the text. All estimates refer to
the coe cient on the licensed share of workers in the state­occupation cell. All specifications include fixed eects
for occupation, state, industry, and month, except for Panel E, which has only state and occupation fixed eects.
Standard errors are clustered at the level of the state­occupation cell. Sample sizes fluctuate because the controls
introduced in each column are either unavailable or lead to cells dropping out of the sample. Appendix Table A10
includes universally licensed occupations in the sample.  = p < 0.10,  = p < 0.05,  = p < 0.01.


occupation. Here we probe robustness to such threats by controlling for variation in two non-
licensing labor market institutions, controlling for predicted outcomes using broad labor market
characteristics, and tightening the comparison of cells to neighboring states or similar occupations.
    Besley and Case (2000) argue that regional labor market institutions often covary, and other
labor market policies and institutions may correlate with licensing and thereby bias our results.
We are unaware of comprehensive measures at the state­occupation level and thus cannot deci-



                                                        24
sively evaluate the concern in our context. Certification and unionization, however, could plausibly
substitute for or complement licensing in such a fashion. We add controls for the state­occupation
certification and unionization rates to our baseline specification and report results in Column 2 of
Table 3. We produce these cell rates by the same beta-binomial method described in Section 3.
Certification and unionization controls do not much alter our estimates.
       In Column 3 of Table 3, we add two controls for predicted employment to Equation 10. The
first control is a low-dimensional representation of the state occupational mix. In summary, we use
principal component analysis to extract a vector of state labor market characteristics that explain
variation across states in occupational employment shares that, a priori, we do not expect to be
explained by licensing. The second is a Bartik-like control that removes the predictive power of the
state demographic mix for occupational employment shares. Appendix E develops both controls
in detail. Motivating these controls, it would be concerning if, for instance, general patterns such
as whether a state had high or low relative employment shares in occupations related to the rural
economy or in occupations predominantly held by nonwhites were driving our identification. We
find, reassuringly, that our estimates are essentially unchanged by these controls, even though they
explain fully one quarter of the residual variation in occupational employment shares.
       In Columns 4 and 5 of Table 3, we restrict identifying variation to related groups of states and
occupations. Specifically, Column 4 adds fixed eects for the intersection of the state and Census
detailed occupational group to our specification.20 We now identify the eect of licensing only
from variation in licensing rates and wages within cells defined by the state and a group of similar
occupations. Our results are mostly unchanged, though our estimated employment eect falls and
becomes insignificant. In Column 5, we restrict the comparison to occupations within groups of
states in the same Census geographic division by adding division­occupation fixed eects.21 Our
estimates are essentially unchanged, suggesting that division-specific occupational dierences and
spatial correlation of policy, the latter perhaps evident in Figure 1, are not of substantial concern.
These comparisons bolster our results insofar as states in the same Census division, or occupations
in the same Census occupational group, serve as more credible counterfactuals than pooling all
U.S. states or all occupations.22
  20                                                                   0
     The regression equation is yi = o + s + gs + · %Licensedi + Xi       + "i , noting that the subscripts on gs indicate
the coe cients are specific to a group­state pair, and so is identified from "within" variation alone. Occupations
assigned to one of 10 major groups (e.g., "professional and related occupations") and to one of 23 detailed groups
(e.g., "legal occupations"). For further details, see Appendix B of the CPS March Supplement documentation.
  21                                                                          0
     The regression equation is yi = o + s + od + · %Licensedi + Xi              + "i , noting that the subscripts on od
indicate the coe cients are specific to a division--occupation pair. The U.S. Census divides states into 10 divisions:
New England, South Atlantic, Middle Atlantic, East North Central, West North Central, East South Central, West
North Central, West South Central, Mountain, and Pacific. Divisions contain between 3 and 8 states.
  22
     These robustness checks can equally be interpreted as checks against between-occupation and between-state
spillovers from licensing. Spillovers of detectable magnitude are a priori unlikely here, as workers are not concentrated
in a few occupations. To the extent spillovers matter, these estimates will be larger in absolute magnitude than our
baseline results, and yet we find that none increase notably.




                                                           25
6.3    Selection into Licensed Occupations
Our model features workers who are identical up to their idiosyncratic occupational preferences,
which is obviously quite restrictive. How does recognizing this heterogeneity aect the interpreta-
tion of our results? As we show in Appendix B, our theoretical su cient-statistics result is robust
to this heterogeneity: Social welfare remains a function of employment and wage bill changes, even
with an arbitrary number of types of workers, as these responses remain informative about average
changes in licensing costs and WTP. This welfare irrelevance also applies if the idiosyncratic terms
{aij } are modeled as variation in wages rather than in preferences.
    Heterogeneity matters, however, for the interpretation of our reduced-form results and of our
structural estimation in Section 7. For example, suppose some workers are generally more produc-
tive than others. If, when an occupation is licensed, the more productive workers tend to select into
the occupation, then the reduced-form estimates of the eects of licensing we present in Section
5 will reflect selection and not just equilibrium eects.23 This form of selection is conceptually
distinct from the one we address by using cell licensed shares: Even if we could observe the exact
suboccupation a worker enters, licensing may change the types of workers entering the suboccu-
pation. In our example--one we develop carefully using discount-rate heterogeneity in Appendix
B--then estimated eects on the average wage, hours per worker, and years of education would
be biased upward by selection. These biases would propagate to our structural estimation. How
important are such selection issues likely to be in our context? We oer two attempts to assess the
empirical relevance of selection, one using heterogeneity and another using a bounding approach.
    Demographic heterogeneity in occupational transition rates generates cross-sectional variation in
the eective cost of licensing.24 Whereas individuals with characteristics that predict low transition
rates may expect to recoup licensing costs over many years in the occupation, individuals with
high predicted transition rates have fewer years in expectation to recoup the same investments.
This implies more occupationally mobile workers should apply higher discount rates in evaluating
potential licensing investments. When an occupation is licensed, we would therefore expect less-
mobile individuals to select into employment in the occupation and more-mobile individuals to
select out of employment in the occupation. This variation in eective costs provides an intuitive
test of selection eects: We first examine if licensing in fact selects against demographic groups
with ostensibly high costs of licensing and, second, whether the estimated eects of licensing on
wages and hours dier substantially between high- and low-cost demographic groups. In particular,
the absence of an employment response for some demographic groups implies selection eects are
absent in outcomes for these groups, isolating the equilibrium eects of interest.
    We begin by calculating the annual occupational transition rate in each of the demographic
   23
      These concerns are familiar in the identification of Roy-like selection models (Heckman et al., 1990; Hsieh et
al., 2013; Adao, 2016). An "identification at infinity" approach (Heckman, 1990; Mulligan and Rubinstein, 2008) is
sometimes employed to address selection in the labor market. Such an approach cannot be employed here because
no demographic group of workers is a given occupation with probability close to one.
   24
      Other demographic variation, such as in predicted rates of employment or interstate migration, would generate
similar heterogeneity. We focus on occupational transitions because of their frequency: On average in a year, workers
are ten times more likely to switch occupations than to switch U.S. states.


                                                         26
strata that we define from predetermined characteristics. Heterogeneity in predicted occupational
transition rates is substantial, as we show in Panel A of Table 4: In the bottom quartile of the
distribution, 4.3 percent of workers switch occupations in a year, compared with 21.5 percent of
workers in the top quartile. Splitting our sample by quartile, we re-estimate Equation 10 for each
quartile and with the employment count, wages, and hours per worker as outcomes. Table 4 reports
the results in Columns 1 to 4. As anticipated, workers with high eective costs of licensing select
out: Employment of most-mobile top-quartile workers falls 49 percent, compared to essentially no
change in employment of least-mobile workers in the bottom two quartiles. Using Equation 9 to
predict quartiles' employment responses to licensing from their occupational transition rates, we
find the model-predicted responses closely match the actual responses.25
       Despite this significant dierence in employment eects by quartile, we find in Panels C and
D of Table 4 little dierence in the eects of licensing on wages and hours by quartile. If workers
were to select out of employment in licensed occupations on unobservable determinants of wages
and hours, we would have seen large dierences in not only employment eects but also in wage
and hours eects between these quartiles. Moreover, the estimated wage and hours eects for the
least-mobile workers--for which selection eects should be absent--are nearly identical to those we
find in Table 2. We conclude that, while there is substantial selection on observable demographic
characteristics, our results do not appear notably biased by selection into licensed occupations on
unobservable determinants of wages and hours. Heckman (1990) reaches a similar conclusion about
the empirical relevance of selection bias in estimating the union wage premium.
       Our second approach follows Finkelstein et al. (2018) and Oster (2019), who build on the work
of Altonji et al. (2005) to develop corrections for selection on unobservables. The main idea of these
corrections is to assume the intensity of selection on a problematic unobservable variable is related to
the intensity of selection on either some observable variables (Oster, 2019) or other unobservables for
which the researcher can introduce fixed eects (Finkelstein et al., 2018). We apply these methods
to examine whether our estimated eects can be plausibly explained by selection on individual-
level unobservables into licensed occupations. Our assumption is that the intensity of selection on
individual-level unobservables is equal to that of household-level unobservables. We then use the
incremental explanatory powers of household- and individual-level fixed eects for wages to obtain
a selection-corrected estimator ^ by the following extrapolation:
                                                2            2
                                    ^ = ^Std + RInd         RStd ^         ^Std ),
                                                2
                                               RHH           2 ( HH
                                                            RStd
  25
     To form these predictions, we take the average wage eect and hours eects from Table 2, and we calibrate the
return on education and the interstate migration rate at 8 percent and 1.5 percent, respectively. The model-predicted
employment responses in each quartile are 0.125, 0.043, -0.059, and -0.389. The actual responses are not statistically
distinguishable from the model predictions (p = 0.171). We explore further the model's performance in explaining
heterogeneous employment responses in Appendix Figure A4. Using transition-rate ventiles, the relationship between
actual and model-predicted employment responses has a slope near one, an intercept near zero, and explains 63 percent
of variation in actual responses. We regard this performance as strong, particularly given that estimation error in
the actual responses will bias the R2 downward.




                                                         27
                        Table 4: Examining Selection into Licensed Occupations

                     (1)          (2)           (3)              (4)           (5)                   (6)
                              Quartiles of Occupational                   Test P-Value       Finkelstein et al.
                             Transition Rate Distribution                  (Q1 = Q4)        Selection Correction
                     Q1           Q2            Q3               Q4
Panel A: Predicted Fraction of Workers with an Occupational Transition
                    0.043        0.071         0.104            0.215         0.000
                   (0.002)      (0.001)       (0.002)          (0.001)
Observations      470,818       493,285       470,194         426,835

Panel B: Eect on Employment
% Licensed          -0.002       0.033       -0.206***        -0.486***       0.000
                   (0.072)      (0.066)       (0.075)          (0.092)
Observations       20,321        20,321        20,321          20,321

Panel C: Eect on Log Hourly Wage
% Licensed        0.162***      0.103**      0.173***         0.146***        0.788                 0.053
                   (0.040)      (0.042)       (0.038)          (0.044)
Observations       81,017        85,602        79,815          70,335
Clusters           13,319        13,649        13,443          12,161

Panel D: Eect on Log Weekly Hours Per Worker
% Licensed        0.032**      0.049***      0.046***           0.014         0.687                 0.044
                  (0.014)       (0.019)       (0.017)          (0.022)
Observations      470,773       493,285       470,194         426,824
Clusters          16,356        16,546        16,452          15,753

 Notes: This table examines selection into licensed occupations and its empirical implications for our estimated
eects of licensing on wages and hours. We split the worker sample into quartiles by predicted probability of an
occupational transition. Columns 1 to 4 of Panel A reports the share of workers with an occupational transition by
quartile. Columns 1 to 4 of Panels B, C, and D respectively report the eect of licensing on employment, wages, and
hours by quartile. We estimate employment eects via Poisson specification of Equation 10. Column 5 tests equality
of coe cients in Columns 1 and 4. Column 6 reports the selection-corrected estimate following Finkelstein et al.
(2018). Panel B includes state and occupation fixed eects, and Panels C and D include fixed eects for occupation,
state, industry, and month. Standard errors are clustered at the level of the state­occupation cell.  = p < 0.10,

   = p < 0.05,  = p < 0.01.


where the "Std," "HH," and "Ind" subscripts indicate the R2 or coe cient                 on the licensed share
refers to regressions with the standard set of fixed eects or respectively augmented by household
or individual fixed eects.26 We report estimates from this procedure in Column 6 of Table 4. We
estimate selection-corrected wage and hours eects of 5.3 and 4.4 percentage points, respectively.
If the equal-intensity assumption is valid, these estimates reflect within-worker equilibrium eects
of licensing on wages and hours, removing between-worker selection eects.
    Correcting for selection reduces the wage estimate because this approach infers the intensity of
  26                                            2
     The panel component of the CPS implies RInd    < 1. Estimates from the individual-level fixed eect regression
are extremely imprecise, so we only use the R2 to implement the selection correction.


                                                         28
individual-level selection on unobservables from apparent positive selection on household-level un-
observables. The results of our first approach--which empirically examines selection on individual-
level unobservables--suggests the equal-selection assumption is rather aggressive, as we find essen-
tially no selection on individual-level unobservable determinants of wages or hours. Overall, our
interpretation of these results is that the empirical relevance of selection on unobservables appears
modest and that, even so, our conclusions would be qualitatively robust to a greater degree of
selection than seems present.


7     Welfare Eects and Incidence of Licensing
We translate the reduced-form estimates into welfare impacts in two ways using our model. First,
we proceed by the su cient statistics for worker and consumer welfare. Second, we structurally
estimate the model. We view these approaches as complements, insofar as they reveal precisely
when we require further assumptions to map from reduced-form responses to welfare eects and
structural parameters.
    In our su cient-statistics approach, welfare eects rescale reduced-form responses of occupa-
tional employment and the wage bill to licensing, letting us move transparently from data to welfare.
A structural approach, however, lets us say more about the welfare impacts of licensing at the price
of two calibration assumptions, which we examine carefully. Structural estimation allows us, in
particular, to decompose the reduced-form responses into eects of licensing on occupational labor
supply and labor demand. We can also examine the plausibility of the vector of estimated structural
parameters implied by our reduced-form results.
    The gap between these two approaches reflects the fact that licensing shifts both occupa-
tional labor supply and demand. Our approach does not separately identify supply and demand
elasticities--and thus does not identify the gross shifts in supply and demand--but neither are these
gross shifts necessary for welfare analysis. The welfare eects of licensing depend on whether in-
creases in labor demand are large enough to oset reductions in labor supply on net, as in Summers
(1989) and as we formalize in Proposition 4.

7.1   Welfare Analysis from Reduced-Form Estimates
Proposition 3 shows that, in our model, the reduced-form eect of licensing on occupational employ-
ment and the wage bill reveal the eects of licensing on worker and consumer welfare respectively.
In Section 5, we estimate that licensing reduces occupational employment. Licensing therefore re-
duces worker welfare, with the implied worker welfare losses decreasing in , which moves inversely
with occupational preference dispersion. Intuitively, the "stronger" are workers' preferences over
occupations, the larger the welfare loss is implied by a given employment drop. We also find in
Section 5 that licensing raises the average wage and weekly hours, but by amounts less than the
employment decline. This implies that licensing reduces the occupational wage bill, though this
estimate is imprecise. Licensing therefore reduces consumer welfare. These consumer welfare losses


                                                 29
are decreasing in the occupational labor demand elasticity ". Taken together, our reduced-form
findings imply that licensing in marginal occupations reduces social welfare.

7.2    Structural Estimation
We use the classical minimum distance estimator (Newey and McFadden, 1994) to estimate a vector
of structural parameters  that, by the mapping m(·) implied by our model, best matches a vector
of reduced-form empirical moments ^ as weighted by the inverse of variance matrix V  ^ . These
estimated structural parameters are given by
                                           n                                     o
                                ^ = arg min [ ^
                                                              ^
                                                       m( )]0 V    1
                                                                       [^   m( )] .                              (12)
                                         


The vector of reduced-form empirical moments ^ contains the four main results of Section 5, which
are the eects of licensing on wages, hours per worker, employment, and the worker age profile.
These moments just-identify four structural parameters: the return to schooling , the intensive-
margin labor supply elasticity  , the average required training time  , and the WTP eect .
    We calibrate the two remaining structural parameters, which are the dispersion of occupational
preferences      and the elasticity of occupational labor demand ", from the literature. Following
estimates in Hsieh et al. (2013) and Cortes and Gallipoli (2017) of occupational preference dispersion
of U.S. workers, we consider values of             2 {2, 3, 4}.27 For estimates of the occupational labor
demand elasticity ", we look to the survey of Hamermesh (1996) and consider values of " 2 {2, 3, 4},
with the view that such an elasticity should be above the skilled­unskilled labor substitution or
local labor demand elasticities in Autor et al. (1998) and Kline and Moretti (2013). We provide a
constructive proof of identification in Appendix B, which shows that our estimates of  and  are
independent of our calibrated         and ", but the calibration does matter for  and . We also make
an adjustment for interstate migration and occupational switching: In our data, 11.2 percent of
licensed workers make a transition between either states or occupations annually, and because such
transitions often destroy the value of a previous license, we report a depreciation-adjusted return
to schooling ~=           0.112.28 This adjustment only aects our calculation of the present-value
licensing cost, not other structural parameters, welfare eects, or incidence analysis.
    After partialling out fixed eects and controls from our four outcomes and the licensed share,
  27
     This range of calibrations implies an elasticity of the occupational employment share with respect to the present
value of net income of between 2.5 and 5. Evidence on this elasticity is limited, but see Powell and Shan (2012).
  28
     Interstate agreements allow for some licenses to be transferable, and so our assumption yields a lower-bound
estimate of the required return to schooling and thus of the present-value licensing cost.




                                                         30
our model yields four linear moment conditions:
                      2       3
                        c
                        w j
                                            2                   3
                      6 7                           " +  
                      6h   7        \ j 6                       7
                      6 bi 7    · %Licensed 6       "  +        7
                      6 7=                  6                   7
                      6 7 1 + (1 +  ) + " 6" (1 +  )  (1 + ")7 .
                      6sb  7                4                   5
                      4 j5
                                                1 + (1 +  ) + "
                        bi
                        a    |                 {z               }
                      | {z }                  =m( )
                        =^


Our approach to structural estimation is to consider the vector of structural parameters that would
rationalize our reduced-form results in Section 5 while imposing minimal additional assumptions.
In discussing our parameter estimates, therefore, we provide relevant benchmarks to assess whether
they are reasonable. Furthermore, the su cient-statistics result of Proposition 3 implies that our
structural estimates only aect welfare and incidence through their implications for the responses of
employment and the wage bill to licensing, which are pinned down by the reduced-form estimates.
Our aim is to make as transparent as possible these steps from the reduced-form estimates to the
welfare analysis of licensing.
   Table 5 displays the results of the structural estimation for the various calibrations of   and ".
Panel A reports the structural parameter estimates. We estimate an intensive-margin labor supply
elasticity 1/ = 0.20, not far from the survey of Chetty (2012), which oers a point estimate for
1/ of 0.33. For the return to a year of schooling, we estimate a ~ of about 8 percent, which agrees
with estimates in Card (1999). Failing to correct for the depreciation of licenses due to interstate
and interoccupation transitions, by implication, would yield a perhaps implausibly high return on
schooling. We estimate a mean training time  of about 1.3 years, which is near the mean reported
in the survey of licensing in low-wage occupations in Carpenter et al. (2017). Our estimates of
the WTP eect  imply that, on average, one year of required training raises WTP by 6 percent.
To the best of our knowledge, only Farronato et al. (2019) oer comparable estimates of WTP for
licensing, but our estimates fit qualitatively with the small estimated eects of licensing on quality
measures, as we review in Section 1.
   In Panel B, we report the estimated welfare eects of licensing in marginal occupations on
workers and consumers. We find that licensing makes workers significantly worse o and that con-
sumer welfare declines insignificantly. These welfare results follow, as above, from the reduced-form
results that licensing reduces employment and that, combining our wage, hours, and employment
estimates, the eect on the wage bill is negative but insignificant. Taking these results together,
we conclude that the social welfare eects of licensing are negative, although our estimates are
somewhat imprecise, primarily because of imprecision on the consumer welfare eect.
   The incidence analysis in Panel C helps to interpret why licensing makes workers and consumers
worse o. We estimate considerable opportunity costs of licensing--about 10 percent of the present
value of lifetime income--and that workers are less than fully compensated for these opportunity
costs by higher wages. In particular, wages oset about 50 to 60 percent of these costs, leaving


                                                 31
                                       Table 5: Structural Estimates

                                              (1)              (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)
Calibrated Parameters
Occ. Pref. Dispersion ()                       3                2             4              3              3
Demand Elasticity (")                          3                3             3              2              4

Panel A: Estimated Parameters
WTP Eect ()                                 0.061*           0.061*       0.061*           0.035         0.074**
                                            (0.032)          (0.032)      (0.032)         (0.031)        (0.034)
Return to Schooling (~
                     )                       0.084            0.114        0.069           0.084          0.084
                                            (0.074)          (0.085)      (0.068)         (0.074)        (0.074)
Intensive Margin Elasticity (1/ )           0.199**          0.199**      0.199**        0.199**         0.199**
                                            (0.081)          (0.081)      (0.081)        (0.081)         (0.081)
Licensing Cost in Years ( )                1.350***       1.350***       1.350***        1.350***       1.350***
                                            (0.478)        (0.478)        (0.478)         (0.478)        0.478)

Panel B: Welfare Eects
Worker                                     -0.081***      -0.121***      -0.061***      -0.081***      -0.081***
                                            (0.018)        (0.028)        (0.014)        (0.018)        (0.018)
Consumer                                     -0.035           -0.035       -0.035          -0.070         -0.023
                                            (0.038)          (0.038)      (0.038)         (0.076)        (0.025)
Social                                     -0.116**          -0.157**     -0.096*          -0.151       -0.104**
                                            (0.055)           (0.064)     (0.051)         (0.093)        (0.043)

Panel C: Incidence Analysis
Worker Share (     L)                      0.697***       0.775***       0.633***        0.535**        0.775***
                                            (0.185)        (0.153)        (0.203)        (0.218)         (0.153)
Cost as Share of Income (`)                 0.113*           0.154**       0.093          0.113*         0.113*
                                            (0.062)          (0.065)      (0.061)         (0.062)        (0.062)
Share of Cost Oset                         0.579***       0.503***       0.627***        0.579***       0.579***
                                            (0.061)        (0.063)        (0.058)         (0.061)        (0.061)
WTP-Adj. Price Change                        0.029            0.029        0.029           0.059          0.020
                                            (0.032)          (0.032)      (0.032)         (0.063)        (0.021)
Share of Price Change Oset                 0.809***       0.809***       0.809***          0.618        0.873***
                                            (0.221)        (0.221)        (0.221)         (0.441)        (0.147)
 Notes: This table reports structural parameters ^ as estimated by Equation 12 in Panel A, welfare eects on workers
and consumers in Panel B, and incidence analysis in Panel C. The sample pools the Merged Outgoing Rotation Group
(MORG) and full CPS sample, using the earnings weights on the MORG sample and final person-level weights for
the non-MORG sample. Standard errors are clustered at the level of the state­occupation cell.  = p < 0.10,

  = p < 0.05,  = p < 0.01.




                                                        32
workers worse o by about 40 to 50 percent of the opportunity cost. For consumers, increases in
WTP oset about 60 to 70 percent of the increase in the price of labor services, leaving quality-
adjusted prices higher but not significantly so. Overall, we find that workers bear between 50 and
80 percent of the incidence of licensing, which leaves between 20 and 50 percent for consumers.
    Motivated by Proposition 4, which provides a break-even level of WTP gains at which the social
costs and benefits of licensing are exactly equal, we can use our structural estimates to ask how far
short licensing falls relative to this break-even level in dollar terms:

                                             (1 +  )    ("       1)
                                         =                            .
                                                             "

We estimate      =    0.077. This implies that externalities or behavioral frictions must be quite
large to render licensing at least welfare-neutral: Individuals must privately undervalue a year of
training by at least 7.7 percent of the wage, which is about equal to the private WTP eect.


8    Conclusion
We develop a theoretical model of occupational licensing and empirical evidence on the eects of
licensing to conduct a welfare analysis of licensing policies in U.S. states. We find that, on the
margin of occupations where policies dier across states, the average net social value of licensing
appears negative: The social cost of reduced occupational labor supply appears to exceed the social
benefit from higher WTP for labor from licensed occupations. Workers and consumers each bear
some incidence: Wage increases do not fully compensate workers for licensing costs, nor do increases
in WTP fully oset the higher price of labor to consumers.
    Within a broad class of models, the eects of licensing on employment and the wage bill are sum-
mary statistics for the welfare eect of licensing and respectively identify its incidence on workers in
the occupation and on consumers. Our theoretical model also generates testable comparative stat-
ics for several labor market outcomes and only requires data on a representative sample of workers,
rather than data on product prices or quality, to be empirically evaluated. In our empirical analysis,
we use variation in licensing policies across states and occupations as proxied by variation in the
licensed share of workers. We find licensing raises average wages and hours per worker but reduces
employment. Further results match prior expectations from the policy context and key comparative
static predictions of the model: In particular, workers accumulate more occupation-specific human
capital than they would absent licensing, delaying their entry to employment.
    Two theoretical arguments exist for licensing. The first is about a missing technology: Absent
licensing, workers may lack a credible signal of quality, leading to worker underinvestment in quality
and excess entry. This argument is at the core of classic models of licensing, and it is the one we
evaluate empirically in this paper. We find that, in marginal occupations, consumers appear to
value the signal insu ciently to justify its social cost. However, we note this argument remains
plausible for inframarginal occupations, such as those licensed by all U.S. states. Our theory oers



                                                   33
a net-benefits test to assess licensing in such cases. The second argument is about externalities:
There may be positive marginal social WTP for quality in some occupations, causing the private
return on human capital to be ine ciently low and underinvestment even when workers' quality is
perfectly observable. As social WTP is not revealed by individual choices, we do not evaluate this
argument here. We can say only that such externalities must be quite large relative to the private
WTP eect of licensing we estimate if they are to justify licensing. To assess the plausibility of
such claims, a possible direction for research would be to translate existing evidence on quality
eects of licensing to social WTP.


References
Adao, Rodrigo, "Worker Heterogeneity, Wage Inequality, and International Trade: Theory and
  Evidence from Brazil," Working Paper 2016.

  , Arnaud Costinot, and Dave Donaldson, "Nonparametric Counterfactual Predictions in
  Neoclassical Models of International Trade," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (3), 633­689.

Akerlof, George A, "The Market for "Lemons": Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mecha-
  nism," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1970, 84 (3), 488­500.

Altonji, Joseph G, Todd E Elder, and Christopher R Taber, "Selection on Observed
  and Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Eectiveness of Catholic Schools," Journal of Political
  Economy, 2005, 113 (1), 151­184.

Anderson, D Mark, Ryan Brown, Kerwin Kofi Charles, and Daniel I Rees, "The Eect of
  Occupational Licensing on Consumer Welfare: Early Midwifery Laws and Maternal Mortality,"
  Working Paper 22456, National Bureau of Economic Research 2016.

Angrist, Joshua D and Jonathan Guryan, "Does Teacher Testing Raise Teacher Quality?
  Evidence from State Certification Requirements," Economics of Education Review, 2008, 27 (5),
  483­503.

Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andr´
                                            es Rodr´
                                                   iguez-Clare, "New Trade Models,
  Same Old Gains?," American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1), 94­130.

Autor, David H, Lawrence F Katz, and Alan B Krueger, "Computing Inequality: Have
  Computers Changed the Labor Market?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1998, 113 (4), 1169­
  1213.

  ,   , and Melissa S Kearney, "Trends in US Wage Inequality: Revising the Revisionists,"
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 2008, 90 (2), 300­323.

Barrios, John Manuel, "Occupational Licensing and Accountant Quality: Evidence from the
  150-Hour Rule," Working Paper 2018.

                                               34
Begun, James W, Edward W Crowe, and Roger Feldman, "Occupational Regulation in
  the States: A Causal Model," Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, 1981, 6 (2), 229­254.

Berry, Steven, Amit Gandhi, and Philip Haile, "Connected Substitutes and Invertibility of
  Demand," Econometrica, 2013, 81 (5), 2087­2111.

Besley, Timothy and Anne Case, "Unnatural Experiments? Estimating the Incidence of En-
  dogenous Policies," Economic Journal, 2000, 110 (467), 672­694.

Blair, Peter Q and Bobby W Chung, "How Much of a Barrier to Entry is Occupational
  Licensing?," British Journal of Industrial Relations, forthcoming.

Bound, John and Sarah Turner, "Going to War and Going to College: Did World War II
  and the GI Bill Increase Educational Attainment for Returning Veterans?," Journal of Labor
  Economics, 2002, 20 (4), 784­815.

Broscheid, Andreas and Paul E Teske, "Public Members on Medical Licensing Boards and
  the Choice of Entry Barriers," Public Choice, 2003, 114 (3-4), 445­459.

Card, David, "The Causal Eect of Education on Earnings," in "Handbook of Labor Economics,"
  Vol. 3, Elsevier, 1999, pp. 1801­1863.

Carpenter, Dick M, Lisa Knepper, Kyle Sweetland, and Jennifer McDonald, License to
  Work: A National Study of Burdens from Occupational Licensing, Institute for Justice, 2017.

Chetty, Raj, "Su cient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge Between Structural and
  Reduced-Form Methods," Annual Review of Economics, 2009, 1 (1), 451­488.

  , "Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of Micro and Macro Evidence
  on Labor Supply," Econometrica, 2012, 80 (3), 969­1018.

Cortes, Guido Matias and Giovanni Gallipoli, "The Costs of Occupational Mobility: An
  Aggregate Analysis," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2017, 16 (2), 275­315.

Cunningham, Evan, "Professional Certifications and Occupational Licenses: Evidence from the
  Current Population Survey," Monthly Labor Review, June 2019.

Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber, "Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical
  Care, and Child Health," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1996, 111 (2), 431­466.

de Chaisemartin, Cl´
                   ement and Xavier D'Haultfoeuille, "Two-Way Fixed Eects Estimators
  with Heterogeneous Treatment Eects," Working Paper 25904, National Bureau of Economic
  Research 2019.

Department of the Treasury, O ce of Economic Policy, Council of Economic Advisers,
  and Department of Labor, "Occupational Licensing: A Framework for Policymakers," White
  Paper 2015.

                                                35
DePasquale, Christina and Kevin Stange, "Labor Supply Eects of Occupational Regula-
  tion: Evidence from the Nurse Licensure Compact," Working Paper 22344, National Bureau of
  Economic Research 2016.

Dynarski, Susan M, "Does Aid Matter? Measuring the Eect of Student Aid on College Atten-
  dance and Completion," American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (1), 279­288.

Farronato, Chiara, Andrey Fradkin, Bradley Larsen, and Erik Brynjolfsson, "Consumer
  Protection in an Online World: When Does Occupational Licensing Matter?," Working Paper
  2019.

Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams, "Place-Based Drivers of Mor-
  tality: Evidence from Migration," Working Paper 25975, National Bureau of Economic Research
  2018.

Flood, Sarah, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles, and J. Robert Warren,
  "Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 6.0 [dataset],"
  2018.

Gittleman, Maury, Mark A Klee, and Morris M Kleiner, "Analyzing the Labor Market
  Outcomes of Occupational Licensing," Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society,
  2018, 57 (1), 57­100.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul, Isaac Sorkin, and Henry Swift, "Bartik Instruments: What,
  When, Why, and How," Working Paper 24408, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.

Graddy, Elizabeth, "Interest Groups or the Public Interest--Why Do We Regulate Health Oc-
  cupations?," Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, 1991, 16 (1), 25­49.

Hamermesh, Daniel S, Labor Demand, Princeton University Press, 1996.

Heckman, James, "Varieties of Selection Bias," American Economic Review, 1990, 80 (2), 313­
  318.

Heckman, James J, Bo E Honore et al., "The Empirical Content of the Roy Model," Econo-
  metrica, 1990, 58 (5), 1121­1149.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, Erik Hurst, Charles I Jones, and Peter J Klenow, "The Allocation of
  Talent and US Economic Growth," Working Paper 18693, National Bureau of Economic Research
  2013.

Johnson, Janna E and Morris M Kleiner, "Is Occupational Licensing a Barrier to Interstate
  Migration?," Working Paper 24107, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.

Kleiner, Morris M, "Occupational Licensing," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2000, 14 (4),
  189­202.

                                               36
  , Licensing Occupations: Ensuring Quality or Restricting Competition?, WE Upjohn Institute,
  2006.

  , Allison Marier, Kyoung Won Park, and Coady Wing, "Relaxing Occupational Licens-
  ing Requirements: Analyzing Wages and Prices for a Medical Service," Journal of Law and
  Economics, 2016, 59 (2), 261­291.

  and Alan B Krueger, "The Prevalence and Eects of Occupational Licensing," British Journal
  of Industrial Relations, 2010, 48 (4), 676­687.

  and     , "Analyzing the Extent and Influence of Occupational Licensing on the Labor Market,"
  Journal of Labor Economics, 2013, 31 (S1), S173­S202.

  and Robert T Kudrle, "Does Regulation Aect Economic Outcomes? The Case of Dentistry,"
  Journal of Law and Economics, 2000, 43 (2), 547­582.

Kline, Patrick and Enrico Moretti, "Local Economic Development, Agglomeration Economies,
  and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority," Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 2013, 129 (1), 275­331.

  and     , "People, Places, and Public Policy: Some Simple Welfare Economics of Local Economic
  Development Programs," Annual Review of Economics, 2014, 6 (1), 629­662.

Kugler, Adriana D and Robert M Sauer, "Doctors Without Borders? Relicensing Require-
  ments and Negative Selection in the Market for Physicians," Journal of Labor Economics, 2005,
  23 (3), 437­465.

Kuznets, Simon and Milton Friedman, Incomes from Independent Professional Practice,
  1929­1936, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1945.

Larsen, Bradley, "Occupational Licensing and Quality: Distributional and Heterogeneous Eects
  in the Teaching Profession," 2013.

Leland, Hayne E, "Quacks, Lemons, and Licensing: A Theory of Minimum Quality Standards,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 1979, 87 (6), 1328­1346.

Lewis, H Gregg, "Union Relative Wage Eects," in "in," Vol. 2, Elsevier, 1986, pp. 1139­1181.

Mincer, Jacob A, Schooling, Experience, and Earnings, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  1974.

Mulligan, Casey B and Andrei Shleifer, "The Extent of the Market and the Supply of Regu-
  lation," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2005, 120 (4), 1445­1473.

   and Yona Rubinstein, "Selection, Investment, and women's Relative Wages Over Time,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (3), 1061­1110.

                                                37
National Conference of State Legislatures, "The State of Occupational Licensing: Research,
  State Policies and Trends," 2017.

  , "The National Occupational Licensing Database," 2019.

Newey, Whitney K and Daniel McFadden, "Large Sample Estimation and Hypothesis Test-
  ing," in "in," Vol. 4, Elsevier, 1994, pp. 2111­2245.

Oster, Emily, "Unobservable Selection and Coe cient Stability: Theory and Evidence," Journal
  of Business & Economic Statistics, 2019, 37 (2).

Powell, David and Hui Shan, "Income Taxes, Compensating Dierentials, and Occupational
  Choice: How Taxes Distort the Wage-Amenity Decision," American Economic Journal: Eco-
  nomic Policy, 2012, 4 (1), 224­247.

Redbird, Beth, "The New Closed Shop? The Economic and Structural Eects of Occupational
  Licensure," American Sociological Review, 2017, 82 (3), 600­624.

Redding, Stephen J and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, "Quantitative Spatial Economics," An-
  nual Review of Economics, 2017, 9, 21­58.

Reddy, Myra, "Health, Safety and Alternatives to Licensing," 2017. Occupational Licensing
  Multi-State Consortium Meeting, National Conference of State Legislatures.

Shapiro, Carl, "Investment, Moral Hazard, and Occupational Licensing," Review of Economic
  Studies, 1986, 53 (5), 843­862.

Smith, Janet Kiholm, "Production of Licensing Legislation: An Economic Analysis of Interstate
  Dierences," Journal of Legal Studies, 1982, 11 (1), 117­137.

Stigler, George J, "The Theory of Economic Regulation," The Bell Journal of Economics and
  Management Science, 1971, 2, 3­21.

Su´
  arez Serrato, Juan Carlos and Owen Zidar, "Who Benefits from State Corporate Tax Cuts?
  A Local Labor Markets Approach with Heterogeneous Firms," American Economic Review, 2016,
  106 (9), 2582­2624.

Summers, Lawrence H, "Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits," American Economic
  Review, 1989, 79 (2), 177­183.

Timmons, Edward J and Anna Mills, "Bringing the Eects of Occupational Licensing into
  Focus: Optician Licensing in the United States," Eastern Economic Journal, 2018, 44 (1), 69­83.

Wheelan, Charles J, "An Empirical Examination of the Political Economy of Occupational
  Licensure," PhD Dissertation 1998.



                                                 38
Appendices for Online Publication


A Additional Tables and Figures        40

B Model Appendix                       60

C Further Results                      75

D Licensing Policy Data                77

E Econometric Extensions               79




                                  39
A      Additional Tables and Figures

                      Table A1: Employed Population by License Status and Type

                   Q1                     Q2                     Q3                     Workers
           Has licensing or
                                    State issued?        Required for job?         Number         Share
            certification?
                   No                    No                      No                452,667        0.725
                   Yes                   No                      No                 23,713        0.038
                   Yes                   Yes                     No                 37,026        0.059
                   Yes                   No                      Yes                 7,052        0.011
                   Yes                   Yes                     Yes               104,239        0.167
 Notes: This table reports counts of unique employed workers according to their answers to questions 1­3 as described
in Section 3. Workers are here counted as answering a rmatively if they ever answer a rmatively while in the sample.
All other combinations of answers are ruled out by the CPS skip pattern.




                                                         40
     Table A2: Variance Components of License Status and State­Occupation Licensing Rate

                         Component        Individual License Status         Licensing Rate
                         State                                     0.002                0.005
                         Occupation                                0.321                0.905
                         Residual                                  0.677                0.089
 Notes: This table reports the results of a variance decomposition of individual license status and the state­occupation
licensed rate in the CPS sample. For both variables, state fixed eects explain negligible shares of total vari-
ance, whereas occupation fixed eects explain considerable shares of variance, particularly after collapsing to
state­occupation means.




                                                          41
                 Table A3: Summary Statistics of Licensed and Unlicensed Workers

                                                 (1)                    (2)                   (3)
                                                      Has state-issued
                                                    occupational license
                                                                                             p-val.
          Variable                               Yes                    No
                                                                                           (1) (2)
          Age                                   40.33                 35.90                  0.000
          Female                                 0.52                  0.47                  0.000
          Married                                0.52                  0.39                  0.000
          Children at Home                       0.47                  0.35                  0.000
          Education
          Less than HS                           0.03                  0.15                  0.000
          HS Graduate                            0.21                  0.30                  0.000
          Some College                           0.32                  0.29                  0.000
          Bachelor's Degree                      0.24                  0.19                  0.000
          More than Bachelor's                   0.19                  0.07                  0.000
          Race/Ethnicity
          Non-Hispanic White                     0.77                  0.74                  0.000
          Black                                  0.14                  0.16                  0.021
          Asian                                  0.05                  0.06                  0.083
          Other                                  0.03                  0.04                  0.003
          Hispanic                               0.87                  0.79                  0.000
          Citizen                                0.99                  0.99                  0.589
          Lives in MSA                           0.74                  0.75                  0.029
          Paid by Hour                           0.38                  0.56                  0.000
          Hourly Wage                            41.80                 31.01                 0.000
          Weekly Labor Income                  2,606.59              1,845.21                0.000
          Union                                   0.14                  0.07                 0.000
          Usually Full-Time                       0.75                  0.65                 0.000
          Any Disability                          0.04                  0.04                 0.517
          Veteran                                 0.06                  0.04                 0.000
          Number of Workers                     74,086               470,905
Notes: This table reports summary statistics on the characteristics of unique workers by their licensing status
according to the first survey month in the CPS. To be consistent across rows, only workers in the Merged Outgoing
Rotation Group are included in the sample.




                                                         42
    Table A4: Data Sources on State­Occupation Variation in Occupational Licensing Policies

                                                                            Policy by Count
Occupation                                                               of States (plus D.C.)
Name                                           Code              Licensed                Unlicensed           Source
Construction managers                          0220                 33                           18            NCSL
Gaming managers                                0330                 30                           21             IJ
Claims adjusters                               0540                 34                           17            Other
Conservation scientists and foresters          1640                 11                           40            Other
Librarians                                     2430                 12                           39            Other
Teacher assistants                             2540                  5                           46             IJ
Dietitians and nutritionists                   3030                 27                           24            Other
Nurse midwives                                 3257                 38                           13             IJ
Diagnostic related technologists               3320                  6                           45            NCSL
Opticians, dispensing                          3520                 22                           29             IJ
Massage therapists                             3630                 46                            5            NCSL
Dental assistants                              3640                  9                           42             IJ
Pharmacy aides                                 3647                 45                            6            NCSL
Veterinary assistants                          3648                 38                           13            NCSL
Phlebotomists                                  3649                  4                           47            Other
Fire inspectors                                3750                 33                           18            NCSL
Animal control workers                         3900                  7                           44             IJ
Private detectives and investigators           3910                 46                            5            NCSL
Security guards                                3930                 40                           11            NCSL
Bartenders                                     4040                 13                           38             IJ
Landscaping supervisors                        4210                  7                           44             IJ
Gaming supervisors                             4300                 30                           21             IJ
Animal trainers                                4340                  9                           42             IJ
Gaming services workers                        4400                 28                           23             IJ
Funeral service workers                        4460                  3                           48             IJ
Funeral directors                              4465                 50                            1            Other
Misc. personal appearance workers              4520                 36                           15             IJ
Tour and travel guides                         4540                 37                           14             IJ
Child care workers                             4600                 43                            8             IJ
Travel agents                                  4830                  7                           44             IJ
Real estate brokers and agents                 4920                 46                            5            NCSL
Bill collectors                                5100                 31                           20             IJ
Gaming cage workers                            5130                 28                           23             IJ
Weighers                                       5630                 25                           26             IJ
Animal breeders                                6020                 28                           23             IJ
Fishers                                        6100                 43                            8             IJ
Logging workers                                6130                  2                           49             IJ
Brick and stone masons                         6220                 26                           25             IJ
Carpenters                                     6230                 25                           26             IJ
Cement masons                                  6250                 24                           27             IJ
Drywall installers                             6330                 26                           25             IJ
Electricians                                   6355                 31                           20            NCSL
Glaziers                                       6360                 26                           25             IJ
Insulation workers                             6400                 25                           26             IJ
Plumbers                                       6440                 37                           14            NCSL
Sheet metal workers                            6520                 25                           26             IJ
Building inspectors                            6660                 33                           18            NCSL
Security and fire alarm installers             7130                 36                           15             IJ
HVAC mechanics and installers                  7315                 36                           15            NCSL
Locksmiths and safe repairers                  7540                 14                           37             IJ
Mobile home installers                         7550                 39                           12             IJ
Upholsterers                                   8450                  9                           42             IJ
Taxi drivers and chaueurs                      9140                 16                           35             IJ
Crane and tower operators                      9510                 17                           34             IJ
Packers                                        9640                  6                           45             IJ

Notes: This table lists the 55 occupations for which we collected policy data at the level of state­occupation cells.
We report the occupation's name and CPS code, the number of states (plus D.C.) where this occupation appears to
be licensed or unlicensed, and our data sources, which refer to the following documents: NCSL = National Conference
of State Legislatures (2019), IJ = Carpenter et al. (2017). For "Other" and further discussion, see Appendix D.



                                                         43
       Table A5: Comparing Two Measures of Licensing--Self-Reported Share Versus Policy

                                                                Dependent Variable:
                                                                 % Licensed in Cell
                                                               (1)                   (2)
                      Policy Indicator                       0.066***             0.066***
                                                              (0.008)              (0.008)
                      Two-Way Fixed Eects                       Y                    Y
                      Demographic Controls                      N                    Y
                      Observations                           189,738              189,738
                      Clusters                                2,470                2,470

 Notes: This table reports estimates from Equation 10, but using the share of workers in a state­occupation cell
who self-report they are licensed as the outcome, and a binary indicator that a cell, per sources in Table A4, has a
licensing policy as the policy variable. Both columns include fixed eects for state and occupation, and in Column 2,
we add demographic strata, industry, and month fixed eects. The regression is on individual worker data to allow
for the inclusion of worker-level controls. Standard errors are clustered by cell.  = p < 0.01.




                                                        44
             Table A6: Which Occupations Contribute Most to Empirical Identification?

                            Occupation                                                       Influence
                                                                           Treat. E.          Workers Per
Name                                                         Code           Weight              10,000              Ratio
Panel A: Most Influential Occupations
Electricians                                                  6355              0.0414                  61.3          6.74
Nursing, psychiatric, and home health aides                   3600              0.0282                 146.2          1.93
Patrol o cers                                                 3850              0.0243                  53.4          4.55
Pipelayers, plumbers, etc.                                    6440              0.0214                  44.4          4.82
Teacher assistants                                            2540              0.0179                  70.9          2.52
Construction managers                                         0220              0.0169                  65.4          2.59
Social workers                                                2010              0.0151                  58.1          2.60
Personal and home care aides                                  4610              0.0150                  93.2          1.61
Dental assistants                                             3640              0.0143                  22.1          6.48
Automotive service technicians and mechanics                  7200              0.0137                  67.1          2.04

Panel B: Most Overweighted Occupations
Brokerage clerks                                              5200              0.0014                   0.3         42.63
Emergency management directors                                0425              0.0030                   0.7         40.66
Aircraft assemblers                                           7710              0.0013                   0.5         27.16
Fire inspectors                                               3750              0.0046                   1.7         26.94
Opticians, dispensing                                         3520              0.0098                   3.7         26.10
Explosives workers                                            6830              0.0018                   0.7         25.74
Manufactured building and home installers                     7550              0.0013                   0.5         24.91
Funeral service workers                                       4460              0.0017                   0.7         24.85
Ambulance drivers and attendants, excl. EMTs                  9110              0.0025                   1.0         24.50
Septic tank servicers and sewer pipe cleaners                 6750              0.0019                   0.8         24.32
 Notes: This table reports the top 10 most influential occupations according to two criteria. Panel A reports influential
occupations according to the implicit weights on potentially heterogeneous treatment eects by occupation in the two-
way fixed eect estimator, as derived by de Chaisemartin and D'Haultfoeuille (2019). Panel B reports overweighted
occupations, as defined by the ratio of the implicit weight and the occupation's sample share of workers. This table is
closely related to Table 1 in the main text, which lists occupations with high interstate variance in licensing; naturally,
many of the listed occupations appear in both tables.




                                                            45
                Table A7: Additional Reduced-Form Eects of Occupational Licensing

                                          Licensed = 1                   % Licensed in Cell
                                                (1)                    (2)                   (3)
                 Panel A: Weekly Hours Per Worker
                                             1.690***               1.856***              1.421***
                                              (0.058)                (0.313)               (0.298)
                 Observations               2,149,992               2,149,992            2,149,992
                 Clusters                     21,890                 21,890               21,890

                 Panel B: Employment Count (Poisson)
                                                                    -0.268
                                                                     (0.061)
                 Observations                                        22,098

 Notes: This table reports estimates from Equation 10 of eects of licensing on outcomes of interest that correspond to
reduced-form moments of the model. The estimate in Column 1 refers to individual-worker licensing status, whereas
those in Columns 2 and 3 refer to the state­occupation cell licensed share of workers. In Column 3, we include strata
fixed eects for predetermined demographic observables. In Panel A, the dependent variable is the level of weekly
hours per worker, and we include fixed eects for occupation, state, industry, and month. In Panel B, the dependent
variable is the state-occupation employment count in a Poisson regression, and we include fixed eects for occupation
and state. Standard errors are clustered at the level of the state­occupation cell.  = p < 0.01.




                                                         46
                  Table A8: Reduced-Form Worker Eects of Occupational Licensing,
                             Including Universally Licensed Occupations

                                           Licensed = 1                  % Licensed in Cell
                                                (1)                     (2)                  (3)
                 Panel A: Years of Education
                                             0.375***                0.449***             0.388***
                                              (0.010)                 (0.054)              (0.052)
                 Observations                2,149,992              2,149,992             2,149,992
                 Clusters                     21,890                  21,890               21,890

                 Panel B: Years of Age
                                             1.289***                1.737***             1.715***
                                              (0.035)                 (0.266)              (0.264)
                 Observations                 811,117                811,117               811,117
                 Clusters                      19,266                 19,266                19,266

                 Panel C: Log Hourly Wage
                                             0.154***                0.200***             0.149***
                                              (0.005)                 (0.024)              (0.023)
                 Observations                 365,261                365,261               365,261
                 Clusters                      20,273                 20,273                20,273

                 Panel D: Log Weekly Hours Per Worker
                                             0.045***                0.049***             0.036***
                                              (0.002)                 (0.010)              (0.010)
                 Observations                2,149,992              2,149,992             2,149,992
                 Clusters                     21,890                  21,890               21,890

                 Panel E: Log Employment
                                                                    -0.179***
                                                                     (0.061)
                 Observations                                         22,098

 Notes: This table reports estimates from Equation 10 of the eects of licensing on outcomes of interest that correspond
to reduced-form moments of the model. The only dierence is in sample: Here we include universally licensed
occupations as defined by Gittleman et al. (2018). The estimate in Column 1 refers to individual-worker licensing
status, whereas those in Columns 2 and 3 refer to the state­occupation cell licensed share of workers. In Columns
1 and 3, we include strata fixed eects for predetermined demographic observables. All specifications include fixed
eects for occupation, state, industry, and month, except in Panel E, which has only state and occupation fixed
eects. Standard errors are clustered at the level of the state­occupation cell.  = p < 0.01.




                                                          47
              Table A9: Reduced-Form Eects of Occupational Licensing, ACS Sample

                                                        (1)                          (2)
                       Panel A: Years of Age
                       % Licensed                    0.642***                     0.660***
                                                      (0.191)                      (0.191)
                       Observations                  1,326,484                   1,326,484
                       Clusters                        19,187                      19,187

                       Panel B: Log Hourly Wage
                       % Licensed                    0.101***                     0.075***
                                                      (0.016)                      (0.015)
                       Observations                  4,032,135                   4,032,135
                       Clusters                        20,124                      20,124

                       Panel C: Log Weekly Hours Per Worker
                       % Licensed                     0.020**                     0.016**
                                                      (0.008)                     (0.008)
                       Observations                  4,032,135                   4,032,135
                       Clusters                        20,124                      20,124

                       Panel D: Log Employment
                       % Licensed                    -0.247***
                                                      (0.060)
                       Observations                   20,230

 Notes: This table reports estimates from Equation 10 of the eects of licensing on outcomes of interest that correspond
to reduced-form moments of the model. The data is the 5-year sample (2010­2015) of the American Community
Survey. In Column 2, we include strata fixed eects for predetermined demographic observables. All specifications
include fixed eects for occupation, state, industry, and month, except in Panel D, which has only state and occupation
fixed eects. Standard errors are clustered at the level of the cell.  = p < 0.10,  = p < 0.05,  = p < 0.01.




                                                          48
             Table A10: Robustness Checks, Including Universally Licensed Occupations

                            (1)                  (2)                (3)                   (4)                 (5)
                       Likely Policy           Unions             Occ. &              State­Occ.           Div.­Occ.
                           Dis.                & Cert.           Demo. Mix            Group FE                FE
Panel A: Years of Education
% Licensed               0.500***             0.426***            0.378***             0.335***            0.276***
                          (0.069)              (0.052)             (0.052)              (0.049)             (0.049)
Observations             2,149,992            2,149992            2,144,001            2,149,992           2,149,989
Clusters                   21,890              21,890               21,015               21,890              21,887

Panel B: Years of Age
% Licensed               1.715***             1.751***            1.752***             1.718***            1.256***
                          (0.264)              (0.269)             (0.267)              (0.250)             (0.266)
Observations              811,117              811,117             809,150              811,117             811,090
Clusters                   19,266               19,266              18,814               19,266              19,239

Panel C: Log Hourly Wage
% Licensed               0.186***             0.108***            0.147***             0.135***            0.119***
                          (0.029)              (0.023)             (0.023)              (0.023)             (0.023)
Observations              365,261              365,261             364,221              365,260             365,163
Clusters                   20,273               20,273              19,668               20,272              20,175

Panel D: Log Weekly Hours Per Worker
% Licensed               0.038***             0.036***            0.036***             0.033***            0.029***
                          (0.013)              (0.010)             (0.010)              (0.010)             (0.009)
Observations             2,149,992            2,149,992           2,144,001            2,149,992           2,149,989
Clusters                   21,890              21,890               21,015               21,890              21,887

Panel E: Log Employment
% Licensed                 -0.109             -0.197***           -0.139**               -0.052             -0.125**
                          (0.084)              (0.063)             (0.057)              (0.054)              (0.051)
Observations              21,890               22,098               21,026              22,098               22,008

 Notes: This table reports estimates from variations on Equation 10 as explained in the main text. All estimates refer
to the coe cient on the licensed share of workers in the state­occupation cell. All specifications include fixed eects
for occupation, state, industry, and month, except in Panel E, which has only state and occupation fixed eects.
Standard errors are clustered at the level of the state­occupation cell.  = p < 0.10,  = p < 0.05,  = p < 0.01.




                                                          49
                                   Table A11: Additional Robustness Checks

                           (1)                      (2)                         (3)                     (4)
                       State­Occ.              State-Demog.                  Flexible               Emp. Growth,
                       Group FE              & Occ-Demog. FE              Licensed Share             2000­2010
Panel A: Years of Education
% Licensed              0.319***                  0.312***                    0.364***                 0.418***
                         (0.054)                   (0.053)                     (0.055)                  (0.065)
Observations            1,865,209                 1,865,172                  1,865,209                 1,619,807
Clusters                  20,321                    20,319                     20,321                    14,243

Panel B: Years of Age
% Licensed              1.070***                  0.665***                    0.964***                 1.044***
                         (0.239)                   (0.203)                     (0.244)                  (0.299)
Observations             722,168                  722,128                     722,168                   605,824
Clusters                  17,842                   17,830                      17,842                   12,845

Panel C: Log Hourly Wage
% Licensed              0.139***                  0.133***                    0.163***                 0.121***
                         (0.024)                   (0.023)                     (0.023)                  (0.028)
Observations             317,141                  316,764                     317,142                   275,150
Clusters                  18,752                   18,601                      18,753                   13,399

Panel D: Log Weekly Hours Per Worker
% Licensed              0.032***                  0.027***                    0.028***                 0.054***
                         (0.011)                   (0.010)                     (0.010)                  (0.012)
Observations            1,865,209                 1,865,172                  1,865,209                 1,619,807
Clusters                  20,321                    20,319                     20,321                    14,243

Panel E: Log Employment
                          -0.097                                             -0.297***                 -0.329***
                         (0.061)                                              (0.058)                   (0.073)
Observations              20,524                                               20,524                   13,160

 Notes: This table reports estimates from Equation 10. For discussion, see Appendix C. All estimates refer to the
coe cient on the licensed share of workers in the state­occupation cell. All specifications include fixed eects for
occupation, state, industry, and month, except in Panel E, which has only state and occupation fixed eects. Standard
errors are clustered at the level of the cell.  = p < 0.01.




                                                        50
           Table A12: State­Occupation Licensed Shares and Local Political Determinants

                                                                          Dependent Variable:
                                                                             % Licensed
                                                     (1)                             (2)                             (3)
%Repo  Slants                                       -0.007
                                                   (0.012)
%Demo  Slants                                                                       0.014
                                                                                   (0.012)
%Indepo  Polarizations                                                                                              -0.004
                                                                                                                   (0.016)

Observations                                       18,245                          18,245                          18,245
Notes: This table reports estimates from Equation 13, which tests for political determinants of licensing at the state­
occupation level that reflect either local political economy or occupation-specific political position. For discussion, see
Appendix C. Variables are defined in the main text. Both specifications include fixed eects for occupation and state.
Standard errors are clustered at the level of the state­occupation cell.  = p < 0.10,  = p < 0.05,  = p < 0.01.




                                                             51
                                 Figure A1: Distribution of State­Occupation Licensed Shares




                     .15    .1
              Share of Workers
            .05      0




                                 0          .2              .4            .6             .8           1
                                                 Licensed Share in State­Occupation Cell

 Notes: This figure shows the distribution of estimated shares of workers with a mandatory state-issued occupational
license in each state­occupation cell, weighted by each cell's total employment count. Licensed shares are estimated
by the empirical Bayes procedure described in Section 3 and Appendix E.




                                                                52
      Figure A2: Eect of Licensing on Highest Level of Educational Attainment (All Levels)


                              Absolute Change (p.p.) in Probability of Educational Attainment

                    None or preschool
                   Grades 1, 2, 3, or 4
                        Grades 5 or 6
                        Grades 7 or 8
                              Grade 9
                             Grade 10
                             Grade 11
               12th grade, no diploma
    High school diploma or equivalent
          Some college but no degree
     Associate's degree, occupational
        Associate's degree, academic
                    Bachelor's degree
                      Master's degree
           Professional school degree
                     Doctorate degree

                                          -10            -5                 0                 5                10

 Notes: This figure presents estimates from Equation 10 of the eects of licensing on the shares of workers in a cell by
their highest level of educational attainment, including details on attainment below a high school diploma. Standard
errors are clustered at the state­occupation cell level. Bars reflect 95-percent confidence intervals with standard
errors clustered by cell.




                                                          53
  Figure A3: Another Comparison of the Self-Reported Licensed Share Versus Licensing Policy




                                                           .2
                        Residualized Cell Licensing Policy
                         -.1        0       -.2.1




                                                                -.2   -.1                  0                 .1   .2
                                                                            Residualized Cell Licensed Share

Notes: This figure presents a local first-degree polynomial fit of the partial relationship between the licensing policy
at the level of the state­occupation cell and the cell-level share of workers who self-report that they are licensed, after
partialling out state and occupation fixed eects. This relationship is estimated on the sample of workers in the 55
occupations for which we observe policy, as explained in Section 3 and Appendix Table A4.




                                                                                       54
     Figure A4: Does the Model Explain the Heterogeneous Employment Eects of Licensing?




                          .5
            Actual Employment Response
                    -.5   -1    0




                                         -.8           -.6          -.4          -.2              0              .2
                                            Predicted Employment Response of Occupational Transition Rate Ventile

                                                                        Line of Perfect Fit

 Notes: This figure plots actual and model-predicted employment responses to licensing for twenty groups of workers.
Each point reflects a worker ventile of the distribution of predicted occupational transition rates, where the horizontal
coordinate is the model-predicted response of ventile employment to licensing and the vertical coordinate is the
actual employment response as estimated by a Poisson regression specification of Equation 10. The model-predicted
estimates are also based on several calibrated values, as we discuss in Section 6. If actual employment responses
coincide exactly with the model-predicted responses, they would fall on the light blue line. The model predicts that
workers with high rates of occupational mobility should select out of employment in licensed occupations, a prediction
that is strongly borne out in the data. Regressing actual on model-predicted employment responses yields a slope
of 0.93 (SE = 0.17) and intercept of -0.09 (SE = 0.04), with an R2 of 0.63. To assess the downward bias of the
R2 due estimation error in actual employment responses, we simulated this regression: For each vintile, we take
1,000 draws from a normal distribution whose mean is the vintile's model-predicted response and whose standard
deviation is the estimated standard error on the vintile's actual response. Regressing these simulated responses on
the model-predicted responses, we find an R2 of 0.73. The nearness of our R2 with the simulated upper-bound R2
suggests our model rationalizes nearly all of the signal variance in actual employment responses by vintile.




                                                                          55
             Figure A5: Distribution of Educational Attainment, by Occupation Cluster


                                                    Percent of Workers in Clustered Occupations
                                          0%   5%    10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40%                      45%

                    None or preschool

                   Grades 1, 2, 3, or 4

                         Grades 5 or 6

                         Grades 7 or 8

                              Grade 9

                             Grade 10

                             Grade 11

                12th grade, no diploma

     High school diploma or equivalent

           Some college but no degree

      Associate's degree, occupational

         Associate's degree, academic

                    Bachelor's degree

                       Master's degree

            Professional school degree

                     Doctorate degree


                           High-Education Occupations        Low-Education Occupations

 Notes: This figure reports the cluster means from the weighted k-means clustering (k = 2) of Census occupational
categories by the distribution of educational attainment in them. In our application, the cluster means represent
the shares of workers with each level of educational attainment conditional upon cluster assignment. Bars indicate
95-percent confidence intervals, clustered by cell, but do not account for uncertainty in k-means assignment.




                                                        56
              Figure A6: Distribution of Educational Attainment, by Occupation Cluster

                                                         Percent of Workers in Clustered Occupations
                                       -15%       -10%         -5%           0%           5%         10%   15%

                    None or preschool

                    Grades 1, 2, 3, or 4

                         Grades 5 or 6

                         Grades 7 or 8

                               Grade 9

                              Grade 10

                              Grade 11

                12th grade, no diploma

      High school diploma or equivalent

           Some college but no degree

      Associate's degree, occupational

         Associate's degree, academic

                     Bachelor's degree

                       Master's degree

            Professional school degree

                     Doctorate degree


                                    High-Education Occupations     Low-Education Occupations

 Notes: This figure presents estimates of the eects of occupational licensing on the cell shares of workers by detailed
level of educational attainment, in which we split the eects based on whether the occupation is assigned to the low-
or high-education cluster by a k-means procedure described in Appendix C.




                                                             57
         Figure A7: Bayesian Adjustment Aects Only Very Small State­Occupation Cells



           Average Absolute Difference from Bayesian Adjustment
            0             .02             .04            .06




                                                                  0   100          200            300           400   500
                                                                        Number of Workers in State­Occupation Bin

Notes: This figure presents a binned scatterplot of the average absolute dierence between the cell licensed shares
before and after the Bayesian adjustment described in Appendix E.




                                                                                        58
          Figure A8: Principal Component Scores from Occupational Employment Shares




 Notes: This figure depicts the principal component scores for state shares of employment by occupation, therefore
extracting the low-dimensional patterns in states' employment mixes. In each of the five panels, states are ranked
and colored according to their respective principal component score. The colors are in five equal-frequency bins.




                                                       59
B      Model Appendix
This appendix provides a detailed solution to the theoretical model of occupational licensing pre-
sented in Section 2. See the text for the structure of the main model. We restate here only the full
optimization problem of worker i:
                              8          20          1 "                                  3                       9
                              >
                              <                        " 1                                                        >
                                                                                                                  =
                                         6@X     " 1
                                                                                    7
                   max               log 4   qj cij" A
                                                                                h1+
                                                                                 i  5         (Ji + yi ) + aiJi
               {cij },hi ,yi ,Ji >
                                 :                                         1+                                     >
                                                                                                                  ;
                                              j
                                      X
                              s.t.          wj cij  AJi (yi )wJi hi .
                                        j


The worker's problem can be solved in four stages:

    1. Given an income Ii = Aj (yi )wJi hi , choose the consumption allocation {cij } that maximizes
       the value of the CES composite good.

    2. Given an eective hourly wage Aj (yi )wj , choose the hours hi:Ji =j that maximize indirect
       utility in each occupation.

    3. Given conditional consumption­labor sets {{cij }, hi |Ji = j, yi = y } for each occupation,
       choose the years of schooling yi:Ji =j that maximize indirect utility in each occupation.

                                f
    4. Given indirect utilities V                                                                       f
                                  ij conditional upon entering each occupation j , choose Ji = arg maxj Vij .


B.1     Consumption Decision
Begin with the CES utility maximization problem:
                                                     X          " 1        X
                                            max           qj cij" s.t.         wj cij  Ii ,
                                            {cij }
                                                      j                    j


where we hold Ii fixed. Given a large number of industries, the first order conditions with respect
to cij are

                                                              1/"
                                                     qj cij         + wj = 0     8j,

where     is a Lagrange multiplier on the budget constraint. We omit the familiar CES derivations
and proceed to the results. Individual consumptions are

                                                              Aj (yi )wJi (wj /qj )   "
                                                  cij =                                   ,
                                                                       P1 "




                                                                      60
where the ideal price index is
                                                 0                   1    1
                                                                         1 "
                                                      X
                                          P =@               " 1
                                                            qj wj   "A
                                                                               ,
                                                       j


such that the value of the optimal CES composite good available to the worker who has years of
education yi and works hi hours in industry Ji has a consumption level

                                                     I (yi , hi , Ji )   AJi (yi )wJi hi
                             Ci (yi , hi , Ji ) =                      =                 .
                                                            P                  P

We normalize the wage of a reference occupation w0 = 1 such that 0 = 1.

B.2    Labor Supply Decision
Let Vj indicate the payo-period utility apart from idiosyncratic occupation preferences and that
is thus common across workers in occupation j . We can rewrite the optimization problem at this
stage as
                    
                                                                                                 AJi (yi )wJi hi
             max Ci (hi )              h1+
                                        i
                                           
                                                    s.t. Ci (hi )  Ci (hi |yi , Ji )                             .
               hi                1+                                                                    P

This yields the first-order condition with respect to hi

                                           AJ i ( y i ) w J i
                                                                    hi = 0,
                                                 P

and thereby the constant elasticity intensive-margin labor supply function
                                                                           1
                                                            AJi (yi )wJi       
                                       hi ( w Ji )   =                             .
                                                                  P

We can now express Vj as a function of the wage wJi , which the worker takes as given, and the
schooling choice yi , which we endogenize in the next subsection of this appendix:
                                                        1                                                 1+
                               AJi (yi )wJi AJi (yi )wJi                                  AJi (yi )wJi    
                    Vj (yj ) =
                                    P               P                    1+                     P
                                                     1+
                                        AJi (yi )wJi 
                             =                          .
                               1+             P




                                                            61
B.3    Schooling
After observing {j }, workers set their level of schooling to maximize their present-value utility
conditional upon entering each occupation. The solution to the schooling decision problem is

                                         
                                        yi = arg max{log Vj (yi )                 yi },
                                                   yi


which yields the first-order condition

                                            1 +  A0        
                                                   Ji ( y i )
                                                ·          )              = 0.
                                                  AJ i ( y i

We can therefore define vj as the common indirect utility of the worker in occupation j , which is

                                                                   + )
                                                                (yi
                                                                                         )w
                                                                                                      1+
                                   + )
                                (yi                        e        j             AJi (yi   Ji            
                       vj = e       j
                                           Vj ( yi )   =                                                      .
                                                               1+                       P

B.4    Occupation Decision and Utility
The conditional indirect utility of a worker in occupation j is the product of common conditional
indirect utility vj and his or her idiosyncratic occupation preference term aij :

                                                        vij = aij vj .

As vij is increasing in the i.i.d. Fr´
                                     echet random variable aij , vij is itself distributed i.i.d. Fr´
                                                                                                    echet.
The worker's problem at this stage is to pick the occupation j that maximizes Vij :

                                                 Ji = arg max vij .
                                                                j

                            is distributed i.i.d. Fr´
By max-stability of vij , viJ                       echet:
                              i


                                0                                   !                                         11
                                 X
                                                 
                                               (yi           +j )                                     (1+ )

                                          e        :J   i =j             Aj (yi :Ji =j )wj
                                                                                                        
                  viJ   = aiJi @                                                                              A ,
                      i
                                                 1+                                  P
                                    j


where aij is i.i.d. Fr´
                      echet with dispersion parameter . Notice that the second term is independent
of the choice Ji . The choice probability of occupation j is
                                             !                                                            
                                                                                           vj                  vj
             sj = P    Ji   = arg max vij        =P         (aij     aij 0 )      log                8j      =P                .
                                    j                                                      vj 0                    j0   vj 0




                                                              62
The expected utility of workers in occupation j is
                                         2         0                                                                          11         3
                                                                                            !                         (1+ )
                                                     X                 (yi           +j )             
                                                                                                 Aj (yi
                                                                 e                                      :Ji =j )wj
                                                                           :J   i =j                                    
                                 6                                                                                                        7
      uj = E[ViJ   |Ji = j ] = E 4aiJi @                                                                                      A    Ji = j 5
                 i
                                                                        1+                              P
                                                       j
                                0                                      !                                     11
                                  X
                                                    
                                                  (yi           +j )                                 (1+ )
                         1                e           :J   i =j              Aj (yi :Ji =j )wj
                                                                                                       
         =       1              @                                                                            A
                                                   1+                                   P
                                    j
             0                                                                    11
                 X             
                             (yi
                                                                         (1+ )
                                 :Ji =j +j )
         /@          e                                
                                                Aj ( yi :Ji =j )wj
                                                                                  A .
                 j


Expected utility in occupation j is the same in all occupations and therefore equal to expected
utility of all workers (uj = u for all j ).

B.5      Willingness to Pay
We assume that willingness to pay is a function of the licensing cost and the expectation of workers'
idiosyncratic occupation preference term conditional upon entering the occupation:

                                    log qj = 0j + 1 log(1                    `j ) + 2 log E[aiJi |Ji = j ].

For an occupation j that is su ciently small, changes in j have a negligible eect on expected
utility u. Also recall that

                                               @ log u   @ log vj   @ log E[aiJi |Ji = j ]
                                                       =          +                        .
                                                 @j        @j               @j

By the choice probability equation above, we also have

                                                              @ log sj   @ log vj
                                                                       =          .
                                                                @j         @j

Then combining these statements, we have

                                        @ log E[aiJi |Ji = j ]                   @ log vj         1 @ log sj
                                                               =                          =                  ,
                                                @j                                 @j                 @j

and so

                                                d log qj                   @ log E[aiJi |Ji = j 0 ]
                                                         = 1             2
                                                  @j                                   @j
                                                                         2 @  log s j 0
                                                             = 1
                                                                               @j
                                                                         2 @ log sj
                                                             = 1                         ,
                                                                              @j


                                                                           63
as employment shares have a constant semi-elasticity in years of training.

B.6    Equilibrium Conditions
Consumption demand:
                                                                                        
                                       @ log Cj             @ log qj        @ log wj
                                                ="
                                          @j                  @j               @j

Willingness to pay:

                                                       @ log qj
                                                                =
                                                         @j

Intensive-margin labor supply:

                                               @ log hi:Ji =j   1 @ log wj
                                                              =
                                                   @j            @j

Schooling:

                                                    @ log yi:Ji =j
                                                                   =0
                                                        @j

Extensive-margin labor supply:
                                                                                   
                                        @ log sj            1 +  @ log wj
                                                 =                                 
                                          @j                        @j

Labor market clearing:

                            @ log Cj   @ log Hj   @ log sj   @ log hi:Ji =j
                                     =          =          +
                               @j         @j        @j           @j

B.7    Model Solution
The model can be solved by using the four labor market equilibrium conditions and the WTP
equation. Let
                                h                                                                     i
                                    @ log sj   @ log hi:Ji =j    @ log wj    @ log Hj      @ log qj
                         x0 =         @j            @j              @j          @j           @j
                                                                                                          .

The above results form a system of linear equations of the form Ax = Cx + b, where A and C
are 5-by-5 matrices and x0 is a vector of length 5. If A and C are both of full rank and b 6= 0, the




                                                                64
system admits a unique solution x = (A                    C)       1 b.   We confirm first that b 6= 0:
                                                               2           3
                                                                        
                                                           6   7
                                                           6 0 7
                                                           6   7
                                                         b=6   7
                                                           6  7.
                                                           6   7
                                                           4 0 5
                                                             

Thus, for b 6= 0, we require that either  6= 0 or  6= 0. The former condition will hold in all cases
of interest. Since A = I , we also have
                                                2                                                   3
                                                    1     0               (1 +  )/       0      0
                                         6                                                   7
                                         60               1                1/            0  07
                                         6                                                   7
                               A       C=6
                                         60               0                 1           1/" 07
                                                                                             7.
                                         6                                                   7
                                         4 1               1                0            1 05
                                           0              0                 0            0 1

The determinant of this matrix is

                                                               1 + (1 +  ) + "
                                           |A       C| =                       .
                                                                     "

A    C is of full rank if and only if |A                C | 6= 0, thus if 1 + (1 +  ) + " 6= 0 and |"| < 1. The
economic content of this parameter restriction is to establish that, if a market-clearing wage exists,
it is unique: It rules out the case in which the total labor supply elasticity--that is, the sum of the
extensive and intensive margins--is exactly equal to the labor demand elasticity. This holds in any
case of interest, as we assume             > 0,  > 0, and " > 1. With these restrictions, we have a unique
solution to the model:
               2    @ log sj 3         2                      (1+ )                 3   12          3
                      @                    1        0                       0   0            
               6 @ log hij:Ji =j 7    6
                                                                
                                                                                7       6   7
               6                 7    60            1         1/            0  07       6 0 7
               6      @j         7    6                                         7       6   7
               6 @ log wj 7
               6      @j         7   =6
                                      60            0          1           1/" 07
                                                                                7
                                                                                        6  7
                                                                                        6   7
               6 @ log    Hj 7
                                 7    6                                         7       6   7
               6                      4 1           1          0            1 05        4 0 5
               4      @j         5
                    @ log qj            0           0          0            0 1           
                      @j
                                                                     2                                    3
                                                                            " (1 +  )         (1 + ")
                                                       6                                                  7
                                                       6         " +                                      7
                                              1        6                                                  7
                                     =                 6          " +                                     7.
                                       1 + (1 +  ) + " 6
                                                       6
                                                                                                          7
                                                                                                          7
                                                       4(1 + )(1 +  )"   ("                             1)5
                                                            (1 + (1 +  ) + ")




                                                                   65
B.8    Social Welfare
The logarithm of expected utility is
                                            2                                                  3
                                                                             )w 
                                                                                       (1+ )
                                     1 X               + )
                                                    (yj                Aj (yj  j         
                              log u / 4  e              j                                      5.
                                                                           P
                                                j


Then we can use a first-order approximation for the partial derivative with respect to j 0 :
                                        
              @ log u X     @              1+                                                         
                     =  sj                    log Aj (yj ) + log wj                 log P           (yj + j ) .
               @j 0        @j 0             
                          j


By the envelope theorem,
                                         
                                  @         1+                            
                                               log Aj (yj )              yj =0         8j,
                                 @j 0        

and thus
                                                                                      
                       @ log u X     1 +  @ log wj                          @ log P             @j
                              =  sj                                                                  .
                        @j 0                @j 0                              @j 0              @j 0
                                    j


Splitting the sum into occupation j 0 whose j 0 changes and all others, we have that

                                        @j 0         @j
                                             = 1 and      = 0 8j 0 6= j,
                                        @j 0         @j 0

and so, simplifying further, we obtain
                                2                                              3
              @ log u   1 +  4 @ log wj 0             X                @ log wj 5                  1 +  @ log P
                      =       sj 0        +                       sj                  sj 0                      .
               @j  0               @j 0                                  @j 0                             @j 0
                                                     j :j 6=j 0


Inverting Equation 9, and doing this for both j 0 and j : j 6= j 0 , we obtain
                                                                    
                                @ log wj 0          1 @ log sj 0
                                           =                     +
                                   @j 0      1+         @j 0
                                @ log wj             @ log sj
                                           =                     8j : j 6= j 0
                                   @j 0       (1 +  ) @j 0

and substitutions yield

                      @ log u   sj 0 @ log sj 0   1 X @ log sj                        1 +  @ log P
                              =                 +      sj                                          .
                       @j 0            @j 0          0
                                                          @j 0                               @j 0
                                                        j :j 6=j




                                                           66
Independence of preferences across occupations gives us that displaced workers from occupation j 0
are apportioned to occupations j 6= j 0 according to the shares of j in total employment:

                                        @ log sj         sj @ log sj 0
                                                 =                     .
                                          @j 0          1 sj 0 @j 0
                                                                                             P              P
Under our assumption of a utilitarian social welfare function, W =                               i ui   =       Nu
                                                                                                                 ¯. By these
substitutions, we obtain

                    @ log W   sj 0 @ log sj 0    1 X           s2
                                                                j   @ log sj 0            1 +  @ log P
                            =                                                                          ,
                      @j 0           @j 0                     1 sj 0 @j 0                        @j 0
                                                 j :j 6=j 0


which rewrites to
                                                              P                   !
                        @ log W   1 @ log sj 0                     j 6=j 0   s2
                                                                              j       1 +  @ log P
                                =                sj 0                                              ,
                          @j 0        @j 0                     1        sj 0                 @j 0

which has a rich economic interpretation. We have characterized the welfare eect of licensing
occupation j on employment in occupation j even in a model with nonnegligible spillovers across
occupations, and it reflects changes in employment in the licensed occupation and in the price level.
Second, the normalized Herfindahl index of employment shares summarizes the extent of these cross-
occupation spillovers. This is, to the best of our knowledge, a novel theoretical connection between
the normalized Herfindahl index and the relevance of spillovers to welfare.
                     P
   In the limit Hj = j s2 j ! 0 in which the eective number of occupations approaches infinity,
spillovers become negligible, and we obtain a particularly stark welfare result:

                                   @ log W   sj @ log sj               1 +  @ log P
                                           =                                        ,
                                      @j          @j                          @j

In the paper, we perform several manipulations on this result. First, we define occupational surplus
as the dierence in social welfare, holding all other {j } constant, between the equilibrium with
j = 0 (no licensing) and the equilibrium j ! 1 (occupation banned).

                                  Wj = W (0, {j 0 })          lim W (j , {j 0 })).
                                                              j !1


Then the above rewrites to

                                   @ log Wj   1 @ log sj               1 +  @ log P
                                            =                                       .
                                      @j          @j                     sj   @j




                                                        67
Furthermore, we can obtain the partial derivative of P with respect to j 0 :

                   @ log P    1   @       X
                                             " 1                            "
                           =    ·     log   qj wj
                     @j 0    1 " @j 0
                                                               j
                                       1  @    X
                                      sj      [" log qj + (1 ") log wj ]
                                1 "      @j 0
                                    j
                                                                   
                                 1 X          @ log qj    @ log wj     @ log wj
                              =       sj "                          +           .
                                1 "             @j 0        @j 0         @j 0
                                                j


From Equation 8, we have
                                                               
                                 @ log qj           @ log wj            @ log sj   @ log hi:Ji =j
                          "                                        =             +                ,
                                   @j 0               @j 0                @j 0         @j 0

and so by substitution,
                                                                                                      
                    @ log P    1 X                           @ log sj   @ log hi:Ji =j   @ log wj
                            =      sj                                 +                +
                      @j      1 "                              @j 0         @j  0          @j 0
                                                j
                                       1       X          @ log wj Hj
                              =                      sj               .
                                   1       "                  @j 0
                                                j


A similar argument as above applies to the o-diagonal terms, yielding the approximation

                                               @ log P    sj @ log wj Hj
                                                       =                 ,
                                                 @j      1 "     @j 0

which in turn implies

                              @ log Wj   1 @ log sj    1 +  @ log wj Hj
                                       =            +                   .
                                 @j          @j        (" 1)    @j 0

We have now mapped the social welfare eect of licensing into two reduced-form comparative statics
that are, in principle, estimable from only labor market data--the eects of licensing on the own-
occupation employment share and wage bill--and three structural parameters. These structural
parameters all have known sign ( > 0,  > 0, "                           1 > 0), and thus we can view the welfare eect
as a weighted sum of these two reduced-form responses.
   A second manipulation of the welfare result is to define changes in worker and consumer surplus
as respectively

                                               @ log W L   sj @ log sj
                                                         =
                                                  @j            @j
                                               @ log W C            1 +  @ log P
                                                         =                       .
                                                  @j                       @j

We introduce this terminology to think intuitively about the incidence of licensing: Workers bear the


                                                                   68
costs of licensing insofar as licensing reduces the present value of nominal income in an occupation
(and thus spurs workers to exit the occupation on the margin), whereas consumers bear the costs of
licensing insofar as licensing raises the price level, reducing the real income of all workers, including
those not in the licensed occupation. Using Proposition 1, we express licensing's eects on worker
and consumer surplus in terms of structural parameters:

                  @ log W L        (1 +  )" (1 + ")
                            = sj ·
                      @j             1 + (1 +  ) + "
                          C
                                                
                  @ log W              sj         (1 + )(1 +  )2 "
                            =                                                     (1 +  ) .
                     @j       1 + (1 +  ) + "          (" 1)

Taken together, and rescaled into occupational surplus, we obtain

                                            @ log Wj   1 +  "
                                                     =                     .
                                               @j         " 1

B.9    Incidence
We can also use the model to analyze incidence. First, we may write the share of licensing costs
that are oset for workers by increases in wages fully in terms of primitives:

                                          1 @ log wj      " / + 
                                                     =                 .
                                           @j          1 + (1 +  ) + "

Next, we can write the eect of licensing on the WTP-adjusted price in terms of primitives:

                                           " w1
                                    @ log(qj      "
                                                      )
                            1                 j                 (" 1) (1 + )(1 +  )"
                                                          =                           ,
                        1       "        @j                    (" 1)(1 + (1 +  ) + ")

and then we can calculate the share of the price increase oset by increases in WTP in terms of
primitives:

                                "      @ log qj /@j    " 1 + (1 +  ) + "
                                                    =                    .
                            "        1 @ log wj /@j   " +     (" 1)

Additional incidence results are provided below as proofs to propositions.

B.10     Proofs of Propositions
Proposition 1

Section B.7 presents a detailed derivation.




                                                                69
Proposition 2

Take the partial derivative with respect to :
                2    @ log sj 3                              2                               3
                       @                                         " (1 +  )       (1 + ")
                6 @ log hij:Ji =j 7                         6                                 7
                6                 7                         6           " +                   7
            @   6      @j         7            1          @ 6                                 7
                6 @ log wj 7                                6                                 7
                6                 7   =                ·                " + 
           @    6 @ log@j         7     1 + (1 +  ) + " @ 6 6
                                                                                              7
                                                                                              7
                6          Hj 7
                                                            4(1 + )(1 +  )"   ("            1)5
                4      @j         5
                     @ log qj                                     (1 + (1 +  ) + ")
                       @j
                                                         2                3
                                                               "(1 +  )
                                                         6                7
                                                         6       "        7
                                               1         6                7
                                      =                ·66        "       7.
                                                                          7
                                        1 + (1 +  ) + " 6                 7
                                                         4 (1 + )(1 +  )" 5
                                                          1 + (1 +  ) + "

One immediately sees the claimed sign on all cross-partials.

Proposition 3

Section B.8 presents a detailed derivation.

Proposition 4

Proposition 3 proves that the social welfare eect of licensing, in terms of the percentage change
in occupational surplus, is

                                  @ log Wj   1 @ log sj    1 +  @ log wj Hj
                                           =            +                   ,
                                     @j          @j        (" 1)    @j

and substituting in comparative statics from Proposition 1, we obtain

                                                             (1+ )(1+ )2 "
                     @ log Wj   (1 +  )"         (1 + ") +       (" 1)        (1 +  )
                              =                                                         ,
                        @j                           1 + (1 +  ) + "

and since we wish to test that @ log Wj /@j < 0, we multiply by the common factor 1+ (1+  )+ "
and obtain the test

                                                    (1 + )(1 +  )2 "
                      (1 +  )"          (1 + ") +                       (1 +  ) < 0,
                                                         (" 1)

which simplifies to

                                                     1 +  "
                                                >           .
                                                        " 1



                                                       70
Proposition 5

Incidence (   L ).   We divide our formula for the worker welfare eect by the social welfare eect:

                                                   (1+ )" (1+")
                               L        WL           1+ (1+ )+"
                                   =       =         1+ "
                                        W              " 1    
                                       (1 +  )"       (1 + ")     (" 1)
                                   =                          ·              .
                                       (1 +  )"        (" 1) 1 + (1 +  ) + "

Conditions for       WL < 0 <      W C . First, using the worker welfare formula, we obtain

                                   W L < 0 () (1 +  )"               (1 + ") < 0
                                                             (1 + ")
                                                 ()  <                .
                                                             (1 +  )"

Next, using the consumer welfare formula, we obtain

                                             (1 + )(1 +  )2 "
                               W C > 0 ()                          (1 +  ) > 0
                                                  (" 1)
                                                     (" 1)
                                          ()  >                 .
                                                 (1 + )(1 +  )"

Thus,
                                                                                          
                           L                 C                      (" 1)       (1 + ")
                         W <0<           W       ()  2                        ,              .
                                                                (1 + )(1 +  )" (1 +  )"

B.11    Constructive Proof of Identification
We show constructively that the vector of reduced-form empirical moments ^ = [a
                                                                              bi , w
                                                                                   c     \ b
                                                                                     j , hi:Ji =j , s j]
just-identify the vector of structural parameters  = [,  , ,  ] with the calibration of          and ". The
structural parameters may be recovered by

                                                  c
                                                 =w    b
                                                    j /hi

                                                   bi
                                                  =a
                                                       1          b
                                                  c
                                                 =w j + (sbj + hi )
                                                       "
                                                           c
                                                           w   b
                                                              js j
                                                  c
                                                 =w j                   .
                                                          c
                                                         (w j  +   bj )
                                                                   h

These results follow quite immediately from algebraic manipulations of the four main equations in
our model solution.




                                                           71
B.12     Generalization to Heterogeneous Agents
We outline how our results generalize to models where agents dier in their characteristics according
to their type k = 1, . . . , K . We also provide a simple model with K types and show how our
approach accommodates selection by type into licensed occupations.
   Su cient Statistics. Our su cient-statistics results are robust to heterogeneity in discount rate
k , eective labor supply function Ajk (y ), and WTP eect jk . This can be seen by repeating
the su cient-statistic derivations above for each type: Type-specific employment and wage bill
eects remain su cient statistics for type welfare. Under a utilitarian social welfare function,
social welfare is a population-weighted average over these type-specific employment and wage bill
eects, recovering the average eect on employment and the wage bill as su cient statistics for
social welfare:
                                    
                       @ log Wj      1 @ log sj,k      1 +  @ log wHj,k
                                =E                 +
                          @j               @j          (" 1)     @j
                                                                
                                  1     @ log sj,k      1+        @ log wHj,k
                                = E                  +        E
                                           @j           (" 1)         @j
                                  1 @ log sj       1 +  @ log wj Hj
                                =            +                      ,
                                      @j          (" 1)     @j

where E[·] takes population averages, sj,k is the employment share of type k in occupation j and
wHj,k is the nominal consumption of type k on labor services from occupation j , as provided by
workers of any type.
   Generalizing our results to heterogeneity in   k,   k , and "k requires only slightly more work. As
we use these parameters to scale our su cient statistics, the social welfare eect is now
                            
              @ log Wj     1 @ log sj,k      1 + k @ log wHj,k
                       =E               +
                 @j         k   @j         k ("k 1)     @j
                                                                
                           1      @ log sj,k         1 + k       @ log wHj,k
                       =E     E                +E             E
                            k          @j          k ("k 1)           @j
                                                                                 
                                   1 @ log sj,k            1 + k     @ log wHj,k
                          + Cov       ,           + Cov            ,              .
                                    k     @j             k ("k 1)        @j

As this derivation shows, the welfare eects of licensing depend upon the covariance of the type-
specific employment and wage bill eects of licensing with the type-specific parameters, rather than
only population-average employment and wage bill eects as well as population-average parame-
ters. Intuitively, if we observe that licensing reduces occupational employment more for types with
stronger occupational preferences, or reduces the wage bill more for types with less elastic consump-
tion preferences, then we would conclude the welfare costs of licensing are higher than in a case
with the same population-average eects in employment and the wage bill but no heterogeneity in
types. Due to the limited evidence on even population estimates of          and ", we calibrate these
parameters in the paper, and we are unaware of any credible evidence on the distribution        k,   k ,
or "k that would allow us to take a stance on the sign of either covariance term. We think there


                                                  72
is considerable value to a sharper welfare analysis at the cost of ignoring the consequences of such
heterogeneity.
   Incidence Analysis and Interpretation of Reduced-Form Results. Although our social welfare
results are relatively robust to heterogeneity, credible analysis of incidence requires more care. The
threat is that, if workers dier by type on outcomes of interest, then we may confound selection
eects of licensing with changes in the equilibrium. We make this point by introducing heterogeneity
in the discount rate k by type k = 1, . . . , K . Heterogeneous discount rates introduce a problematic
source of selection because high-discount rate types invest less in education, implying these workers
have relatively low absolute advantage, and licensing is more costly to high-discount rate types, so
licensing will select positively on absolute advantage. The change in the average cell wage induced
by licensing therefore reflects a selection eect as well as an equilibrium eect.
   To develop this point formally, recall that the share of type-k workers in occupation j is

                                                   )                        (1+ )
                                           k (j +yjk            
                                sjk = e                  [Ajk (yjk )wj ]      
                                                                                            k,


where
                                           X               )
                                                   k (j +yjk
                                                                                    (1+ )
                                                                        
                                   k   =       e                 [Ajk (yjk ) wj ]           .
                                           j


We assume K is large, so that any individual type k is a negligible share of employment. Let
k = (1 +    k )   with E   k   = 0 and  > 0. We can write the share of workers in occupation j who
are type k as

                                                           sjk Nk
                                                   f
                                                   s jk = P          .
                                                            k sjk Nk

In equilibrium, these type shares are log-proportional to discount rates multiplied by total invest-
ment in training and schooling:

                                                                       
                                                   f
                                               log s jk /   k ( j   + yjk ).

Applying the envelope theorem, the partial derivative of k 's share of employment in j is

                                                         f
                                                   @ log s jk
                                                              =        k,
                                                      @j

implying that types with above-average discount rates select out of licensed occupations and types
with below-average discount rates select into licensed occupations.
   To show that this selection on type aects the average occupational wage wj , we step through




                                                            73
the decomposition:

                                               K
                                               X
                                        wj =         f
                                                     s jk wjk
                                               k=1
                                               K
                                               X
                                 log wj              f
                                                     s jk log wjk
                                               k=1
                                               XK                       K
                               @ log wj                   @ log wjk X @ s
                                                                        f jk
                                        =            f
                                                     s jk          +         log wjk .
                                  @j                         @j       @j
                                               k=1                      k=1

Applying the envelope theorem, and the assumption that worker types dier only in discount rates,
we obtain that the change in type-specific log wages is constant over types:

                                               @ log wjk  @ log wj
                                                                   8k.
                                                  @j         @j

Next, we also use our selection result:

                                           f
                                          @s jk             f
                                                      @ log s jk
                                                 f
                                                =s jk            =              f
                                                                               ks jk .
                                          @j             @j

Finally, we summarize the cross-sectional relationship between types' discount rates and types'
eective labor supplies by

                                                     log wjk =       j k,


where   j   is decreasing in the concavity A00
                                            j (y ) < 0 of the occupation-specific eective labor supply
schedule, as when the schedule is highly concave, between-type dierences in discount rates achieve
smaller between-type dierences in eective labor supplies and thus smaller between-type dierences
in observed wages. Combining these results, we have the selection-inclusive eect of licensing on
the average wage:

                                        @ log wj   @ log wj
                                                 =          +               j Varj ( k ),
                                           @j         @j
                        PK        2
where Varj (   k)   =        f
                         k=1 s jk k .    This result shows that in a model of discount-rate heterogeneity,
estimates of the eect of licensing on average wages will overstate the true equilibrium eect due to
selection. Furthermore, selection eects will be particularly important when occupations contain
workers of a variety of types and these types dier substantially in their average wages.
   This selection concern clearly also applies to the interpretation of our average wage eects.
We explore it in Section 4 by seeing how our results change with detailed controls for observable
predictors of wages as well as a bounding exercise from Oster (2019) and Finkelstein et al. (2018) to
assess the plausibility that our results are consistent with @ log wj /@j = 0 because of selection. We
conclude that the intensity of selection on individual-level unobservables into licensed occupations

                                                                74
would indeed need to be very large, relative to both the intensity of selection on observables or on
household-level observables. To the extent our results nevertheless overstate the within-type wage
gains from licensing, our results understate the extent of incidence on workers.


C       Further Results
C.1      Supplementary Robustness Checks
Appendix Table A11 reports the results of several supplementary robustness checks beyond those
in Table 3. Column 1 includes an alternative (coarser) set of state by occupation group fixed
eects, this time using Census major occupational groups rather than Census detailed occupational
groups.29 Column 2 includes fixed eects for all two-way interactions of states with demographic
characteristics and occupations with demographic characteristics: For some examples, this adds a
fixed eect for women in Massachusetts, nonwhites in the teacher assistant occupation, and so on.
These fixed eects will sweep out heterogeneous eects of demographic characteristics by occupation
and by state, although not by cell. Our results are unchanged, supporting our interpretation of our
results as causal eects of licensing and not as a consequence of sorting on worker characteristics.
In Column 3, we include a more flexible specification of our two-way fixed eect strategy:

                 0
           y i = o   1
                   + o                0
                       · %Licenseds + s   1
                                        + s · %Licensedo +           · %Licensedi(o,s) + Xi0  + "i ,

where %Licenseds and %Licensedo are, respectively, state and occupation licensed shares. This
specification allows for some occupations to be more or less responsive to variation in states' overall
propensity to license, and similarly for some states to be more or less responsive to variation in
occupations' overall propensity to be licensed. Our results are unchanged, suggesting that the
variation in licensing after removing two-way fixed eects is quite idiosyncratic in nature.
      In Column 4, we control for cell-level employment growth from 2000 to 2010. We estimate cell
employment by centered five-year samples--that is, pooling 1998­2002 for 2000 and 2008­2012 for
2010. The licensed share continues to be estimated in our main sample. State-occupation cells with
high or low licensed shares in our main sample did not have dierential employment growth from
2000 to 2010. Consequently, although the number of cells shrinks by about 30 percent, our results
are unchanged.

C.2      Educational Attainment
Occupational licensing regulations commonly specify a minimum required educational credential
(Gittleman et al., 2018). Here we seek to recover the relevant credential for each occupation when
it is licensed, and splitting occupations by these credentials, estimate distinct eects of licensing on
the distribution of educational attainment. We view these results as providing our most credible
 29
      For more information, see Appendix B of the CPS March Supplement documentation.




                                                      75
evidence that licensing policy has a causal eect on educational attainment: That is, we claim that,
absent licensing requirements, workers would not obtain such educational credentials.
    Motivated by the results in Figure 2, we posit that licensing schemes divide into two types: one
that requires associate's degrees or similar, and another requiring more than a bachelor's degree.
We argue the former is consistent with licensed occupations with a relatively low average level of
education and the latter with licensed occupations with a relatively high average level of education.
We implement this division by k -means clustering: we compute the share of workers with each
detailed level of education by occupation using sample weights and then use the k -means algorithm
to divide occupations for k = 2. We find that these clusters split occupations into intuitively
low- and high-education groups: See Appendix Figure A5.30 In addition, our results are robust to
alternative approaches, such as splitting occupations at the median by average years of education.
    Appendix Figure A6 displays the results. Consistent with our hypothesis, occupational licensing
has sharply heterogeneous eects on the education distribution in low- and high-education occupa-
tions. In low-education occupations, we see a large (7.7 p.p.) decline in the share of workers whose
highest level of education is a high school diploma and a large (9.9 p.p.) increase in the share of
workers with vocational associate's degrees. By contrast, in high-education occupations, the eects
are concentrated in a large (3.6 p.p.) decline in the share of workers with bachelor's degrees and
a concomitant (4.7 p.p.) increase in the share of workers with master's degrees. We can easily
reject equality of coe cients for the eects of licensing in low- versus high-education occupations,
for most individual education levels and jointly across all education levels. These results establish
a notably direct link between the specific educational requirements likely required when an occu-
pation is licensed and the actual changes in the distribution of educational attainment within that
occupation.

C.3     Robustness to Political Confounds
Do local political determinants of regulation including, but extending beyond, occupational licens-
ing confound our identification strategy? For example, it may be that occupations whose workers
tend to vote for Republicans (Democrats) also tend to be more heavily licensed in states that gen-
erally vote Republican (Democrat). To evaluate this and related hypotheses, we use data on the
political ideology of workers by occupation from the 1972­2016 Cumulative Datafile of the U.S.
General Social Survey (GSS) as well as the ideology of politicians in state legislatures from Shor
and McCarty (2011).
    The GSS asks participants for their occupation as well as their political party a liation. Oc-
cupations are classified as in the CPS. The GSS asks about party a liation with the question:
"Generally speaking, do you usually think of yourself as a Republican, Democrat, Independent, or
what?" We coded individuals who responded they were a "strong" or "not strong" Republican or
  30
     60.1 percent of workers are in occupations assigned to the low-education cluster. The clusters align naturally
with low-education occupations as those in which the modal level of education attainment is a high school degree
and high-education occupations as those in which the modal level is a bachelor's degree.



                                                        76
Democrat as their respective parties. Remaining respondents identified as either independents or
members of another party and were coded as a third category. The pooled sample includes 62,644
responses and 534 unique occupations. To reduce sampling variance in the Republican and Demo-
cratic shares of workers in each occupation, we estimated a mixed-eects logistic regression model,
with occupation random eects nested within random eects for 23 Census detailed occupation
groups. The following analysis uses the model-based predicted Republican share of the two-party
vote by occupation. For state-level variation, we use ideal-point estimates from Shor and McCarty
(2011) of the average ideology of each U.S. state legislature in 2014, taking the simple average of
the upper and lower legislative bodies in each state, as well as the distance between the median
Republican and median Democratic legislator. For ease of interpretation, we then standardized
these state-politics variables to be mean zero and unit standard deviation.
    We estimate variations on the following specification, which interacts a GSS occupation-level
variable with a Shor and McCarty (2011) state-level variable:

              %Licenseos = o + s +       · (OccupationPoliticso  StatePoliticss ) + eos .        (13)

We keep the state­occupation licensed share as the dependent variable, cluster at the state­
occupation cell level, and include state and occupation fixed eects. To the extent a coe cient
is significant, this may raise concerns that the state­occupation licensed share is correlated with
other regulations and policies that vary among states and occupations.
    Appendix Table A12, however, finds no evidence of associations of occupation- and state-level
political variable interactions with the licensed share. We try plausible specifications that might
reveal local political determinants of licensing. In Column 1, we interact the occupation Republican
share with the average left-right slant of the state legislature. Column 2 uses instead the occupation
Democratic share in the interaction. These two results suggest that Republican- and Democratic-
leaning legislatures do not respectively dierentially treat Republican- and Democratic-leaning
occupations with licensing. Column 3 uses the share of workers who are either Republicans or
Democrats and interacts this with the distance between party medians. The insignificant result
suggests that polarized state legislatures do not dierentially treat occupations that are relatively
more or less politically independent with licensing.
    Though this exercise does not rule out all possible local political explanations, it does suggest
that patterns of licensing across U.S. states and occupations are relatively idiosyncratic and not
easily explained by local politics.


D     Licensing Policy Data
This appendix provides additional details on the construction of state­occupation licensing policy
data we introduce in Section 3. Appendix Table A4 lists the 55 occupations for which we were
able to code policy variation. For some occupations, data collection involved more than simply
recording policy information from the National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL) and the

                                                 77
Institute for Justice (IJ). Here, organized by occupation, we discuss choices that this undertaking
required, as well as the sources beyond the NCSL and IJ that we consulted.
       0540 (claims adjusters, appraisers, examiners, and investigators). We used information avail-
able on the website of Western International Sta ng Inc., an insurance sta ng agency that appears
to specialize in temporary-help claims examiners and adjusters that insurers hire after natural dis-
asters.31
       1640 (conservation scientists and foresters). We cross-checked information on the Society of
American Foresters website,32 CareerOneStop.com, and the websites of state forester certification
or licensing boards.
       2430 (librarians). We cross-checked data on CareerOneStop.com with tables published by the
American Library Association ­ Allied Professional Association (ALA-APA),33 which describes
itself as a nonprofit organization to advance "mutual professional interests of librarians and other
library workers" and which is specialized in librarian licensing and certification eorts. As school
library media specialists (i.e., school librarians) are licensed to be at least teachers in all 50 U.S.
states, we use variation in public librarian licensing regulations only.
       3030 (dietitians and nutritionists).   We used a policy information table published by the
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, which describes itself as the "world's largest organization
of food and nutrition professionals."34 We code a state­occupation cell as "licensed" if state-
credentialed workers enjoy practice exclusivity, not only title protection.
       3649 (phlebotomists). We recorded information on "mandatory certification" (i.e., licensing)
from PhlebotomyExaminer.com, which we found had uniquely detailed information on the state-
specific training, certification, and licensing regimes for phlebotomists.35
       4520 (miscellaneous personal appearance workers). We used information from the U.S. Bureau
of Labor Statistics Occupational Employment Statistics program on occupations in the 5-digit SOC
code 39-5090 (also "miscellaneous personal appearance workers"). These were "makeup artists, the-
atrical and performance" "manicurists and pedicurists," "skin care specialists," and "shampooers."
We used data from the Institute for Justice on the latter three occupations (the first is of negligible
size), and took the simple average of whether each occupation was licensed in a state.
       4465 (morticians, undertakers, and funeral directors). We consulted the paper of Pizzola and
Tabarrok (2017).
       Various construction occupations. To accommodate variation in licensing for commercial versus
residential construction work in the same occupation, we code a state­occupation cell's value as 0 if
the state licenses neither type of work in the occupation, 0.5 if the state licenses either commercial
or residential work but not both, and 1 if the state licenses both commercial and residential work in
the occupation. This applies for the following occupations: 6220 (brickmasons, blockmasons, and
  31
     https://perma.cc/4F2X-TQ89.
  32
     https://perma.cc/7CVJ-3ELS.
  33
     https://perma.cc/Z8HT-59SG.
  34
     https://perma.cc/Q2EQ-8646.
  35
     https://perma.cc/9X37-PPKA.



                                                   78
stonemasons), 6230 (carpenters), 6250 (cement masons, concrete finishers, and terrazzo workers),
6330 (drywall installers, ceiling tile installers, and tapers), 6360 (glaziers), 6400 (insulation workers),
and 6520 (sheet metal workers).


E     Econometric Extensions
This appendix provides further details on some econometric techniques used in this paper which are
potentially somewhat novel or unfamiliar to some readers. In Sections E.1 and E.2, we introduce
the beta­binomial model we use to reduce sampling variance in the licensed share. In Section E.3,
we develop two controls we use in Section 6 of the main text as robustness checks. In Section E.4,
we explain how we correct for the upward bias in estimating total variation distance.

E.1    Estimating Cell-Level Standard Errors
In this subsection, we present both Bayesian and frequentist approaches to obtaining a formula for
the mean and the standard error of the leave-out state­occupation licensed share. Throughout this
subsection, we define for notational convenience
                                                        X
                                                Los =           Li ,
                                                        i2Wos


where Li = 1 if worker i is licensed and equals zero otherwise, s indexes states, o indexes occupa-
tions, and worker i is in Wos if he or she is in state s and occupation o. Lo is defined analogously.
    Frequentist Approach. The leave-out licensed share of worker is

                                                        Los Li
                                            %Li =              ,
                                                        Nos 1

and using the formula for the variance of a Bernoulli random variable, we obtain the variance

                                           2        %Li (1 %Li )
                                           ui   =                .
                                                      Nos 1

Two considerations weigh against a frequentist approach in our measurement error correction.
First, we do not exploit information from licensed shares of workers in other states but the same
occupation to reduce error. Second, the estimated cell-level measurement error is zero when all or
no workers are licensed in the cell.
    Empirical Bayes Approach. Following common practice in Bayesian statistics (Bolstad and
Curran, 2016, Ch. 8), we propose to model the distribution of licensed and unlicensed workers
across state­occupation cells as

                                          po  Beta(o ,           o)

                                         Los  Binom(Nos , po ).


                                                        79
The first step is to calibrate o and          0,   the occupation-specific parameters of the prior distribution
of the licensed share across state­occupation cells. We use the beta distribution because, as the
conjugate distribution to the binomial, conditioning on the binomial count data of licensed and
unlicensed workers will yield a posterior that is also a beta distribution, a result we provide below.
    We estimate the parameters of the beta distribution by method of moments:

                                                    µ2
                                                     1o   µ3
                                                           1o     µ1o µ2o
                                            c
                                             o =
                                                           µ2o
                                             b        µ1o µ3
                                                        2
                                                               1o   µ1o µ2o
                                              o =                            ,
                                                      µ2
                                                       1o  µ  3
                                                              1o   2 µ1o µ2o

                                       1
where µ1o = Lo /No and µ2o =            2
                                      Nos
                                             L2
                                              os      L2
                                                       o . This procedure fails for 4 of 483 occupations. For
these occupations, we assume the uninformative prior o =                                    o   = 1/2 for the state­occupation
licensed   share.36
    We now use Bayes' theorem to update the beta prior with the count data. Our assumption that
counts of licensed and unlicensed workers in a state­occupation cell are drawn from a cell-specific
binomial distribution implies
                                                                      !
                                                             Nos          Los Nos           Los
                                    p(Los |Nos , os ) =                   os os                   .
                                                             Los

With a constant k , our prior is

                                                       c
                                                             1                   co 1
                                            p(os ) = k os
                                                        o
                                                                 (1       os )          .

By Bayes' theorem,

                                                                                     c
                           p(os |(Los , Nos )) = k 0 os
                                                     c
                                                      o     1+Los
                                                                      (1     os )     o 1+Nos Los
                                                                                                         .

The posterior distribution for the state­occupation licensed share is therefore

                         os |(Los , Nos ) = Beta(o          1 + Los , bo             1 + Nos          Los ).

The posterior mean is

                                                       o + Los
                                                                                 ,
                                                   o + o + Nos            Los
 36
     We also tried an MLE approach by estimating a beta-binomial regression of Los on a constant, given observations
Nos , using the canonical logit link function. For 164 of 483 occupations, this procedure yields negative estimates of
o or o , particularly when there are relatively few licensed or total workers in an occupation. We opted to use the
method-of-moments procedure in light of the poor performance of the MLE procedure in small samples.




                                                            80
and the posterior variance is

                                   (o + Los )( o + Nos Los )
                                                                   .
                                (o + o + Nos )2 (o + o + 1 + Nos )

The leave-out results in the text follow immediately. As the mean of the prior distribution is
c
 o /(c    b
      o + o ), and the licensed share is Los /Nos , the empirical Bayes estimate of the licensed share
is a convex combination of the prior mean and the licensed share, with the relative weight on the
licensed share increasing in the number of observations in the state­occupation cell. Notably, as
the sample Nos becomes large, the weights in the posterior shift away from the prior and toward
the data.

E.2    Applying the Correction
We document the consequences of the empirical Bayes adjustment of cell licensed shares. As the
number of observations in a cell increases, the implied weight on the prior declines to zero. In
Figure A7, we see that the adjustment is generally small, and only of consequence for cells with
very few workers. For cells with more than 10 workers, the average absolute dierence between the
raw leave-out-mean and the empirical Bayes estimate is about 0.03. We have truncated Figure A7
at 500 workers to make the small cells visible.

E.3    Additional Controls Used in Robustness Checks
Here we explain the occupation-mix and demographic-mix controls we use in our robustness checks
in Section 6 of the main text, specifically in Table 3.
   Occupation-Mix Control. To explain our procedure, let M be a matrix of employment shares
whose columns are occupations and rows are states. Find the first k principal components of the
submatrix M    o , s ,   which deletes column o and row s . Then, by this rotation, predict the
principal component scores for all occupations but o in the holdout state s, and augment the
matrix of principal component scores with these predicted scores. Using this augmented matrix,
estimate the regression
                                                  X
                                                           k
                                        so  s =                pks + es ,                         (14)
                                                  k

where so s is the share of workers from state s in occupation o and pks is the value of the k th
principal component in s. For the holdout observation (o , s ), predict s
                                                                        [ o s by Equation 14. Repeat
for all (o, s) and use the log predicted value as a control. The resultant data capture the predictable
variation in occupational employment shares across states from employment in other occupations in
that state and correlations across occupations' employments in other states. For example, if some
states with relatively many (few) farmers also tend to have relatively many (few) loggers, we would
expect other states to respect this rural-urban pattern and would want to rule out the possibility



                                                      81
that such patterns are used to identify causal eects of licensing. Our method is a "leave-out"
strategy for predicting relative employment from such correlations.
   We set k = 5, and Figure A8 depicts the results. Each panel of the figure assigns states to equal-
frequency bins according to each of their principal component scores. We see strong regional and
thematic patterns. PC1 is strongly correlated with population density, PC2 is East versus West,
PC3 is North versus South, PC4 is high in the Pacific Coast and Deep South but low elsewhere,
and PC5 is high in the Mid-Atlantic and Southwest but low elsewhere. Our control explains 18
percent of the "within" variation in log employment after state and occupation fixed eects. As
reported in Section 6, we find broadly the same eects of licensing as in our baseline specification.
This confirms that estimated employment eects are not confounded by correlations with broad
features of the state occupational mix.
   Demographic-Mix Control. We predict state­occupation employment levels using a Bartik-like
technique that combines the national occupational employment shares of a demographic group
d 2 {1, . . . , K } and the state shares of population of these demographic groups. For standard
reasons, this predicted employment is formed via a "leave-self-out" method.
   Let Losd be the employment count in occupation o and state s for workers of demographic type
             P             P              P                 P
d. Let Lsd = o Losd , Lod = s Losd , Ld = o Lod and Ls = d Lsd . Then our control is

                                            X                               
                                   d                       Lod       Losd
                                   L os =       Lsd                            .
                                                            Ld       Lsd
                                            d

This control explains about 11 percent of the residual variation in employment after removing state
and occupation fixed eects. Together with the occupation-mix control, about 25 percent of the
residual variation in employment is explained.

E.4     Bias Correction in Estimating Total Variation Distance
With k = 1, . . . , K denoting a level of educational attainment, we define a treatment eect    k   as
the percentage point change in the share of workers with education k that is the causal eect of
licensing. Total variation distance is defined as
                                                       X
                                            TVD =              |   k |.
                                                           k


          [ from estimates c
Computing TVD               k will be biased upward, with the bias increasing in the standard
error   kand decreasing in the absolute value | k |. This is immediate from the case of k = 0 for all
k but c k estimated with any error: Estimated total variation distance is positive when true total
variation distance is zero. Using the truncated normal distribution and unbiased estimators c  k and




                                                      82
ck , the analytical expression for this bias is

                                                     X (| ck |/ ck)
                                   [
                                 E[TVD      TVD] =                  ck.
                                                       (| c
                                                       k   k |/ ck)


                                [ = 0.1194 and E[TVD
In our application, we estimate TVD              [               TVD] = 0.0122, therefore E[TVD] =
0.1072. Our bias-corrected estimate is therefore that 10.72 percent of workers obtained a dierent
level of educational attainment because of licensing than they would have attained absent licensing
requirements. Our uncorrected estimate is biased upward by a factor of 1.11, implying that our
estimate of total variation distance is only slightly inflated by the eect of sampling variance.




                                                  83
References for Appendices
Bolstad, William M and James M Curran, Introduction to Bayesian Statistics, John Wiley
  & Sons, 2016.

Gittleman, Maury, Mark A Klee, and Morris M Kleiner, "Analyzing the Labor Market
  Outcomes of Occupational Licensing," Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society,
  2018, 57 (1), 57­100.

Pizzola, Brandon and Alexander Tabarrok, "Occupational Licensing Causes a Wage Pre-
  mium: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Colorado's Funeral Services Industry," Interna-
  tional Review of Law and Economics, 2017, 50, 50­59.

Shor, Boris and Nolan McCarty, "The Ideological Mapping of American Legislatures," Amer-
  ican Political Science Review, 2011, 105 (3), 530­551.




                                               84
