                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 OPTIMAL POLICY FOR MACRO-FINANCIAL STABILITY

                                         Gianluca Benigno
                                          Huigang Chen
                                        Christopher Otrok
                                        Alessandro Rebucci
                                          Eric R. Young

                                       Working Paper 26397
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26397


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2019




This paper is a substantially revised version of Benigno, Chen, Otrok, Rebucci, and Young
(2012). Earlier versions of this paper also circulated under the title "Optimal Policy with
Occasionally Binding Credit Constraints" and "Optimal Stabilization Policy in a Model with
Endogenous Sudden Stops". We thank numerous seminar and workshop participants and
discussants, as well as Javier Bianchi, Anton Korinek, Enrique Mendoza, and Olivier Jeanne for
comments and numerous discussions. The views expressed in this paper are exclusively those of
the authors and not those of the institutions with which they are affiliated, nor do they necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Young thanks the Bankard Fund
for Political Economy for financial support at various stages of this project.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Gianluca Benigno, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and Eric
R. Young. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Optimal Policy for Macro-Financial Stability
Gianluca Benigno, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and Eric R. Young
NBER Working Paper No. 26397
October 2019
JEL No. E61,F38,F41,G01,G18,H23

                                          ABSTRACT

There is a new and now extensive literature analyzing government policies for financial stability
based on models with endogenous borrowing constraints. These normative analyses often build
upon the concept of constrained efficient allocation, where the social planner is constrained by
the same borrowing limit that agents face. In this paper, we show that the same set of policy tools
that implement the constrained efficient allocation can be used optimally by a Ramsey planner to
replicate the unconstrained allocation, thus achieving higher welfare. We establish this in the
context of a well-known model economy, but the result is relevant whenever the policy
instrument that is assigned to the planner can affect the market price that determines the value of
collateral in the borrowing constraint. The result implies that a robust normative analysis in this
model class requires explicit computations of the Ramsey optimal policy problem.


Gianluca Benigno                                 Alessandro Rebucci
London School of Economics                       Johns Hopkins Carey Business School
Department of Economics                          100 International Drive
Houghton Street                                  Baltimore, MD 21202
London WC2A 2AE ENGLAND                          and NBER
G.Benigno@lse.ac.uk                              arebucci@jhu.edu

Huigang Chen                                     Eric R. Young
Uber Technologies Inc.                           University of Virginia
huigang_chen@yahoo.com                           Department of Economics
                                                 Charlottesville, VA 22904
Christopher Otrok                                USA
Department of Economics                          ey2d@virginia.edu
University of Missouri
Columbia, MO 65211
and Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis
otrokc@missouri.edu
1         Introduction

The recent global financial crisis has stimulated research on macroeconomic models with
financial frictions. One of the most popular approaches builds upon the literature on sudden
stops developed in the seminal work of Mendoza (2002, 2010), where financial frictions take
the form of occasionally binding borrowing constraints. The virtue of this approach is
its ability to distinguish between normal states of the economy (when the constraint is
not binding) and crisis states (when the constraint binds). In particular, the amount of
borrowing that agents are allowed to undertake depends on the value of the collateral that
is determined endogenously by a key market price that enters into the borrowing constraint.
For example, in Mendoza (2002), this key market price is the real exchange rate while in
Mendoza (2010) the key market price is the price of physical capital. The presence of
a market price in the collateral constraint creates a mechanism of financial amplification
known as debt-deflation spiral or asset fire sale which is consistent with empirical features
of sudden stop episodes. From a normative point of view, the presence of a relative market
price in the borrowing constraint generates scope for policy intervention because agents
do not take into account the effects that their choices have on the market price when the
collateral constraint binds. This distortion is usually referred to as pecuniary externality
and several papers have studied the inefficiency associated with it and the corresponding
scope for policy intervention in open and closed economy settings.1
        This paper aims at strengthening the foundations of the normative analysis in this class
of models. In many papers, the normative analysis builds upon the concept of constrained
efficient allocation. The constrained efficient allocation is defined as a social planner prob-
lem in which the planner faces the resource and technological constraints along with the
borrowing limit. The analysis then proceeds by characterizing the constrained efficient al-
location (SP from now on) relative to the competitive equilibrium (CE for brevity) and by
    1
    See for instance, among others, Lorenzoni (2008), Bianchi (2011), Benigno et al. (2013, 2016), Bianchi
and Mendoza (2018), Korinek (2018), and Jeanne and Korinek (2018, 2019).


                                                    2
discussing how to implement it from a decentralized perspective. In this paper, we highlight
a drawback of this approach. In particular, we show that, in a typical specification of the
model economy, the same set of tools that implements the SP allocation from a decentral-
ized perspective can also be used optimally by a Ramsey planner to replicate the allocation
that would arise if the borrowing constraint were not present, i.e. the unconstrained allo-
cation, thereby achieving a much higher level of welfare. This result shows that a standard
Ramsey optimal policy approach is more robust than the SP approach typically used in the
pecuniary externality literature because it attains all the welfare gains that are within reach
of the policy instruments selected. The result highlights also the importance to motivate
the choice of the instrument assigned to the Ramsey planner or used to implement the SP
allocation from the outset of the analysis.
       In our analysis, we focus on a production version of the economy used in Bianchi (2011)
and Korinek (2018), as in Mendoza (2002) and Benigno et al. (2013).2 This is a two-
sector small open economy that produces traded and non-traded goods and in which agents
have limited access to international capital market. From the perspective of the small open
economy, foreign borrowing is denominated in units of the tradable good, but it is leveraged
on income generated in both sectors. Thus, the relative price of non-tradeable good (which
is typically interpreted as the real exchange rate in these models) affects the valuation of
non-tradable income and hence the collateral value.
       We first show that, in this model economy, one particular tax scheme that implements
the SP allocation relies on the use of a tax on tradable consumption and a tax on firm
non-tradable revenues along with lump-sum transfers to firms and the household.3 We find
that this tax scheme is used only when the constraint binds: since private agents cannot
borrow the desired amount, movements in the relative price of non-tradable are inefficient,
and resources are not allocated efficiently between the two sectors of the economy in this
   2
     The use of a production economy, differently from the endowment case, allows us to introduce a gap
between the competitive and the social planner allocation when the constraint binds.
   3
     This tax scheme is neutral in the sense that is does not redistribute resources between households and
firms.


                                                    3
state of the economy. The tax on tradable consumption mitigates the effect of the pecuniary
externality on the borrowing decisions of the agents, while the tax on non-tradable profits
reallocate resources between sectors as needed to restore efficiency.
      Next, we show that the same set of taxes can be used optimally by a Ramsey planner
to achieve the unconstrained equilibrium, that is the allocation in which the borrowing
constraint never binds. In this case, the tax on tradable consumption supports the relative
price of non-tradable consumption in such a way that the borrowing constraint never binds
in equilibrium, while the tax on firm profits ensures that, again, resource are allocated
efficiently across sectors. This result means that a Ramsey optimal policy approach is more
robust than the SP approach often used in the literature because, whenever the policy tool
can affect the price of the collateral, it attains all the welfare gains that are within reach
of the policy instruments selected.
      While we derived our results in the context of a particular model economy, we emphasize
its generality. The same considerations would arise in variations of our setting, including
in alternative frameworks in which the relative price of collateral is an asset price or in
environments in which the borrowing constraint depends on the value of the collateral at
the time of the repayment. Indeed the policy incentive from a Ramsey planner point of
view, conditional on the set of policy tools assigned, is to undo the effects of the borrowing
constraint and to balance this incentive with the distortions created by the use of the policy
tools.
      Our paper relates to several contributions in the literature. In the literature on pecu-
niary externalities in models with endogenous borrowing constraints, the most prominent
examples of adoption of the SP approach are Lorenzoni (2008), Bianchi (2011), Benigno et
al (2013), Davila (2014), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2015), Davila and Korinek (2018),
and Jeanne and Korinek (2018).4 In the model of Lorenzoni (2008), agents are risk neutral
  4
    Examples of normative analyses of pecuniary externalities adopting the Ramsey optimal policy ap-
proach advocated in this paper include Benigno et al. (2012), Bianchi and Mendoza (2018), Devereux,
Young, and Yu (2018) and Jeanne and Korinek (2019).



                                                 4
and the asset price does not depend on the marginal utility of consumption so that it is
not possible to influence it when the constraint is binding, thereby restricting the planner's
ability to intervene only ex-ante.
       Bianchi (2011), Benigno et al. (2016) and Korinek (2018) study an endowment version
of the model economy analyzed in this paper. Bianchi (2011) and Korinek (2018) implement
the SP allocation with a tax on debt and lump-sum transfers, which is usually interpreted as
capital control or macroprudential policy. Benigno et al. (2016) show that, in this economy,
the state-contingent tax on debt that implements the SP allocation is the same as the one
sets by a Ramsey planner that uses the same instrument. This is because, in the case of an
endowment economy, the tax on debt does not affect the relative price that determines the
collateral value so that, when the constraint binds, as long as there are lump-sum transfers,
the solution of the SP planning problem is equivalent to that of the Ramsey policy problem
with the debt tax.5
       Benigno et al (2016) also compares taxes on debt and taxes on consumption with lump-
sum transfers, usually interpreted in terms of exchange rate policy, and show that a subsidy
on non-traded consumption can achieve the unconstrained equilibrium in the endowment
case they analyze. However, the same subsidy cannot implement the SP allocation in that
set up. This is because, in the endowment economy, when the constraint binds, the SP
allocation coincides with the competitive equilibrium one, and since the subsidy on non-
traded consumption operates only when the constraint binds it cannot be used to replicate
the SP allocation. Benigno et al. (2013) analyze the social planner problem of the same
economy studied in this paper, but do not discuss the implementation of the allocation in
a decentralized equilibrium using government taxes and subsidies.
       Davila (2014) and Davila and Korinek (2017) acknowledge that the normative analysis of
models with credit constraints that depend on endogenously determined asset prices hinges
   5
    Bianchi (2011) reports a robustness exercise extending his model to production. However, this is a
production structure in which the only variable input is an inelastically supplied and exogenously priced
imported intermediate good that makes the production economy isomorphic to the endowment case.



                                                   5
on the specific set up of the normative benchmark, but do not compare the constrained
efficient allocation with a Ramsey allocation and focus on the availability of ex-ante or
ex-post transfers.
    Other approaches have focused on welfare-improving government interventions in the
presence of multiple distortions in addition to pecuniary externalities. For instance, Brun-
nermeier and Sannikov (2015) show that restrictions to capital flows can be welfare-improving
in an economy with multiple goods, incomplete financial markets, and inefficient production,
but do not characterize the capital control policy that implements constrained efficiency.
    In an environment with informational frictions, Di Tella (2018) considers a constrained
social planner problem in which the planner is constrained by the same informational friction
that private agents face. Kurlat (2018) also focuses on a SP problem in which the planner
faces the same informational limitations as private agents. He incorporates such friction
into a simplified version of Lorenzoni's (2008) economy and, conducting a similar normative
analysis, finds that the normative conclusions on fire sales are reversed. Neither of these
studies, however, discuss the implementation of the SP allocation with specific policy tools.
    Finally, our result on the ability of a given set of policy tools to undo the underlying
distortions in the economy is reminiscent of the results in the paper by Correia, Nicolini
and Teles (2008), in which the role of price stickiness for the design of monetary policy
depends on the existence of alternative fiscal policy tools.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the model we use and
its competitive equilibrium. Section 3 sets up the social planner problem and discusses its
implementation with an unrestricted set of instruments. Section 4 analyzes the Ramsey
planner problem. Section 5 concludes.



2     The Model and Its Competitive Equilibrium

In this section, we describe briefly our model set-up and discuss its key assumptions.


                                              6
2.1    Households

There is a continuum of households j  [0, 1] that maximize the utility function
                                                                           1-
                                                                                
                                                                     
                                                 1               Htj            
                        U j  E0             t          Ctj -                        ,               (1)
                                  t=0
                                                1-                              


where C j denotes the individual consumption basket and H j the individual supply of labor
for the tradable and non-tradable sectors (H = H T + H N ). The elasticity of labor supply
is  , while  is the coefficient of relative risk aversion. For simplicity, in the remainder of
this section, we omit the j subscript, but it is understood that all choices are made at the
                                                                   1
individual level. In what follows, we assume that  <              1+i
                                                                      ,   where  is the discount factor
and i is the real return on saving between period t and t + 1.
   The consumption basket, Ct , is a composite of tradable and non-tradable goods:

                                                                               
                                  1         -1               1         -1      -1
                        Ct            CtT   
                                                 + (1 -  )       CtN   
                                                                                    .               (2)


The parameter  is the elasticity of intratemporal substitution between consumption of
tradable and nontradable goods, while  is the relative weight of tradable goods in the
consumption basket. We normalize the price of tradable goods to 1. Denoting the relative
price of nontradable goods by P N , the aggregate price index is given by

                                                                       1
                                                                 1-   1-
                              Pt =  + (1 -  ) PtN                          .


   Households maximize utility subject to their budget constraint expressed in units of
tradable consumption:


                      CtT + PtN CtN =  t + Wt Ht - Bt+1 + (1 + i) Bt ,                              (3)


where Wt is the wage in units of tradable goods, Bt+1 < 0 denotes the debt position at

                                                   7
the end of period t with gross real return 1 + i. Households receive profits,  t , from firms'
ownership, and their labor income is Wt Ht .
       International financial markets are incomplete, and access to them is imperfect as in
Mendoza (2002 and 2010). Specifically, the amount that each individual can borrow is
limited by a fraction of his current total income:6

                                               1-
                                     Bt+1  -      [ t + Wt Ht ] .                                   (4)
                                                

Unlike Mendoza (2010) or Bianchi and Mendoza (2018), we abstract from imposing a work-
ing capital requirement as our analysis is analytical rather than quantitative.
       Households maximize (1) subject to (3) and (4) by choosing CtN , CtT , Bt+1 , and Ht . The
first-order conditions of this problem are:

                                               -
                                         H             1       -1    1
                              CT :   Ct - t          CtT            C  = µCE
                                                                          t                         (5)
                                          

                                          -
                                   H                       1    -1       1
                       CN :    Ct - t         (1 -  )  CtN           C  = µCE
                                                                           t Pt
                                                                               N
                                                                                                    (6)
                                    

                               Bt+1 : µCE
                                       t  = CE
                                            t  +  (1 + i) Et µCE
                                                              t+1 ,                                 (7)

and
                                        -
                                  H                                   1-
                      Ht :    Ct - t          Ht-1 = µCE
                                                      t Wt +             Wt CE
                                                                            t ,                     (8)
                                                                       

where µCE
       t  is the multiplier on the period budget constraint, and CE
                                                                 t  is the multiplier on
the international borrowing constraint. The presence of the borrowing constraint distorts
directly two margins: the intertemporal margin, as the Euler equation (7) includes the
term CE
     t  which is positive when the constraint binds, and the labor supply choice (8). For
future reference, note here that we can combine (5) and (6) to obtain the intratemporal
   6
    For an discussion of the nature of the credit constraint we refer to Mendoza (2010), Bianchi (2011),
Jeanne and Korinek (2018) and Bianchi and Mendoza (2018).




                                                   8
allocation of consumption,
                                                        1           1
                                                                   -
                                                (1 -  )  CtN
                                     PtN    =       1        -1         .                    (9)
                                                    (CtT )

2.2    Firms

Firms produce tradable and non-tradable goods with a homogeneous labor input and the
following decreasing return to scale technologies:


                                                  1-           N
                                        YtN = AN
                                               t Ht  ,                                      (10)
                                                  1-          T
                                        YtT = AT
                                               t Ht  ,                                      (11)


where AN and AT are the productivity levels, which are assumed to be random variables,
in the non-tradable and tradable sector, respectively. The firm's problem is static, and
current-period profits ( t ) are:


                                        1-T                         1-N
                        t = AT  T
                             t Ht               + PtN AN
                                                       t HtN                    - Wt Ht .   (12)


The first-order conditions are:


                                                                        -N
                              Wt = 1 - N PtN AN
                                              t HtN                             ;           (13)


                                                                   -T
                                    Wt = 1 - T AT  T
                                                t Ht                        ;               (14)

and taking the ratio of (13) over (14) we obtain:

                                                                    -T
                                             1 -  T AT  T
                                                     t Ht
                                  PtN   =                           -N
                                                                            .               (15)
                                            (1 - N ) AN   N
                                                      t (Ht )


From this last expression we can see that the relative price of non-tradable goods determines
the allocation of labor between the two sectors: for given productivity levels, a decrease



                                                    9
(increase) in PtN drives down (up) the marginal product of non-tradables and induces a
shift of labor toward (out of) the tradable sector.


2.3    Competitive Equilibrium

To determine the goods market equilibrium, combine the household budget constraint (3),
the firm's profits (12), and the equilibrium condition in the nontradable sector to obtain
the current account equation of our economy:


                                                    1-     T
                            Bt+1 = (1 + i) Bt + AT
                                                 t Ht  - CtT .                          (16)


The nontradable equilibrium condition implies that


                                            1-N
                                AN
                                 t HtN            = YtN = CtN .                         (17)


Finally, using (12) we can rewrite (4) as

                                        1- T
                              Bt+1  -     Yt + PtN YtN ,                                (18)
                                         

so that (16) and (18) determines the evolution of Bt+1 .


Definition 1 (Competitive Equilibrium- CE) The competitive equilibrium allocation
of this economy is characterized by (16), (17) and (18) along with the first order conditions
for the household (5), (7), (8) and (9), for the firms (15) and the following complementary
slackness condition:

                            1- T
                   Bt+1 +     Yt + PtN YtN            CE
                                                      t  = 0 with CE
                                                                  t  > 0.
                             




                                              10
2.4        Unconstrained Equilibrium

For later use, it is useful to define here the competitive equilibrium of the same economy
without the borrowing constraint (18). We refer to this allocation as the "unconstrained
equilibrium" (denoted with the U E superscript) and define it formally as follows.


Definition 2 (Unconstrained Equilibrium-UE) The unconstrained allocation of our
economy is defined as a decentralized equilibrium in which households maximize (1) subject
to (2) and (3), and firms maximize profits (12) subject to (10).
        In this allocation financial markets are still incomplete in the sense that there are in-
efficient variations of consumption due to the lack of state contingent debt. To guarantee
that the competitive equilibrium of the unconstrained economy has an ergodic distribution
of debt with finite support under the assumption that  (1 + i) < 1, in what follows, we
assume the existence of a lower bound on debt which is strictly greater than the natural
debt limit.



3         Constrained Efficiency

In this section we follow the social planner approach typically used in the literature. We first
review the characterization of the constrained social planner allocation of our economy (SP
from now on). We then show how this allocation can be implemented from a competitive
equilibrium point of view, which is one of the contribution of this paper.7


3.1        Definition and Analysis

The SP allocation is constrained in the sense that the planner faces the same borrowing
limit that the private agents do, but from an aggregate country-wide perspective. It is
also important to emphasize that this planner does not use any policy instrument, but
    7
    Benigno et al. (2013) do not analyze the implementation of the SP allocation and in their analysis
there are no instruments of government intervention.

                                                 11
simply allocates resources efficiently. The critical aspect of this planner problem is that the
relative price that enters the borrowing constraint, by assumption, is determined by the
same pricing rule (9) used in the competitive equilibrium allocation.


Definition 3 (Constrained Social Planner Problem­SP) The planner chooses the
optimal path of CtT , CtN , Bt+1 , HtT , and HtN by maximizing (1) subject to the resource
constraints (16) and (17), the aggregate borrowing constraint (18), and the pricing rule of
the competitive equilibrium allocation (9).
   Importantly, the planner takes into account the effects of its decisions on PtN , and hence
internalizes the pecuniary externality arising from the presence of this relative price in the
borrowing constraint. To see this, we first rewrite (18) as

                                                                     1                             1
                      1-                  1-T        (1 -  )                             1-N    1- 
             Bt+1   -    AT  T
                          t Ht                  +                 -1         AN
                                                                              t HtN                      ,   (19)
                                                         1
                                                      (CtT )

in which we substituted the production function and (9). The first-order conditions for the
SP problem are:

                                                    -                    1
                                          
                                         Hj,t                C           
                           CT :   Cj,t -                                     = µSP
                                                                                1,t +                        (20)
                                                             CT
                                                                 1-
                                                                                                -1
                SP 1 -  (1 -  )       (1 -  ) CtT                                      1-N      
               - t                                                           AN
                                                                              t    HtN               ,
                                           

                                           -
                                    
                                   Hj,t                      1               -1     1
                    CN :    Cj,t -              (1 -  )  CtN                      C  = µSP
                                                                                        2,t ,                (21)
                                    
                                         SP
                           Bt+1 : µSP
                                   1,t = t  +  (1 + i) Et µSP
                                                           1,t+1 ,                                           (22)
                    -
               H                                                 T           1 -  SP           -T
 HtT   :   Ct - t       Ht-1 = 1 - T µSP   T  -
                                      1,t At Ht +                                 t 1 -  T AT
                                                                                            t Ht  , (23)
                                                                               




                                                    12
and

                                           -
                                  H                                                -N
                    HtN   :   Ct - t           Ht-1 = 1 - N µSP      N
                                                             2,t At Ht                                 (24)
                                   
                                       1
                 1 -  SP (1 -  )   - 1                             -1
                                                                              (1-N ) - 1
                                                                                         -1
               +     t          -1     1 - N                 AN
                                                              t
                                                                   
                                                                        HtN          
                                                                                              ,
                          1
                          (C )T    
                                   t


                                                                                  SP
where µSP                                       SP
       1,t is the Lagrange multiplier on (16), µ2,t is the multiplier on (17) and t  is
the multiplier on (19). Benigno et al. (2013) provide an extensive discussion of these first
order conditions relative to those in the competitive equilibrium. Here we note only that in
equation (20), in choosing tradable consumption, the planner takes into account the effects
that this choice has on the value of the collateral. This is the effect that is usually referred
to in the literature as the "pecuniary externality."


3.2       Implementation with an Unrestricted Set of Instruments

We now discuss how to decentralize the SP allocation with an unrestricted set of policy
instruments. By this we mean that the planner can choose freely from the menu of all policy
tools available in this economy. Thus, before proceeding, we need to discuss the menu of
taxes available in this economy, the government budget, and how these taxes modify the
individual budget, the borrowing constraint and the firm's profit.
       In this economy, one can allow for the following set of instruments: a tax (or subsidy)
on non-tradable and tradable consumption,  N      T
                                           t and  t , respectively, which are usually

interpreted in terms of exchange rate policy because they affect PtN directly; a tax (subsidy)
on the amount that households borrow,  B
                                       t , that is usually interpreted as capital controls;
                                                                                            8


a tax on wage income, denoted with  H , as well as lump-sum taxes (transfers) to the
consumer, denoted TtC , which can be interpreted as traditional fiscal policy tools.                    On
   8
    As Bianchi (2011) and Cesa-Binachi and Rebucci (2017) showed, by introducing a domestic banking
system that intermediates funds borrowed internationally to lend domestically, it is possible to use the
same theoretical framework to analyze macro-financial regulation in terms of taxes on domestic credit flows,
reserve requirements or other macroprudential policy tools. In that context,  Bt is usually interpreted as a
macro-prudential policy tool.

                                                    13
the production side of the economy, one can also allow for sector taxes on firms revenues
rebated in lump-sum manner. We consider a distortionary tax (subsidy) on non-tradable
revenue,  D                                                   D
          t , rebated with a lump-sum transfer to the firm, Tt . A distortionary tax on

tradable revenue could also be considered, but is equivalent to the distortionary tax on
non-tradable revenue. Taxes on revenue can also be interpreted in term of fiscal policy.
      Given this set of instruments, and assuming that the government balances the budget
period by period we have:


                 B        T T    N N N      D N N     H          C    D
                 t Bt+1 +  Ct +  t Pt Ct +  t Pt Yt +  Wt Ht = Tt + Tt .                                (25)


The household budget constraint now is:


 (1 +  T )CtT + (1 +  N )PtN CtN =  t + (1 -  H )Wt Ht - (1 -  B )Bt+1 + (1 + i) Bt + TtC , (26)


while the individual borrowing constraint becomes

                                             1-
                                 Bt+1  -         t + (1 -  H )Wt Ht .                                   (27)
                                              

The firm's profit is now given by:


                                   1-T                               1-N
                   t = AT  T
                        t Ht             + (1 -  D    N N
                                                 t )Pt At HtN              - Wt Ht - TtD .              (28)


      The following proposition characterizes how to decentralize the SP allocation with an
unrestricted set of policy instruments.9


Proposition 1 (Implementation of the SP Allocation). Given the following set of
taxes ( B ,  N ,  T ,  D ,  H , T D , T C ), there exists a combination of policy rules for the subset
of taxes ( T ,  D , T D ,T C ) (for brevity, a tax scheme for this subset of instruments) that
  9
      Note that this result is novel and is neither in Benigno et al 2013 nor in Benigno et al. 2016.


                                                      14
implements the constrained SP allocation in the competitive equilibrium of our economy.
This tax scheme is time consistent.
Proof. To prove the proposition above we seek a tax scheme that equates the first order
conditions of the SP and CE allocations. When the constraint does not bind, it is easy to
see by inspection that the first order conditions of the SP and the CE coincide. Therefore,
there is no need to use any tax tools to equalize them. When the borrowing constraint
binds, we can correct the distortion in the marginal utility of tradable consumption by
using  T
       t . In fact, by comparing (20) with (5), we have

                                                                   1-                                   
                                                                                                   -1
          SP           SPt   1   -  (1 -  )    (1 -  )   CtT                              1-N      
  1 + T
      t        = 1 -    SP
                                                                            AN
                                                                             t HtN                       < 1,
                       µ1,t                        C N


with the right-hand side evaluated at the SP allocation, which is a policy intervention that
                                                                                          SP
subsidizes consumption of tradable goods. Second, by setting  T =  T                           and  N = 0 in
(9), we can also implement the SP intratemporal allocation of consumption given by the
ratio of (20) over (21). Third, note that once we set  B
                                                       t = 0, the intertemporal allocation

of consumption has the same expression for both the SP and the CE, in equations (22) and
(7), respectively. Fourth, note that the intratemporal allocation of labor in the planner
problem is given by:

                                          -T                       1- SP
               µSP     1 -  T AT     T                     1+         t
                2,t             t Ht                                 µSP
                                                                      1,t
                    =                                                                          ,
               µSP
                1,t   (1 - N ) AN   N -
                                t (Ht )
                                        N
                                                           SP
                                                                        1
                                                                  (1- )  (Ct
                                                                           N
                                                                             )
                                                                                    -1
                                                      1-                                 -1
                                                 1+    
                                                            t
                                                           µSP      1           -1       
                                                            2,t         (T
                                                                        Ct      )

obtained from (23) and (24), which governs the sector allocation of labor. The correspond-
ing condition in the competitive allocation is

                                                               -T
                                        1 -  T AT  T
                                                t Ht
                           PtN =                                     -N
                                                                            .
                                   (1 -  D ) (1 - N ) AN   N
                                                       t (Ht )




                                               15
It follows that, by setting  D
                             t such that


                                                                   1- SP
                               1                              1+      t
                                                                     µSP
                                                                      1,t
                                      =
                          (1 -  D )SP                          (1- )  (Ct
                                                                          1
                                                                          N
                                                                            )
                                                                                          -1
                                                        1- SP                                  -1
                                               1+          t
                                                           SP
                                                          µ2,t    1       -  1                 
                                                                   (Ct T
                                                                         ) 

           1
where   (1- D )SP
                    < 1(> 1) depending on the elasticity of intratemporal substitution  > 1(<
1), we can also equalize this margin between the two allocations.
                                                   SP                 SP
   Note, finally, that when we use  D                    and  T               as described above, when the con-
straint binds, we have that (18) can be written as

                                   1-                                SP
                        Bt+1 = -      YtT + (1 -  D
                                                  t                       )PtN YtN - TtD ,
                                    

with                                                                                  1
                                         PtN                  1 -  CtT                
                                                        =                                 .
                                   (1 + ( T )SP )                CtN

In general, therefore, when the constraint binds, the borrowing constraint in the SP will dif-
                                                    SP                 SP
fer from the one in the CE because of  D                    and  T            . So we need to find a combination
of taxes such that
                                              1-                           SP
                               Bt+1 = -          YtT + PtN                        YtN .
                                               
                                   SP
To do so, denote with PtN                the relative price of non-tradable in the social planner
allocation:                                                                   1
                                            SP              1 -  CtT          
                                        PtN        =                              .
                                                               CtN

so that
                                              SP                SP
                                        PtN        (1 +  T           ) = PtN

evaluating the price at the same (SP) allocation. This means that we can set TtD in the




                                                         16
competitive equilibrium allocation such that


                               SP                SP             SP           SP
                         TtD        = - D
                                        t             (1 +  T        ) PtN        YtN .


                                    SP
Thus, the triplet  D ,  T , T D          , with T C satisfying the government budget constraint, will
be sufficient to replicate the SP allocation when the constraint binds.
    The SP problem defined above is recursive. Therefore, the tax scheme { T ,  D , T D , T C }SP
that decentralizes the SP allocation is time-consistent. QED.

    We note here that this proposition shows the existence of one possible tax scheme
implementing the SP allocation, but this is not unique. We focus on this particular tax
scheme to highlight the fragility of the SP approach to the normative analysis of models
with endogenous borrowing constraints that depend on market prices. Second, from the
expressions of the policy rules for  T ,  D , T D , T C plotted in 1 Figure 1, we also can see that
these taxes are used only when the constraint binds and should be interpreted as ex-post
interventions in the sense of Benigno et al. (2016) and Jeanne and Korinek (2019).
    As we can see, the tax scheme entails a subsidy on tradable goods and a tax on non-
tradable revenue. The subsidy on tradable goods makes agents internalize the pecuniary
externality. The tax on non-tradable revenue affects the intratemporal sector allocation of
labor. Thus, by correcting the allocation of labor across sectors, the planner can relax the
borrowing constraint when it binds by increasing the amount that it is produced in each
sector.



4     Ramsey Optimal Policy

Thus far we saw that there exists a time-consistent tax scheme that can implement the
constrained social planner allocation of our model economy. We will now show that the
same subset of tools can be used optimally by a Ramsey planner to undo the constraint


                                                       17
                                                    Figure 1



                          0.15




                           0.1




                          0.05
           (D,T,TD)(t)




                            0




                         -0.05




                          -0.1



                                                                                             D
                         -0.15
                                                                                             T
                                                                                             TD

                          -0.2
                                 -1.2   -1.1   -1      -0.9        -0.8   -0.7       -0.6         -0.5
                                                            B(t)

         Notes: The figure plots the policy rules for  T ,  D , and T D that implement the
         constrained efficient allocation. The plot assumes the same set of parameter values
         used by Benigno et a. (2013). Note that T C is not plotted because it is determined
         from the government budget constraint. Borrowing decreases from left to right on
         the x-axis.


and thus achieve a higher level of welfare.
       In a standard Ramsey problem, the planner maximizes the representative agent's utility
given the resource constraint, the technological constraints, and the competitive allocation
first order conditions for a given set of policy instruments. In order to compare the two
approaches, we assign to the the Ramsey planner the same subset of policy tools that
implement the SP allocation,  T ,  D , T D , T C .10
  10
     See Benigno et al. (2012) for the numerical solution of this problem and a quantitative characterization
of some of the policy tools discussed here by taking a Ramsey time-consistent optimal policy approach.




                                                       18
Definition 4: Ramsey Planner Problem For a given {B0 } , and assuming that {AT
                                                                             t }

and {AN
      t } are Markov processes with finite strictly positive support, the Ramsey problem

for  T ,  D , T D , T C is to choose a competitive equilibrium that maximizes

                                                                                 1-
                                                                                      
                                                                              
                                                          1               Htj         
                                U j  E0              t         Ctj -                     ,
                                          t=0
                                                         1-                           


subject to (2), the agents resource constraints


                 (1 +  T )CtT + PtN CtN =  t + Wt Ht - Bt+1 + (1 + i) Bt + TtC ,                                (29)


the firms' definition of profits


                                    1-T                                       1-N
                 t = AT  T
                      t Ht                   + (1 -  D    N N
                                                     t )Pt At HtN                   - Wt Ht - TtD               (30)


the government budget constraint


                                        T   T    D N N         C    D
                                        t C t +  t P t Y t = Tt + Tt ,




 the technological constraints (10) and (11), the non-tradeable goods market equilibrium
condition (17), the borrowing constraint (18) the first order conditions of the household,

                                                 -
                                        Ht            1       -1    1
                                 Ct -                  CtT         C  = µCE      T
                                                                         t (1 +  t )                            (31)
                                        

                                                -
                                        Ht                1          -1    1
                                Ct -                (1 -  )  CtN          C  = µCE
                                                                                t Pt
                                                                                    N
                                                                                                                (32)
                                        
                     -                                                                         -
                                             1
                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                         
                Ht          1       -1                                                  
                                                                                       Ht             1        -1
         Ct -    
                                 CtT      Ct 
                                                                      Ct+1 -            
                                                                                          +1
                                                                                                          CtT
                                                                                                            +1      Ct+1 
                                                                                                                     

Bt+1 :                                           = CE
                                                   t  +  (1 + i ) E t                                                    ,
                     (1 +  T
                           t )                                                               (1 +  T
                                                                                                   t+1 )

                                                                                                                (33)



                                                          19
                                                  -      1       -1       1
                                             Ht
                  Ht
                       -              Ct -    
                                                         CtT          Ct             1-
           Ct -             Ht-1 =                                            Wt +      Wt CE
                                                                                           t .   (34)
                                                  (1 +   T
                                                         t )                          

and the first order conditions of the firms,


                                                                          -N
                            Wt = (1 -  D
                                       t ) 1-
                                              N
                                                PtN AN
                                                     t HtN                      ,                (35)


                                                                 -T
                                  W t = 1 -  T AT  T
                                                t Ht                  ,                          (36)

   Before proceeding, recall that, by taking the ratio of (32) to (31), we obtain

                                                             1     1
                                                                  -
                                    PtN       (1 -  )  CtN
                                            =            -1
                                                                                                 (37)
                                 (1 +  Tt )
                                                   1
                                                   (CtT ) 

and by substituting (28), (11) and (17), the borrowing constraint becomes:

                            1 -  T T 1-T
                  Bt+1 +         At (Ht ) + (1 -  D    N N
                                                  t )Pt Ct - Tt
                                                               D
                                                                 = 0.
                              

The next proposition states the main result of the paper.


Proposition 2. Given the set of taxes (  T ,  D , T D , T C ) to the Ramsey planner as in
definition (4) above, there exists an optimal time-consistent tax scheme that replicates the
UE allocation.
   Proof. To see this, we will first find the tax scheme for the assigned set of tools that
implements the UE allocation. We then prove this is Ramsey optimal and time-consistent.
Focus first on the tradable good tax,  T
                                       t , as a policy tool that can undo the borrowing
                                  N,CE              N,U E                   N,CE N
constraint. Let  T
                 t be such that Pt     = (1 +  T
                                               t )Pt      , with TtD =  D
                                                                        t Pt    Ct , so that
the borrowing constraint is not binding


                  UE       1 -  T T,U E 1-T              N,U E N,U E
                 Bt +1 +        At (Ht )    + (1 +  T
                                                    t )Pt     Ct     > 0.
                             


                                                  20
However, since  T
                t affects also the intertemporal allocation of resources (33), we need to

find a constant  T
                 t such that the intertemporal margin is not distorted.

   To do so, we first note that, by setting CE
                                            t   0 and  T
                                                       t so that


                                                           U N )C U N
                                                       u (Ct +1    T
                                                                  Ct+1
                                         (1 + r)Et         1+ T
                                                              t+1
                                1
                                    =                                    ,                  (38)
                             1 + Tt         Et [u (CtU N  UN
                                                     +1 )CC T ]
                                                              t+1




the Euler equations of the Ramsey problem and the unconstrained equilibrium coincide. It
follows that the tax rate  T
                           t that satisfies (33) must be constant, otherwise the intertemporal

margin would be distorted. Note now that, by inspection of the UE allocation, the non-
tradable price has a strictly positive lower limit. Therefore, there exists a lower bound of  T ,
 T , compatible with the strictly positive lower limit on the relative price of non-tradables,
such that the borrowing constraint (18) is always satisfied for any  T             T . Thus, any
constant tax policy of the form  T
                                 t  
                                     T
                                                T can be part of the tax schedule replicating
the UE allocation.
   Now, if the borrowing constraint is not binding, CE
                                                    t  = 0, so that all the other equilib-
rium conditions will be identical to those in the UE allocation, except for the one deter-
mining the labor demand in the non-tradable sector, which is affected by PtN . Indeed we
have that:

                                                                             -N
                     WtCE   = (1 -   D
                                     t )   1-   N
                                                     PtN,CE AN
                                                             t      HtN,CE
                                                                    N
                     WtU E = (1 - N )PtN,U E AN   N,U E -
                                              t (Ht    )  .


Since PtN,CE = (1 +  T
                     t )Pt
                          N,U E
                                , if we set  D
                                             t such that



                                                        1
                                     (1 -  D
                                           t ) =              ,
                                                    (1 +  T
                                                          t )



we will have WtCE = WtU E because, when evaluated at the unconstrained equilibrium,


                                               21
                                                       N,U E N
the two taxes cancel each other. Given that TtD =  D
                                                   t Pt     Ct , the government budget
constraint can always clear by using TtC so that


                                        T,U E       N,U E N,U E
                              TtC =  T
                                     t Ct     + D
                                                t Pt     Yt     - TtD .


Since the labor demand in the non-tradeable sector is the only condition indirectly distorted
by  T                             T    D     D    C
    t , the tax scheme above for  t ,  t , Tt , Tt achieves the UE allocation.

       Note now that, given the assigned policy tools, the Ramsey planner has no incentive
to deviate from the tax scheme above at any point in time. In fact, all welfare gains that
can be reached have been achieved because there are no additional instruments that can be
used to complete the markets:  T
                               t is used to undo the constraint, while all other available

tools are used to undo the distortions created by  T
                                                   t . Therefore, the tax scheme above for

T    D     D    C
t ,  t , Tt , Tt is Ramsey optimal and also time consistent. QED

       Importantly, note here that the quadruplet ( T    D     D    C
                                                    t ,  t , Tt , Tt ) is the same set of taxes

that decentralize the constrained social planner allocation. The critical difference is that
when used optimally by the Ramsey planner, they can undo the constraint altogether, while
the constrained social planner takes the borrowing constraint as given. Under the optimal
Ramsey policy,  T
                t removes the borrowing constraint altogether by affecting directly the

market value of collateral entering it, PtN , while  D                                     T
                                                     t offsets the distortions created by  t .

So if we allow a Ramsey planner to optimize over ( T    D
                                                   t ,  t ), given the behavior of the private

sector, it is possible to replicate the unconstrained equilibrium in this economy. This result
implies that, in the SP allocation, the tax scheme ( T    D
                                                     t ,  t ) is suboptimal in the sense that

it does not achieves all the welfare gains that could be attained by using the same set of
instruments.11
       Second, the policy rule for  T can be interpreted as a price support intervention, akin to
  11
     Note that Benigno et al (2016) shows that, in an endowment version of this economy, a tax on tradable
or non tradable consumption can achieve the UE allocation of that economy. However, they do not show
that the same set of policy instruments that can implement the SP, can also achieve a higher level of welfare
if used optimally, as we show in this paper.


                                                     22
an exchange rate intervention or an attempt to prop up the price of collateral. By taxing
tradable goods, this policy increases the relative price of non-tradable goods. Critically,
when the constraint binds, this supports the relative price of non-tradables, counteracting
the debt-deflation spiral that would otherwise lead to a decline in tradable consumption
and a fall in the relative price of nontradables.
    Third, in equilibrium agents anticipate that policy will undo the constraint when this
binds, and behave as if the constraint does not exist (i.e., like in the UE allocation). Even-
tually, in finite time, our economy will hit the borrowing constraint because agents are rel-
atively impatient. When that happens, under the Ramsey optimal policy, ( T    D     D    C
                                                                         t ,  t , Tt , Tt )

will be set so that the multiplier on the borrowing constraint is zero (i.e., the constraint is
just binding).
    Finally, the result arises from the instrument's ability to affect the price of collateral on
which the borrowing constraint is specified and therefore it has fairly general applicability.
The substance of our main result would not change if we modify the borrowing constraint
to include a working capital component, or if we consider a collateral constraint defined on
an asset price, as long as the instrument assigned to the policy maker can affect the price
of collateral when the borrowing constraint binds.



5     Conclusions

In this paper we show that, in models with occasionally binding borrowing constraints in
which the collateral value depends on market prices, the same combination of instruments
that implements the constrained efficient allocation can also be used optimally by a Ram-
sey planner to achieve the unconstrained equilibrium where the constraint never binds in
equilibrium. We established this in the context of a specific, widely used, model economy,
but the results have more general applicability. The result in fact applies whenever a pol-
icy instrument that is assigned to the planner can affect the market price determining the


                                               23
value of the collateral in the borrowing constraint. The result implies a potential lack of
robustness of any policy conclusion reached by adopting the constrained efficient allocation
as a benchmark for the normative analysis in this class of models. This implies that a ro-
bust normative analysis in this class models requires explicit computations of the Ramsey
optimal policy problems.




                                            24
References

 [1] Bianchi, J. (2011), "Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle,"
    American Economic Review 101(7), pp. 3400-3426.

 [2] Bianchi, J. and E.G. Mendoza (2018), ""Optimal Time-Consistent Macroprudential
    Policy,"," Journal of Political Economy 126, no. 2 (April 2018): 588-634.

 [3] Benigno, G., H. Chen, C. Otrok, A. Rebucci, and E.R. Young (2013), "Financial Crises
    and Macro-Prudential Policies," Journal of International Economics, Vol. 89(2), pp.
    453-470.

 [4] Benigno, G., H. Chen, C. Otrok, A. Rebucci, and E. R. Young (2016). "Capital Con-
    trols or Exchange Rate Policy? A Pecuniary Externality Perspective." Journal of
    Monetary Economics, Vol. 84, pp. 147-165.

 [5] Brunnermeier, M. and Sannikov, Y. (2015) "International Credit Flows and Pecuniary
    Externality", American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7.1 (2015): 297-338.

 [6] Cesa-Bianchi A. and A. Rebucci (2017), "Does Easing Monetary Policy Increase Fi-
    nancial Stability?"Journal of Financial Stability, Vol. 30, pp. 111-125, 2017.

 [7] Correia, I., J. P. Nicolini, P. Teles (2008) "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy: Equiv-
    alence Results", Journal of Political Economy 168, 1, pp.141-170.

 [8] Davila E. (2014), "Dissecting Fire Sales Externalities", Manuscript, New York Univer-
    sity and Yale University.

 [9] Davila E. and A. Korinek (2018), "Pecuniary Externalities in Economies with Financial
    Frictions", The Review of Economic Studies, Volume 85, Issue 1, pp. 352-395.

[10] Devereux, M. B., E. R. Young, and C. Yu (2018): "Capital Controls and Monetary
    Policy in Sudden-stop Economies,"Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

                                             25
[11] Di Tella S. (2019), "Optimal Regulation of Financial Intermediaries" American Eco-
    nomic Review, 109(1): pp. 271-313.

[12] Jeanne, O. and A. Korinek (2018), "Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A Pigouvian
    Taxation Approach,", Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

[13] Jeanne, O. and A. Korinek (2019), "Macroprudential Regulation versus Mopping Up
    after the Crash", Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

[14] Korinek, A. (2018), "Capital Flows to Emerging Markets: An Externality View ",
    Journal of International Economics 111, pp. 61-80.

[15] Kurlat P. (2018), "How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Fire Sales", Manuscript,
    Stanford University.

[16] Lorenzoni, G. (2008), "Inefficient Credit Booms," Review of Economic Studies 75(3),
    pp. 809-833.

[17] Mendoza, E. G. (2002). "Credit, Prices, and Crashes: Business Cycles with a Sud-
    den Stop." In Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, edited by Sebastian
    Edwards and Jeffrey A. Frankel, 335-392. National Bureau of Economic Research.

[18] Mendoza, E.G. (2010), "Sudden Stops, Financial Crises and Leverage: A Fisherian
    Deflation of Tobin's Q,"American Economic Review 100(5), pp. 1941-1966.




                                          26
