                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          GIVE ME YOUR TIRED, YOUR POOR, YOUR HIGH-SKILLED LABOR:
           H-1B LOTTERY OUTCOMES AND ENTREPRENEURIAL SUCCESS

                                      Stephen G. Dimmock
                                          Jiekun Huang
                                       Scott J. Weisbenner

                                       Working Paper 26392
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26392


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




We thank Yunju Cha, Yu Sheng Loh, and Chunxue Yang for excellent research assistance. For
helpful comments we thank Kai Li, Tim McQuade, seminar participants at Australia National
University, and participants at the Western Finance Association Conference and the Red Rock
Finance Conference. All opinions expressed are those of the authors and not the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26392.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Stephen G. Dimmock, Jiekun Huang, and Scott J. Weisbenner. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Give Me Your Tired, Your Poor, Your High-Skilled Labor: H-1B Lottery Outcomes and
Entrepreneurial Success
Stephen G. Dimmock, Jiekun Huang, and Scott J. Weisbenner
NBER Working Paper No. 26392
October 2019
JEL No. D22,G24,G32,J23,J24,J61,O3

                                           ABSTRACT

We study how access to high-skill labor affects the outcomes of start-up firms. We obtain
exogenous variation in firms' ability to access skilled labor by using win rates in H-1B visa
lotteries. Relative to other firms that also applied for H-1B visas, firms with higher lottery win
rates are more likely to receive additional venture capital funding and to have a successful exit
via an IPO or acquisition. H-1B visa lottery winners also subsequently receive more patents and
patent citations. Overall, our results show that access to high-skill labor is a critical determinant
of success for start-up firms.

Stephen G. Dimmock                                     Scott J. Weisbenner
Division of Finance and Banking                        University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Nanyang Technological University                       Department of Finance
Singapore                                              340 Wohlers Hall, MC-706
dimmock@ntu.edu.sg                                     1206 South Sixth Street
                                                       Champaign, IL 61820
Jiekun Huang                                           and NBER
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign             weisbenn@illinois.edu
Department of Finance
340 Wohlers Hall, MC-706
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
huangjk@illinois.edu
       There is considerable debate about the desirability of allowing high-skill foreign workers

to enter the country. Proponents argue that there is a shortage of high-skilled labor, creating a

need for foreign workers. Accordingly, access to high-skilled foreign workers may benefit

domestic firms, increasing investment and innovation. Yet, critics contend that, instead of filling

a skill gap, foreign workers merely displace American workers and have little effect on

investment and innovation by firms. Despite the intense debate, there is little evidence on the

effect of high-skill foreign workers on firm-level outcomes.

        In the United States, firms can access high-skill foreign workers through the H-1B visa

system. For each federal government fiscal year, there is a fixed quota of H-1B visas available

to for-profit firms. 1 During years in which the demand for H-1B workers exceeds the available

quota, the visas are allocated through a "lottery." 2 These H-1B visa lotteries provide an ideal

setting to identify the causal effect of highly skilled foreign workers on the success of firms. By

exogenously varying the supply of H-1B visas across firms that are ex ante similar, these

lotteries enable us to isolate the effect of high-skilled foreign labor on firms' outcomes from

confounding factors.

        In this paper, we exploit exogenous variation in firms' H-1B visa lottery outcomes to

identify how access to high-skill foreign workers affects the success of start-up firms. For such

firms, high-skill workers can contribute to the success of the firm by increasing productivity and

innovation as start-ups often depend heavily on the human capital of their employees. If high-




1
  The H-1B visa quota does not apply to hiring by universities and certain non-profit organizations. In this paper,
we study for-profit firms that are subject to the quota.
2
  U.S. Citizenship and immigration Services uses "a computer-generated random selection process" to allocate H-1B
visas when applications exceed the quota. For example, see https://www.uscis.gov/news/alerts/uscis-completes-h-
1b-cap-random-selection-process-fy-2019.

                                                        1
skilled foreign workers are important for the development of start-up firms, other things equal,

access to foreign talent should lead to better firm outcomes.

        The success or failure of start-ups has significant economy-wide implications, making

this an important group of firms to study. First, most large firms started as small firms and this

paper thus examines how important obtaining high-skill labor is to entrepreneurial success.

Second, innovation and technological progress are key drivers of economic growth (Romer,

1990; Aghion and Howitt, 1992). Work dating back to Schumpeter (1942) highlights the

importance of start-ups in generating innovation and disruptive technologies. More recently,

Gourio, Messer, and Siemer (2016) highlight how the number of start-ups in a region has an

important role in explaining the region's long-term economic development.

        We construct a sample of start-up firms in the Crunchbase dataset that filed H-1B

petitions for government fiscal years in which all non-cap-exempt H-1B visas were awarded

through lotteries. We find that the H-1B lottery win rate positively predicts the likelihood of

receiving external financing during the next three years. 3 This result is robust to controlling for

firm characteristics, such as the amount raised in prior funding rounds, the number of H-1B

applications, and the average salary of the H-1B petitions. We further control for industry-city-

year fixed effects, ensuring that our results are relevant for comparable firms. The economic

magnitude of the result is large. For example, a one standard deviation increase in the win rate is

associated with a 4.3 percentage point increase in the likelihood that the firm receives subsequent

external funding (a 10% increase relative to the baseline funding rate). Strikingly, the magnitude

of this effect is little changed by the inclusion of controls or various fixed effects, indicating that



3
  By "external financing" we simply mean external, private equity investment obtained by the firm. A vast majority
of this is funding by venture capitalists. We also examine how H-1B lottery outcomes are related to subsequent
funding from high-reputation venture capital firms.

                                                        2
the outcome of H-1B visa lotteries is indeed random and uncorrelated with observable firm

characteristics.

        The key identification assumption for our results is that a company's H-1B lottery win

rate is exogenous to the quality of the firm and its prospects. This assumption appears

reasonable, as the U.S. Citizenship and immigration Services (USCIS) states that it uses "a

computer-generated random selection process" to select H-1B visa applications in the years

included in our sample. Nevertheless, as a test of the key identifying assumption, we regress the

H-1B lottery win rate on firm and application characteristics. Consistent with H-1B visa lottery

outcomes being random, we fail to find that lottery outcomes are significantly related to firm and

application characteristics.

        Because exit through IPOs or acquisitions is commonly used as a measure of success for

start-up firms (e.g., Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu, 2007; Sørensen, 2007; Kerr, Lerner, and

Schoar, 2014; Bernstein, Giroud, and Townsend, 2016), we examine the effect of H-1B visa

lottery outcomes on the probability of a successful exit. We find that firms with higher win rates

are significantly more likely to have a successful exit. The economic magnitude of this result is

large. For example, a one standard deviation increase in the win rate is associated with a 2.9

percentage point increase in the probability of a successful exit over a five-year period following

the lottery, representing a 20% increase relative to the baseline exit rate.

        Because going public is the most desirable outcome for start-up firms (e.g., Brau, Francis,

and Kohers, 2003), we further examine the effect of H-1B visa lottery outcomes on the

probability of having an IPO. We find that firms with higher win rates in the H-1B lottery are

significantly more likely to go public. For example, a one standard deviation increase in the win




                                                  3
rate is associated with a 1.5 percentage point increase in the probability of an IPO, representing a

23% increase relative to the baseline IPO rate over a five-year window following the lottery.

       We next examine one possible mechanism through which high-skill foreign workers

could affect the outcomes of start-up firms ­ through their contribution to innovation. To test

this, we match firms in our sample with patent data from the United States Patent and Trademark

Office (USPTO) and construct four measures of innovation performance: the number of patents,

the adjusted number of patents, the number of adjusted citations, and the average number of

adjusted citations per patent. We find that the win rate in the H-1B visa lottery has a significant

positive effect on innovation outcomes across the four measures. The economic magnitudes of

the results are nontrivial. For example, a one standard deviation increase in the win rate is

associated with a 4.8% increase in the number of patents and a 4.0% in the number of adjusted

patent citations. These results suggest that highly skilled foreign workers contribute to the

innovation success of start-up firms.

       Our paper contributes to the literature on the economic impacts of high-skilled foreign

workers. Kerr and Lincoln (2010) show that increases in the H-1B admission cap (at the national

level) lead to increased patenting by Indians and Chinese in cities and firms that are more

dependent on the H-1B program. However, using H-1B visa lotteries in two fiscal years during

which only a small fraction of the visas are allocated through lotteries, Doran, Gelber, and Isen

(2016) find that winning H-1B visas has insignificant or modest effects on firms' patenting, and

that the H-1B workers crowd out domestic workers. Peri, Shih, and Sparber (2015) show that

negative shocks in the supply of H-1B visas induced by the lotteries at the city level lead to

reduced employment growth in both foreign and domestic-born workers, suggesting a

complementarity between the two. Our paper complements the existing studies by using the



                                                 4
variation in the supply of H-1B visas at the firm level for four years when all H-1B visas are

allocated through lotteries and focusing on the funding and patenting outcomes of start-up firms.

       Our paper also complements studies such as Kerr, Lerner, and Schoar (2014) and Howell

(2017) that provide evidence of the causal effects of angel financing and government R&D

subsidies, respectively, on the outcomes of start-up firms. Both papers identify causal effects by

exploiting internal rankings of agents who provide funding to start-ups. As Kerr, Lerner, and

Schoar (2014) highlight, identifying causal determinants of entrepreneurial success has proven a

challenge for the literature. Our paper highlights, through exogenous random assignment, the

importance of high-skilled labor to start-up firm outcomes, including economically large effects

on the patenting outcomes, the likelihood of obtaining subsequent financing, and having an IPO.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 discusses the background on H-

1B visa lotteries. Section 2 describes our data sources and reports summary statistics. Section 3

evaluates the validity of our win rate variable. Section 4 presents our main empirical results.

Section 5 examines the dynamics of the effects of H-1B lottery wins over time. Section 6

presents results for patenting outcomes, and Section 7 concludes.


1. Background on H-1B Visas

       The purpose of the H-1B visa is to allow U.S. employers to hire skilled foreign workers

in specialty occupations "that requires (a) theoretical and practical application of a body of

highly specialized knowledge and (b) attainment of a bachelor's or higher degree in the specific

specialty (or its equivalent) as a minimum for entry into the occupation in the United States"

(U.S.C. 1184(i)(1)). An H-1B visa permits the holder to work in the U.S. for three years,

renewable once for an additional three years (maximum total of six years), and the employer can

sponsor the H-1B visa holder for permanent residency.

                                                 5
         For an individual to receive an H-1B visa they must have an offer of employment from a

U.S. firm. The firm must file a Labor Condition Application (LCA) with the Department of

Labor, stating that the employment offer complies with the requirements of the H-1B visa

program. 4 The LCA includes information about the firm, such as its name, address, and industry.

The LCA also includes information about the position, such as the salary and starting date. If the

Department of Labor certifies the LCA, the potential employee may apply for an H-1B visa by

submitting an I-129 petition to U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS).

         The number of H-1B visas available to for-profit firms is capped in each federal

government fiscal year (beginning on October 1 and ending September 30 of the subsequent

year). During our sample period, the quota of available new H-1B visas was capped at 65,000

per fiscal year (the regular cap), with an additional quota of 20,000 H-1B visas available for

individuals who hold a master's degree or Ph.D. from an eligible and accredited U.S. based

university (the master's cap). The quotas apply only for new H-1B applications (not renewals or

transfers between employers) made by for-profit firms (e.g., not-for-profit universities are not

subject to the cap).

         LCAs can be filed up to six months before the employment starting date and typically

take about a week to be approved. The USCIS begins processing applications on April 1 for

positions beginning in October of that year, and continues to process applications until that

year's quota has been filled. Figure 1 illustrates the timeline of the application process. Because

of the sequential approval process, firms frequently "pre-date" LCA applications by filing LCAs




4
  In addition to ensuring that the H-1B applicant would work in a specialty occupation, the employer must attest
that: the applicant would be paid at least the "prevailing wage" for similarly positions in the geographic area; the
applicant will not displace or negatively affect similarly employed U.S. workers; and the firm is not involved in a
strike, lockout, or work stoppage. Further, the firm must also post the LCA at the firm's place of business in at least
two clearly visible locations. See https://www.foreignlaborcert.doleta.gov/faqsanswers.cfm#h1b_programs.

                                                           6
prior to April 1, giving a start date that is 180 days in the future. For example, an LCA filed on

March 1, 2014 for new employment would specify a start date of August 28, 2014 (although the

effective start date is the start of the government fiscal year, i.e., October 1, 2014) and an end

date of August 27, 2017. Pre-dated and approved LCAs can then be used to file I-129 petitions

immediately at the beginning of April. The cost of pre-dating is that the firm loses one or two

months at the end of the desired work period as LCAs are valid for a maximum of three years.

See Peri, Shih, and Sparber (2015) for further discussion of pre-dating.

            For fiscal years 2008, 2009, and each fiscal year beginning from 2014 onward, all new

H-1B visas were allocated by USCIS lotteries using "a computer-generated random selection

process," because the quota of available H-1B visas was oversubscribed within the filing period

(i.e., the first five business days of the April preceding the fiscal year). 5 In other years, because

the cap was reached after the filing period, the majority of the visas were granted on a first-

come-first-served basis. In each year when the cap was reached within the filing period, USCIS

first conducted a lottery to assign the 20,000 H-1B visas available under the master's cap. After

this lottery, the unselected applicants from the master's cap lottery are pooled with the applicants

who are not eligible for the master's cap, and a second lottery is conducted to assign the

remaining 65,000 H-1B visas. Thus, individuals eligible for the master's cap pool have a higher

probability of receiving an H-1B visa relative to ineligible applicants. Applications that are not

selected in either lottery are then returned unopened, and USCIS does not retain records of the

unselected applicants (see Clemens, 2013; Peri, Shih, and Sparber, 2015).




5
    For example, see https://www.uscis.gov/news/alerts/uscis-completes-h-1b-cap-random-selection-process-fy-2019.

                                                         7
2. Data and Variables

       Our study combines data from multiple sources. We obtain data on H-1B visa

applications and approvals from the Department of Labor and U.S. Citizenship and Immigration

Services (USCIS). We obtain data on a set of private start-up companies from Crunchbase.

Finally, we obtain data on patents from the public use PatentsView data files, made available by

the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO).

       To construct our sample of firm-fiscal year observations, we begin with the set of

Crunchbase firms that meet the following criteria: (1) the firm is a private firm as of the April 1

preceding the federal government fiscal year, (2) it has completed at least one round of external

financing, and (3) the dollar amount of the prior external financing is available. Using firm

names and addresses, we match the Crunchbase firms to the H-1B data and retain the firms that

applied for at least one H-1B visa for fiscal years 2008, 2009, 2014, and 2015. There are 1,866

unique firms meeting these criteria and 2,570 firm-year observations. Consistent with prior

studies using the Crunchbase data, such as Wang (2017), the firms in our sample are

concentrated in a few states: 49% in California, 10% in Massachusetts, and 9% in New York.


2.1. H-1B Visa Data

       We obtain data on approved H-1B applications from USCIS through a Freedom of

Information Act (FOIA) request. Our analyses focus on fiscal years 2008, 2009, 2014, and 2015,

because in these fiscal years all new H-1B visas were granted through lotteries. In contrast, for

fiscal years 2010-2013 there was less demand for new H-1B visas and most applications were

not subject to a lottery. The data provide the number of new H-1B petitions (i.e., petitions for

initial employment) that are approved by USCIS for each employer in each government fiscal




                                                 8
year. Since the USCIS does not retain records of the unselected H-1B petitions (see Clemens,

2013), we obtain information on H-1B applications from an alternative data source.

        We obtain data on firms' Labor Condition Applications (LCA) from the Department of

Labor. 6 The data provide detailed information for each prospective foreign worker, including

job information such as salary and the intended starting and ending dates; employer information

such the firm's name, address, and NAICS code; and the status of the application (i.e., whether it

is certified, withdrawn, or denied). We use the number of certified (and not withdrawn) LCAs

for H-1B visas filed by a firm in February and March with a start date that is five to six months

in the future as a proxy for the firm's demand for new H-1B workers in the upcoming fiscal

year. 7 Table 1 shows that the average firm-year in the sample applies for 2.5 H-1B visas. Figure

2 shows that 58% of the sample applies for a single visa and only 6.6% apply for more than five.

        We create our key explanatory variable, Win Rate, defined as the number of approved

new H-1B visas divided by the number of applications. Table 1 shows the average Win Rate for

firms in the sample is 55%. Based on USCIS press releases, the overall H-1B lottery win rate for

the four years in our sample is approximately 56.6%. 8 Thus, the Win Rate in our sample of start-

up firms is comparable to that in the full sample. Panel A of Figure 3 shows a histogram of Win

Rate. As would be expected from the fact that most firms in our sample apply for only a single

visa, the observations are clustered at zero and one. The distribution of Win Rate highlights an

important advantage of focusing on a sample of small firms ­ with few applications there is a

large dispersion in Win Rate. In contrast, for firms with a large number of applications their Win

Rate will tend to the sample average by the law of large numbers.


6
  The data are available at https://www.foreignlaborcert.doleta.gov/performancedata.cfm.
7
  See Section 3.2 for a detailed discussion of our choice of the screens.
8
  See https://www.uscis.gov/archive. The USCIS reports approximate application numbers rounded to the nearest
thousand.

                                                       9
        In the LCA filing, companies are required to state the salary offered to the H-1B visa

applicant. For companies that file multiple LCAs in a given fiscal year, we take the average of

the reported salaries. As Table 1 shows, the average (median) salary offered to the H-1B

applicants is $85,100 ($80,000).


2.2. Crunchbase Data

        We obtain data on start-up firms from Crunchbase, a crowd-sourced database that tracks

events related to start-up companies, especially those in high-tech sectors. 9 As of April 2019, the

dataset covers over 233,000 firms and more than 366,000 events (including private funding

rounds, IPOs, and acquisitions). For each start-up firm, Crunchbase provides the name, address,

and industry of the firm, as well as detailed information on the events (e.g., the date, type, and

amount of a funding round, and the date of an IPO or acquisition). To ensure the Crunchbase

data for the firm is sufficiently detailed and to avoid introducing a look-ahead bias, we limit our

sample to firms that are already in the Crunchbase data at the time of the lottery (i.e., those that

have completed at least one prior round of external financing and report the dollar amount of

prior external financing). Because our focus is on start-ups, we exclude firms that have already

gone public. We then match firms in the Crunchbase data with employers in our H-1B data

using names and addresses.

        A number of recent studies examine the Crunchbase data and its reliability. Dalle, den

Besten, and Menon (2017) compare the Crunchbase database with the OECD Entrepreneurship

Financing Database and with the VentureXpert database, and conclude that "...the coverage is

very comprehensive, especially for start-ups located in the United States." Ling (2016) manually



9
  Crunchbase was founded in 2005 and the data before 2005 are backfilled (see Wang, 2017). Since our sample
starts from federal government fiscal year 2008, this backfill issue is unlikely to bias our results.

                                                      10
compares transaction amounts for a subsample of Crunchbase firms with data from business

publications and VentureXpert, and concludes that the Crunchbase data are accurate. Similarly,

Block, Fisch, Hahn, and Sandner (2015) and Wang (2017) argue that Crunchbase provides the

most comprehensive coverage for early-stage innovative firms.

       From the Crunchbase data we create several control variables. The summary statistics in

Table 1 show that firms in the sample have completed an average of 2.8 prior financing rounds,

have received an average of $40.1 million in prior external financing, had their first financing

round 56.0 months ago, and the most recent round 26.3 months ago. All control variables are

measured as of the March 31 prior to the H-1B visa lottery (which is held in April), and thus are

measured before the uncertainty related to the H-1B visa lottery is resolved. Figure 1 provides a

timeline of the H-1B visa process and the timing of our variables.

       From the Crunchbase data, we create several firm-level outcome variables. These

variables are based on events that occur during the three year period beginning in October of the

year of the H-1B lottery (i.e., the three year period during which the H-1B visas awarded in the

lottery would grant the recipient the right to work in the U.S.). The first variable, Funded, is an

indicator variable for firms that receive additional external financing. Numerous prior studies

use external financing as a signal of a firm's success (e.g., Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu, 2007;

Kerr, Lerner, and Schoar, 2014; Howell, 2017). Table 1 shows that 44.7% of the firms in our

sample receive external funding in the three years following the lottery. Panel B of Figure 3

shows Funded for different levels of Win Rate (conditional on having at least 100 observations

for that level of Win Rate). The figure shows that firms with a Win Rate of zero receive

subsequent funding 40.6% of the time, while firms with a Win Rate of 100% receive subsequent

funding 48.9% of the time.



                                                 11
         Prior studies show that venture capitalists (VCs) vary in their quality, and that more

reputable VCs improve firm outcomes. 10 Following Atanasov, Ivanov, and Litvak (2012) and

Puri and Zarutskie (2012), we construct three measures of VC reputation: VC age defined as the

number of years since the first deal the VC participated in, the number of deals that the VC has

invested in, and the number of the VC's portfolio companies that went public. For each

measure, we define high-reputation VC firms as those that rank in the top decile of the

distribution of that measure in the given year. We also create a composite VC reputation

measure that indicates VC firms that rank in the top decile for any one of the three measures.

Using the composite VC reputation measures we create the variable Funded High Reputation

VC, which is an indicator for firms that receive external funding from a high reputation VC firm

in the three year post-lottery period (note that the variable Funded High Reputation VC is thus a

subset of the variable Funded). The average Funded High Reputation VC is 24.3% in our

sample.

         From the Crunchbase data, we create two additional measures of firm outcomes. IPO is

an indicator for firms that have an initial public offering during the post-lottery period.

Successful Exit is an indicator for firms that either have an IPO or are acquired for at least $25

million (in inflation adjusted 2008 dollars). 11 We follow Bernstein, Giroud, and Townsend

(2016) and include only acquisitions above this threshold as, unlike IPOs, acquisitions do not

necessarily indicate a successful exit. Indeed, Metrick and Yasuda (2011) note that many

acquisitions result in a loss for investors. The means of IPO and Successful Exit in our sample

are 4.3% and 9.5%, respectively.


10
  See Gompers (1996), Sørensen (2007), Bottazzi, Da Rin, and Hellman (2008), and Zarutskie (2010).
11
  For observations where Crunchbase does not report the acquisition amount, we search the SDC Platinum
database. If we are unable to find the acquisition amount we do not include the acquisition in the Successful Exit
measure, as Metrick and Yasuda (2011, pg. 127) note that these often "indicate a going-out-of-business sale."

                                                         12
        Internet Appendix Table 1 compares our sample of Crunchbase firms that file LCAs with

Crunchbase firms that do not file LCAs. Consistent with the intuition that firms that actively

seek high-skill foreign labor have relatively good prospects, the LCA filers have received

significantly more prior funding. The LCA filers are also significantly more likely to receive

subsequent external funding and to have an IPO, so they are better both ex ante and ex post at

least in terms of financing outcomes. Accordingly, in our empirical tests we limit the sample to

include only Crunchbase firms that file for LCAs, as this avoids sample selection biases due to

the higher quality of LCA filing firms. We are not comparing a firm that hires high-skill

immigrant labor with a firm that does not (these firms likely have very different growth

prospects). Instead, we are comparing two firms that both want to hire high-skill labor, with

chance (i.e., the H-1B visa lotteries) determining which firm is allowed to hire the high-skill

worker.


2.3. Patent Data

        A large number of prior studies use the number of patents and patent citations as

measures of innovative success 12 and numerous studies show that these variables are correlated

with the value of innovation. 13 To examine innovation in our sample, we obtain patent data from

the USPTO data tables provided through PatentsView, 14 and match Crunchbase firms to the

patent assignee identifiers in the PatentsView data using firm names and locations. The

PatentsView dataset includes information on all patents granted between January 1976 and



12
   Lerner and Seru (2017, Appendix 1) list 68 papers published in the top three finance journals from 2005-2017 that
use patent data.
13
   For example, see Pakes (1985), Griliches (1990), Trajtenberg (1990), Austin (1993), Hall, Jaffe, Trajtenberg
(2005), and Kogan, Papanikolaou, Seru, and Stoffman (2017).
14
   The PatentsView data tables are available at http://www.patentsview.org/download/. In this paper, we use the
data files as of the May 28, 2018 update. The advantage of the PatentsView database is that it is regularly updated.
In contrast, other patent databases, such as the NBER patent database, do not include data for recent years.

                                                        13
December 2017, including information about technology classes and citations. For each

approved patent, the dataset provides both the application date and the approval date.

        Using the PatentsView data, we create several dependent variables that measure the

firms' innovative output. Each of these variables is based on approved patents that the firm

applied for during the three year period that the H-1B visa applied for would be valid. 15 In the

regressions, we control for lagged values of the patenting activity during the three year period

before the H-1B visa lottery. 16

        Following the literature, we adjust both the number of patents and the number of citations

based on the year of application and technology category. Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2001,

2005) argue that un-adjusted patent variables are subject to truncation bias and are not directly

comparable across time or technology categories. Truncation bias in the number of patents

occurs because we observe only approved patent applications. Patent approval takes an average

of two years but can take considerably longer (e.g., see Dass, Nanda, and Xiao, 2017; Lerner and

Seru, 2017). As a result, recent patent applications that are still undergoing the approval process

are unobservable. Truncation bias in the number of citations occurs because patent citations

accumulate over time; thus, citation counts are not comparable across patents of different

vintages. Further, patent counts and citations are not directly comparable across different

technological categories, because of differences in patenting rates, approval rates, and typical

citation life-cycles (see Dass, Nanda, and Xiao, 2017; Lerner and Seru, 2017).




15
   For example, for federal government fiscal year 2008 our dependent variable would include patents applied for
during the period October 1, 2007 thought September 30, 2010, because this is the period during which the H-1B
visa holder would be allowed to work for the firm.
16
   For example, for federal government fiscal year 2008 the USCIS began accepting applications on April 1, 2007.
Accordingly, the control variables are based on approved patents applied for during the period April 1, 2004 through
March 31, 2007.

                                                        14
         To adjust for these problems, we follow Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2001, 2005),

Lerner, Sørensen, and Strömberg (2011), Bena and Li (2014), Seru (2014), and Chang, Fu, Low,

and Zhang (2015) and adjust both the number of patents and citations per patent. We adjust the

number of patents as follows. First, for each technology category and year, we compute the

average number of patents per firm (conditional on the firm having at least one patent in the

category-year). Second, we scale each patent by the average found in the first step. Third, we

sum the scaled number of patents across all (approved) patents applied for by the firm in that

year. Similarly, we adjust the citations per patent by first computing the average number of

citations per patent in a given technology class-year. Second, we scale the citations per patent

using this average. Third, we sum the scaled citations per patent across all (approved) patents

applied for by the firm in that year. 17

         The summary statistics in Table 1 show that 32.2% of the firm-years in our sample have

at least one patent in the three-year period following inclusion in our sample and the average

number of patents is 5.4. Patent numbers are highly skewed, however, with less than 1% of the

firms responsible for half of the approved patents.


3. Evaluating the Validity of the Win Rate Variable

         The key identification assumption for this paper is that the Win Rate captures exogenous

variation in firms' access to skilled foreign labor. Given that H-1B visas are assigned by

computer generated pseudo-random numbers during our sample years, this assumption appears

reasonable. However, there are two issues that could affect the validity of the Win Rate. First,

H-1B applications that are eligible for the master's cap have a higher probability of selection.


17
  Dass, Nanda, and Xiao (2017) and Lerner and Seru (2017) show that these adjustment methods are less effective
towards the end of any given sample period (when truncation issues are more severe). Thus, we report results for
patenting using both the full sample and using only data from the H-1B lotteries for the 2008 and 2009 fiscal years.

                                                         15
Second, because we impute H-1B applications for new employment from LCA filings, there is

some measurement error in the denominator of Win Rate. In this section, we address these two

issues and provide empirical support for the validity of the Win Rate variable.


3.1. H-1B Master's Cap

         As discussed in Section 1, there are two separate pools for the H-1B lottery. First,

applicants with an approved U.S. graduate degree are entered into a lottery for the 20,000

"master's cap" visas. Second, the non-selected master's cap applicants are pooled with the non-

master's cap applicants in a second lottery for the remaining 65,000 visas. Thus, H-1B

applicants eligible for the master's cap pool have a higher probability of winning. Unfortunately,

neither the LCA data nor the USCIS FOIA data indicate whether an applicant was entered in the

master's cap pool. We can, however, examine how applicant education correlates with variables

in the LCA data using the education information that is included in the prevailing wage

determination (PWD) data files provided by the Department of Labor (available for the 2014 and

2015 fiscal years). As part of the LCA process, firms must certify that the salary offered to the

foreign worker will be at least as high as the "prevailing wage" offered to domestic workers with

similar qualifications in the same occupational category. The firm must support its claim with

reference to a prevailing wage determination source, such as the PWD program. 18

         We examine the PWD data 19 and find that the baseline fixed effects we include in our

regressions absorb much of the variation in applicant education. Specifically, industry-city-year




18
   Firms are not required to file a PWD as part of the LCA process and a majority of firms do not use the PWD
system but instead rely on alternative sources such as the Occupational Employment Statistics database. Thus, we
are not able to match most of our LCA filings to a PWD filing.
19
   The PWD data sample we use includes only filings related to H-1B visas. We exclude filings that are cap-exempt,
i.e., those by universities and other educational institutions, hospitals, clinics, medical institutions, and research
instituions, and those for medical doctors and dentists.

                                                         16
fixed effects explain 73% of the variation in whether an applicant has a graduate degree. In the

subsequent section, we show that the inclusion of these fixed effects has little effect on the

coefficient on Win Rate. Given that these fixed effects directly absorb most of the variation in

applicant education, applicant education seems unlikely to bias our findings for Win Rate.


3.2. The Imputation of Applications for New Employment from LCA Filings

       We construct the Win Rate variable as the number of newly approved H-1B visas divided

by the number of applications for new employment imputed from LCA filings. During our

sample period, the LCA data released by the U.S. Department of Labor do not state whether an

LCA is for new employment. However, beginning in 2017 the LCA data started to include

information on whether an LCA petition is for new employment. We use the 2017 data to

perform a check on the choice of the window we use to identify LCAs for new employment in

our sample years. We retrieve all certified LCAs for H-1B visas submitted in fiscal year 2017.

       To focus on firms that are similar to those in our main sample, we manually match

employers in the 2017 LCA dataset with firms in Crunchbase using firm name and address. We

require that firms in Crunchbase meet the following criteria: (1) it is a private firm as of April 1,

2017, (2) it has completed at least one round of external financing, and (3) the dollar amount of

the prior external financing is available. We are able to match 1,018 firms in Crunchbase with

employers in the 2017 LCA data.

       We compute the false negative rate and false positive rate for LCAs submitted by the

matched Crunchbase firms in a given month from December 2016 through April 2017. A false

negative is defined as an LCA for new employment that does not have a start date that is five to

six months in the future. A false positive is defined as an LCA with a start date five to six

months in the future that is not for new employment.


                                                 17
       Internet Appendix Table 2 shows that the vast majority of the LCAs for new employment

are submitted in February and March. Also, the vast majority of LCAs filed in February and

March are for new employment (roughly 80%), while filings for new employment constitute a

small fraction of LCAs in other months. Only about 1-2% of the workers filing for new

employment in February and March do not have a start date that is five to six months in the

future, suggesting that the requirement on the start date does a remarkably good job of

identifying petitions for new employment in these two months. Similarly, February and March

have the lowest false positive rates (5.9% and 10.5% respectively). In contrast, petitions

submitted in January have a false positive rate of 35%, and those submitted in December and

April have a false positive rate greater than 80%. These numbers suggest that our imputation

algorithm provides reasonably precise estimates of the number of H-1B applications for new

employment.


3.3. Win Rate is Not Predictable

       If the H-1B lottery Win Rate variable captures exogenous variation in firms' access to

high skill foreign workers, then Win Rate should not be predictable using lagged firm

characteristics or information about the applicants. For example, Clemens (2013) tests whether

H-1B visa lottery outcomes are predictable based on applicant age, education, and work

experience, and fails to find any significant relations, and concludes this is "strong evidence of

true natural randomization." Following this logic, we regress Win Rate on the baseline set of

control variables, all of which are measured prior to the H-1B lottery.

       The results are shown in Table 2. In both columns, the control variables include

log(number of rounds of financing), log($ amount raised previously), log(months since first

round), log(months since last round), log(number of H-1B applications), log($ salary for H-1B


                                                 18
positions), and log(1 + number of prior patents). Column (1) includes government fiscal-year

fixed effects. Column (2) includes industry-city-year fixed effects.

           In column (1) a single control variable is significant and in column (2) none of the control

variables are significant. For both columns, the overall model that contains several measures of

firm quality prior to the lottery is not statistically significant as shown by the model F-statistic

(i.e., the seven control variables are jointly not statistically different from zero). The

insignificance of the coefficient estimates and the insignificant model F-statistics are consistent

with the claim that the H-1B lottery Win Rate provides exogenous variation in access to high-

skilled labor.


4. H-1B Visa Lottery Outcomes and Additional Financing

4.1. H-1B Visa Lottery Outcomes and External Financing

           We run linear regressions to examine the effect of winning H-1B visa lotteries on the

likelihood of receiving additional external funding. 20 The dependent variable in Table 3 is

Funded, an indicator variable equal to 100 if the company receives additional external funding

during the three-year period beginning October 1 following the H-1B visa lottery and zero

otherwise. In column (1), the specification does not include any controls or fixed effects. In

column (2), the specification includes the following controls: log(number of rounds of

financing), log($ amount raised previously), log(months since first round), log(months since last

round), log(number of H-1B applications), log($ salary for H-1B position), and log(1 + number

of prior patents). Column (2) also includes industry-city-year fixed effects. Both columns report

t-statistics based on standard errors clustered by firm.




20
     For robustness, Internet Appendix Table 4 reports results estimated using logit and conditional logit models.

                                                            19
         In both specifications, the coefficient estimate on Win Rate is positive and significant. 21

Firms that win in the H-1B lottery are more likely to receive additional funding than firms that

lose. Further, the economic magnitude of the result is large. For example, the coefficient in

column (2) implies that a one standard deviation increase in Win Rate is associated with a 4.3

percentage point increase in the likelihood that the firm is funded (a 10% increase relative to the

baseline funding rate).

         The magnitude of the coefficient on Win Rate represents both direct and indirect effects

of winning the right to employ a high-skill foreign worker. For example, besides the direct

contribution of the high-skill worker to the firm, the worker may have positive externalities on

the firm's workforce (Bernstein, Diamond, McQuade, and Pousada, 2018). Further, a positive

experience with one H-1B worker may encourage the firm to apply for more H-1B visas in future

years.

         The coefficient estimates are stable across the specifications. In column (1), the

regression does not include any controls whatsoever. In this regression, the result shows how

variation in Win Rate affects the likelihood of receiving additional funding among all firms and

years in the sample. In column (2), the regression includes control variables and industry-city-

year fixed effects. In this regression, the comparison group is limited to other firms that operate

in the same industry and are located in the same city during the same year. Further, this

regression controls for many of the firms' characteristics and its H-1B application profile. These

fixed effects and controls explain a large portion of the variation in Funded; the R2 increases

from 0.005 to 0.558. The coefficient on Win Rate, however, is not significantly different


21
  Throughout the paper, the Win Rate variable is calculated using LCA applications filed during February and
March. For robustness, we repeat the tests in Table 3 using LCAs filed during January-March and December-March
as alternative windows. The results presented in Internet Appendix Table 3 show that using these alternative
windows produce essentially the same results as in the baseline specification.

                                                     20
between the two columns (p-value = 0.46). The stability of the coefficient estimate across

specifications is consistent with the argument that Win Rate captures random lottery outcomes

and is essentially uncorrelated with observable characteristics of the firms.

       Oster (2019) formalizes the insights of Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005) and develops a

method for evaluating omitted variable bias, based on comparing coefficient and R2 changes after

including control variables. Her method shows it is possible to compute an identified set for the

coefficients, subject to the assumption that selection on observables is proportional to selection

                                                                        2     2
on unobservables. Formally, the identified set is  ,  -  -   -    , where  is the
                                                             2 -2
                                                            


coefficient estimate in the specification with the full set of controls, i.e., column (2), and  2 is

the corresponding R-squared,  and  2 are the coefficient estimate and R-squared from the

                                                      2
specification with no controls, i.e., column (1), and   is the unobservable maximum R-

squared possible in a model that contained all remaining unobservable sources of variation. We
    2
use   = 1 as this represents the clear upper boundary. Using this method, we find the

identified set for the coefficient on Win Rate is [9.85, 11.22]. This set does not include zero and

encompasses a fairly tight range of magnitudes, suggesting that it is statistically unlikely that

unobserved variables bias the results.


4.2. H-1B Visa Lottery Outcomes and Financing by High-Reputation VCs

       Prior studies show that high-reputation VCs select better investments and improve firm

outcomes (e.g., Sørensen, 2007). Winning H-1B visa lotteries might enable start-up firms to

secure funding from more reputable VCs. Accordingly, we construct several proxies for VC

reputation following Atanasov, Ivanov, and Litvak (2012) and Puri and Zarutskie (2012). The

first is VC Age, defined as the number of years since the first deal the VC participated in. The

second is VC Number of Deals, defined as the number of deals that a VC has invested in. The
                                                  21
third is VC Number of IPOs, defined as the number of the VC's portfolio companies that went

public. For each measure, we define high-reputation VCs as those ranking in the top decile of

the distribution of that measure in the given year. We also construct VC Composite, which

identifies VCs that rank in the top decile of any one of the three measures.

       Table 4 regresses indicators for whether the firm obtains funding from a high-reputation

VC over the subsequent three years on the Win Rate, firm controls (including an additional

control for whether the firm had previously received funding from a high-reputation VC), and

industry-city-year fixed effects. This dependent variable is a subset of the Funded variable used

in Table 3. In all specifications, the coefficient estimate on Win Rate is positive and significant.

Firms with a higher win rate in the H-1B lottery are more likely to receive funding from high-

reputation VCs. The economic magnitude of the result is large as well. For example, the

coefficient in column (4) implies that a one standard deviation increase in Win Rate is associated

with a 3.6 percentage point increase in the likelihood the firm is funded by a high-reputation VC

(a 15% increase relative to the baseline probability). These results provide strong support for the

idea that winning H-1B visa lotteries enables firms to obtain funding from high-reputation VCs

and potentially benefit from the expertise, network, and resources of these VCs.


5. The Dynamics of the Effect of H-1B Visa Lottery Outcomes

5.1. External Funding

       In this section, we examine how H-1B lottery results are related to external funding

outcomes over time. Following the lottery held in early April, H-1B visa recipients can begin

employment at the beginning of October. The H-1B visa is valid for three years and renewable

for up to three additional years. We would expect any effects from the H-1B visa holder to

accumulate over the life of the visa. Accordingly, in Panel A of Table 5 we examine the relation

                                                 22
between Win Rate and external funding while progressively increasing the window in which we

examine funding outcomes. In column (1), Funded is measured over the 12-month period

beginning once the H-1B visa becomes valid. In columns (2) and (3), Funded is measured,

respectively, over the 36- and 60-month periods beginning once the H-1B visa becomes valid. 22

Thus, these variables are cumulative (i.e., funding received during the first 12 months is also

received during the first 36 and 60 months). 23

        The results in Panel A of Table 5 show that the economic effect of Win Rate increases

over time; the coefficient of Win Rate on Funding doubles in magnitude between one and three

years (then is essentially unchanged as the horizon increases from three to five years). This

pattern is intuitive: the effect of employing an H-1B visa worker on external funding does not all

happen immediately, but instead takes about three years to fully materialize.


5.2. Successful Exits and Initial Public Offerings

        In this section, we consider two alternative firm-level outcome variables. IPO is an

indicator variable for firms that have an initial public offering. Successful Exit is an indicator

variable for firms that either have an IPO or are acquired for at least $25 million (in inflation

adjusted 2008 dollars). Prior studies have used IPO and exit as measures of firm success (e.g.,

Hochberg, Ljungqvist, and Lu, 2007; Sørensen, 2007; Kerr, Lerner, and Schoar, 2014; Bernstein,

Giroud, and Townsend, 2016). For both dependent variables, we show the results when the

dependent variable is measured over the 12-, 36-, and 60-month periods after the H-1B visa




22
   For government fiscal year 2015 observations, post-lottery data is available on funding, acquisition, and IPO
outcomes from October 2014 through April 2019. So the five-year outcome window is actually 55 months for 2015
observations.
23
   Note that for Funded, there can be multiple positive events across years. For example, of firms that receive
external funding in the first year, 36% also receive funding in the second year and 29% also receive funding in the
third year.

                                                        23
becomes valid (e.g., the 12-month period runs from October of the lottery year through

September of the next year).

       In Panel B of Table 5, the dependent variable is Successful Exit. The coefficient on Win

Rate is significant for one- and three-year horizons at the 10% level and significant at the 1%

level over a five-year horizon. The economic magnitude of the results is large. For example, the

coefficient estimate in column (3) implies that a one standard deviation increase in the Win Rate

is associated with a 2.9 percentage point increase in the probability of a successful exit over the

next five years (a 20% increase relative to the baseline Successful Exit rate of 14.9%).

       In Panel C of Table 5, the dependent variable is IPO. The coefficient on Win Rate is

marginally significant for the three-year horizon and significant at the 1% level over a five-year

horizon. The economic magnitude of the result for IPOs is also large. For example, the

coefficient in column (3) implies that a one standard deviation increase in Win Rate is associated

with a 1.5 percentage point increase in the probability of going public (a 23% increase relative to

the baseline IPO likelihood of 6.6% over the five-year period).

       The magnitude of the coefficient on Win Rate on various firm outcomes, particularly

long-term outcomes like Successful Exit and IPO, represents the cumulative effect of the H-1B

workers through multiple channels. For example, the previous section shows that winning in the

H-1B lottery increases the ability of the firm to obtain external financing from high-reputation

VCs. The high-reputation VCs could, in turn, have a causal effect on the likelihood of a

successful exit. In our regressions, the coefficient on Win Rate includes both the direct effects

from the H-1B worker's contributions to the firm as well as indirect effects through other

channels such as H-1B workers' positive effect on the likelihood of obtaining external financing

and their positive externalities for other workers that also contribute to future firm success. Both



                                                 24
the direct and indirect effects are caused by the variation in access to high-skilled labor generated

by the H-1B lotteries.

         Overall, the pattern of results for Funded, Successful Exit, and IPO are quite intuitive.

The effects of the H-1B lottery outcomes occur more rapidly for obtaining external financing

than they do for having a successful exit or an IPO (which are later stage developments for the

start-up). The effect of the H-1B lottery on simply obtaining external financing materializes

within 3 years (with little additional effect after that), with the 3- and 5-year effects about double

that measured after one year. In contrast, the cumulative effect of winning the H-1B lottery on

both Successful Exit and IPO over a five-year horizon is roughly quadruple that measured after

only one year and about double that measured at a three-year horizon.


6. Patenting and Innovation

         High-skilled foreign workers may contribute to start-up firms' innovation success. Table

6 examines the relation between Win Rate and several variables measuring innovation

performance. In all columns, we use our baseline specification that includes firm and applicant

controls as well as industry-city-year fixed effects. We also include past patenting activity as a

control, 24 because past patenting activity is a strong predictor of future activity. Panel A reports

the results for the full sample. Panel B reports the results using only data for the 2008 and 2009

fiscal years, because the truncation biases discussed in Dass, Nanda, and Xiao (2017) and Lerner

and Seru (2017) are less severe with older data.

         In column (1), the dependent variable is log(1 + Number of Patents) and in column (2)

the dependent variable is log(1 + Adjusted Number of Patents). In both columns there is a


24
  Prior patenting activity is measured over the three-year period ending just before the H-1B lottery is held (e.g., for
observations on firms participating in the lottery for fiscal year 2009, the control variables are measured over the
period from April 1, 2005 through March 31, 2008).

                                                          25
significant and positive relation between Win Rate and the number of patents for both the full

sample and for the subsample of fiscal years 2008 and 2009. Further, the economic magnitude

of the results is significant. The coefficient estimates in Panel A imply that a one standard

deviation increase in the Win Rate increases the number of patents by 4.8% and the adjusted

number of patents by 2.6%.

       In column (3), the dependent variable is the logarithm of the adjusted number total patent

citations received by patents filed during the three year post H-1B lottery period. The results

show there is a positive and significant relation between Win Rate and the total number of

adjusted patent citations for the full sample as well as for the 2008/2009 subsample. The result

using the full sample implies that a one standard deviation increase in the Win Rate increases the

adjusted number of patent citations by 4.0%, and the magnitude of this relation becomes larger if

the sample is restricted to the 2008 and 2009 government fiscal years (when truncation bias is

less severe).

       The total number of citations for a firm can increase either because the number of patents

increases or because the citations per patent increase. To separate these possibilities, in column

(4) the dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the average number of adjusted citations

per patent. The coefficient on the win rate variable using the full sample is 0.029 and significant

at the 10% level, suggesting that a one standard deviation increase in the Win Rate increases the

adjusted citations per patent by 1.3% (though this effect is not statistically significant in the

2008/2009 subsample). This finding, combined with the results in other columns, suggests that

access to H-1B visa workers increases the total amount of innovative activity with no detrimental

effect on the average quality of the innovation (or perhaps a modest increase in the quality of the

innovation).



                                                  26
        Our findings for patenting are consistent with those of Kerr and Lincoln (2010) who find

a strong positive relation between H-1B visas and patenting. More generally, our results are

consistent with Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2010) and Bernstein, Diamond, McQuade, and

Pousada (2018) who find that immigrants are responsible for a disproportionately large fraction

of U.S. patents. Our results, however, differ from those of Doran, Gelber, and Isen (2016) who

find little relation between firms' H-1B visa approvals and the number of patents. In addition to

differences in sample periods, Doran et al. examine the full universe of U.S. firms using data

provided by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). In contrast, we focus on a set of start-up firms

that are likely to benefit substantially from access to talented foreign workers. Indeed, the firms

in our sample are nearly three times more likely to patent than the firms in Doran et al. The

comparison between our results and those of Doran et al. suggests that the contributions of H-1B

visa holders vary across firms, and the effects found in our sample of start-up firms are likely

larger than would be found in the overall universe of firms.


7. Conclusion

        In the U.S., firms can apply for H-1B visas that allow high-skill foreign workers to enter

the U.S. There is a fixed quota of H-1B visas available to for-profit firms, and when the number

of applications exceeds the quota the U.S. government holds a lottery that assigns H-1B visas

based on computer-generated pseudo-random numbers. The outcome of these H-1B visa

lotteries provides exogenous, random variation in firms' access to skilled foreign workers. In

this paper, we examine a sample of start-up firms that applied for H-1B visas, and compare

outcomes based on the firms' win rate in the H-1B lotteries.

        We find that a firm's win rate in the H-1B visa lottery is strongly related to the firm's

outcomes over the following three years. Relative to ex ante similar firms that also applied for

                                                27
H-1B visas, firms with higher win rates in the lottery are more likely to receive additional

external funding and have an IPO or be acquired. Firms with higher win rates also become more

likely to secure funding from high-reputation VCs, and receive more patents and more patent

citations. Overall, the results show that access to skilled foreign workers has a strong positive

effect on firm-level measures of success.

       Gourio, Messer, and Siemer (2016) highlight the important role the number of start-ups

in a region has in explaining the long-term economic development of that region. Our results

show that access to skilled foreign workers leads to improved funding and patenting outcomes

for start-up firms, suggesting that improved visa access for such firms could generate significant

economic benefits.




                                                28
References
Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt. 1992. A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction.
   Econometrica 60, 323-351.
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber. 2005. Selection on Observed and
   Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools. Journal of Political
   Economy 113, 151-184.
Atanasov, Vladimir, Vladimir Ivanov, and Kate Litvak. 2012. Does Reputation Limit
   Opportunistic Behavior in the VC Industry? Evidence from Litigation against VCs. Journal
   of Finance 67, 2215-2246.
Austin, David H. 1993. An Event-Study Approach to Measuring Innovative Output: The Case of
   Biotechnology. American Economic Review (P&P) 83, 253-258.
Bena, Jan, and Kai Li. 2014. Corporate Innovation and Mergers and Acquisitions. Journal of
   Finance 69, 1923-1960.
Bernstein, Shai, Rebecca Diamond, Timothy McQuade, and Beatriz Pousada. 2018. The
   Contribution of High-Skilled Immigrants to Innovation in the United States. Working paper,
   Stanford University.
Bernstein, Shai, Xavier Giroud, and Richard R. Townsend. 2016. The Impact of Venture Capital
   Monitoring. Journal of Finance 71, 1591-1622.
Block, Jörn H., Christian O. Fisch, Alexander Hahn, and Philipp G. Sandner. 2015. Why Do
   SMEs File Trademarks? Insights from Firms in Innovative Industries. Research Policy 44,
   1915-1930.
Bottazzi, Laura, Marco Da Rin, and Thomas Hellman. 2008. Who Are the Active Investors?
   Evidence from Venture Capital. Journal of Financial Economics 89, 488-512.
Brau, James C., Bill Francis, and Nihon Kohers. 2003. The Choice of IPO versus Takeover:
   Empirical Evidence. Journal of Business 76, 583-612.
Chang, Xin, Kangkang Fu, Angie Low, and Wenrui Zhang. 2015. Non-Executive Employee
   Stock Options and Corporate Innovation. Journal of Financial Economics 115, 168-188.
Clemens, Michael. 2013. Why Do Programmers Earn More in Houston than Hyderabad?
   Evidence from Randomized Processing of U.S. Visas. American Economic Review (P&P)
   103, 198-202.
Dalle, Jean-Michel, Matthijs den Besten, and Carlo Menon. 2017. Using Crunchbase for
   Economic and Managerial Research. Working paper, OECD.
Dass, Nishant, Vikram Nanda, and Steven Chong Xiao. 2017. Truncation Bias Corrections in
   Patent Data: Implications for Recent Research on Innovation. Journal of Corporate Finance
   44, 353-374.


                                              29
Doran, Kirk, Alexander Gelber, and Adam Isen. 2016. The Effects of High-Skilled Immigration
   Policy on Firms: Evidence from Visa Lotteries. University of Notre Dame, Working paper.
Gompers, Paul A. 1996. Grandstanding in the Venture Capital Industry, Journal of Financial
  Economics 42, 133-156.
Gourio, Francisco, Todd Messer, and Michael Siemer. 2016. Firm Entry and Macroeconomic
   Dynamics: A State-level Analysis. American Economic Review 106, 214-218.
Griliches, Zvi. 1990. Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey. Journal of Economic
    Literature 28, 1661-1707.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg. 2001. The NBER Patent Citations Data
   File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools. NBER working paper 8498.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg. 2005. Market Value and Patent
   Citations. RAND Journal of Economics 36, 16-38.
Hochberg, Yael V., Alexander Ljungqvist, and Yang Lu. 2007. Whom You Know Matters:
   Venture Capital Networks and Investment Performance. Journal of Finance 62, 251-301.
Howell, Sabrina T., 2017. Financing Innovation: Evidence from R&D Grants. American
  Economic Review 107, 1136-1164.
Hunt, Jennifer, and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle. 2010. How Much Does Immigration Boost
   Innovation? American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2, 31-56.
Kerr, William R., and William F. Lincoln. 2010. The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa
   Reforms and U.S. Ethnic Invention. Journal of Labor Economics 28, 473-508.
Kerr, William R., Josh Lerner, and Antoinette Schoar. 2014. The Consequences of
   Entrepreneurial Finance: Evidence from Angel Financings. Review of Financial Studies 27,
   20-55.
Kogan, Leonid, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Amit Seru, and Noah Stoffman. 2017. Technological
   Innovation, Resource Allocation, and Growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 665-
   712.
Lerner, Josh, and Amit Seru. 2017. The Use and Misuse of Patent Data: Issue for Corporate
   Finance and Beyond. Working paper, Harvard Business School.
Lerner, Josh, Morten Sørensen, and Per Strömberg. 2011. Private Equity and Long-Run
   Investment: The Case of Innovation. Journal of Finance 66, 445-477.
Ling, Yun. 2016. The Impact of Venture Capital on the Life Cycles of Startups. Working paper,
   University of Southern California.
Metrick, Andrew, and Ayako Yasuda. 2011. Venture Capital and the Finance of Innovation 2nd
   Edition, Wiley, New York, NY.



                                              30
Oster, Emily. 2019. Unobservable Selection Coefficient Stability: Theory and Evidence. Journal
   of Business & Economic Statistics 37, 187-204.
Pakes, Ariel. 1985. On Patents, R&D, and the Stock Market Rate of Return. Journal of Political
   Economy 93, 390-409.
Peri, Giovanni, Kevin Shih, and Chad Sparber. 2015. Foreign and Native Skilled Workers: What
    Can We Learn from H-1B Lotteries? NBER working paper 21175.
Puri, Manju, and Rebecca Zarutskie. 2012. On the Life Cycle Dynamics of Venture-Capital and
   Non-Venture-Capital-Financed Firms. Journal of Finance 67, 2247-2293.
Romer, Paul M. 1990. Endogenous Technological Change. Journal of Political Economy 98,
  S71-S102.
Schumpeter, Joseph A. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. New York: Harper and
   Brothers.
Seru, Amit. 2014. Firm Boundaries Matter: Evidence from Conglomerates and R&D Activity.
   Journal of Financial Economics 111, 381-405.
Sørensen, Morten. 2007. How Smart is Smart Money? A Two-Sided Matching Model of Venture
   Capital. Journal of Finance 62, 2725-2762.
Trajtenberg, Manuel. 1990. A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value of
   Innovation. RAND Journal of Economics 21, 172-187.
Wang, Xinxin. 2017. Catering Innovation: Entrepreneurship and the Acquisition Market.
  Working paper, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Zarutskie, Rebecca. 2010. The Role of Top Management Team Human Capital in Venture
   Capital Markets: Evidence from First Time Funds. Journal of Business Venturing 25, 155-
   172.




                                              31
            Figure 1: Timeline of Application Process and Variable Measurement
This figure illustrates the timeline of our study using the lottery for fiscal year 2015 as an
example. The H-1B visa lottery for fiscal year t are held in the first week of April of fiscal year
t-1, which is when the win rate is observed. We measure the funding and patenting outcomes
during the three-year period starting from October 1 of fiscal year t (i.e., the earliest start date of
employment for workers granted an H-1B visa in the lottery for fiscal year t). We measure the
control variables as of March 31 in fiscal year t-1.

                                              2014/10/01 - 2017/09/30
      2014/04/07                         H-1B visa holder eligible to work
    H-1B visa lottery                Measure dependent variables over this period
        occurs



      2014/03/31
    Control variables                     2015/10/01             2016/10/01             2017/09/30
       measured                                                                      H-1B visa expires




 2014/01/01                                                                              2017/09/30
                   2014/10/01
              H-1B lottery winners
                eligible to begin
                    working




                                                  32
                      Figure 2: Histogram of Number of H1-B Visa Applicants
This figure shows a histogram of the number of H-1B applicants. The number of applicants is
truncated at 10, with the final bar showing the fraction of observations that apply for 10 or more
H-1B visas.
             .6
             .4
  Fraction
             .2
             0




                  1    2     3      4     5       6        7     8       9     10+
                                     Number of Applications




                                                 33
                         Figure 3: Histogram of H-1B Visa Lottery Win Rates and Funding Outcomes
Panel A shows a histogram of the distribution of Win Rate (the number of H-1B visas a firm
wins through the lottery in a year divided by the number of applicants). Panel B shows a bar
chart of the proportion of observations receiving external financing in the three-year post-lottery
period for different levels of Win Rate. For Panel B we include only levels of Win Rate for
which we have at least 100 observations.


                                          Panel A: Win Rate
                       .4
                       .3
     Fraction
     .2                .1
                       0




                                           0              .25             .5      .75         1


                                          Panel B: Percent Funded by Win Rate
     30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50




                                                                                        48.9%
           Percent Funded after Lottery




                                                                        43.6%

                                          40.6%




                                            0             .25            .5      .75      1
                                                                      Win Rate



                                                                           34
                                  Table 1: Summary Statistics
This table reports the summary statistics for our sample of firm-years. The sample includes start-
up firms in Crunchbase that sponsor H-1B petitions in fiscal years 2008, 2009, 2014, and 2015.
Number of Applications is the number of H-1B applicants filed on a Labor Condition Application
(LCA) by a firm in a year. Win Rate is the number of H-1B visas a firm wins through the lottery
in a year divided by the number of applicants. Salary is the average annual salary of the
applicants sponsored by a firm in a year. Number of Prior Financing Rounds is the number of
funding rounds a firm receives before the lottery. Prior Amount Raised is the total amount of
funds raised before the lottery. Time Since First Round is the number of months between the
first round of funding and the lottery. Time Since Last Round is the number of months between
the most recent round of funding and the lottery. Funded is an indicator that equals 100 if a firm
receives subsequent external funding in the three years following the lottery and zero otherwise.
Funded High Reputation VC is an indicator that equals 100 if a firm receives subsequent funding
in the three years following the lottery from a VC firm that is in the top decile of VC firms by
age, number of deals, or number of IPOs and zero otherwise. Successful Exit is an indicator
variable that equals 100 if the firm goes public or is acquired for at least $25 million (in 2008
inflation adjusted dollars) in the three years following the lottery and zero otherwise. IPO is an
indicator variable that equals 100 if the firm goes public in the three years following the lottery
and zero otherwise. Any Patents is an indicator variable that equals 100 if the firm is granted a
patent that was applied for in the three years following the lottery and zero otherwise. Number of
Patents is the number of patents granted to a firm in the three years following the lottery.
Number of Prior Patents is the number of patents granted to a firm in the three years before the
H-1B lottery. Number of Adjusted Patents is the category-year mean adjusted number of patents
granted to a firm in the three years following the lottery. Total Citations is the number of
citations to a firm's patents granted in the three years following the lottery. Total Adjusted
Citations is the category-year mean adjusted number of citations summed across the firm's
patents granted in the three years following the lottery. Average Number of Citations is the
average number of citations to a firm's patents granted in the three years following the lottery.
Average Number of Adjusted Citations is the average of the category-year mean adjusted
citations on the firm's patents granted in the three years following the lottery. For each variable,
we report the mean, standard deviation, 25th percentile, median, and 75th percentile.




                                                35
                                       Mean     Std. Dev.   25th%    Median    75th%
Number of H-1B Applications              2.5        5.1        1        1         2
Win Rate                                0.55       0.44        0      0.55        1
Salary ($)                             85,100    29,700     65,000   80,000   100,000
Number of Prior Financing Rounds         2.8        2.0        1        2         4
Prior Amount Raised ($M)                40.1       90.3        5       17        44
Time Since First Round (months)         56.0       41.7       23       46        81
Time Since Last Round (months)          26.3       30.5        7       15        34
Funded(t,t+2)                           44.7       49.7        0        0       100
Funded High Reputation VC(t,t+2)        24.3       42.9        0        0         0
Successful Exit(t,t+2)                   9.5       29.3        0        0         0
IPO(t,t+2)                               4.3       20.2        0        0         0
Any Patents(t,t+2)                      32.2       46.7        0        0       100
Number of Patents(t,t+2)                 5.4       65.3        0        0         1
Number of Prior Patents(t-3,t-1)         7.8       112         0        0         3
Number of Adjusted Patents(t,t+2)        0.9        9.7        0        0       0.2
Total Citations                         186       2,142        0        0         8
Total Adjusted Citations                 6.2       68.8        0        0       0.3
Average Number of Citations              9.4       34.4        0        0       3.4
Average Number of Adjusted Citations     0.3        1.2        0        0       0.1




                                          36
                           Table 2: Win Rate as Dependent Variable
This table reports regression analysis of the win rate in H-1B visa lotteries. The dependent
variable is Win Rate, which is the number of H-1B visas a firm wins through the lottery in a year
divided by the number of applicants. Column (1) includes federal government fiscal year fixed
effects. Column (2) includes industry-city-year fixed effects. All columns include the following
firm characteristics: log(number rounds of financing), log($ amount raised previously),
log(months since first round), log(months since last round), log(number of H-1B applications),
log($ salary for H-1B positions), and log(1 + number of prior patents). The numbers in brackets
are t-statistics based on standard errors clustered by firm. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1-percent, 5-percent, and 10-percent levels, respectively.
                                                       (1)                         (2)
 log(# rounds financing)                             -0.02                       -0.01
                                                    [0.84]                      [0.43]
 log(amount raised)                                   0.01                        0.01
                                                    [0.91]                      [0.96]
 log(months since first round)                        0.01                        0.02
                                                    [0.40]                      [0.73]
 log(months since last round)                        -0.02                       -0.02
                                                    [1.34]                      [0.89]
 log(number of H-1B applications)                     0.01                       -0.01
                                                    [0.84]                      [0.50]
 log(salary)                                         -0.07 **                    -0.04
                                                    [2.35]                      [0.77]
 log(1 + number of prior patents)                     0.01                       -0.01
                                                    [1.37]                      [0.45]
 Model F-Stat p-value                                0.16                        0.84
 Year fixed effects?                                  Yes                   Subsumed
 Industry-City-Year fixed effects?                     No                         Yes
 R2                                                 0.008                       0.509
 Adjusted-R2                                        0.004                       0.022
 Number of Observations                             2,570                       2,570




                                               37
  Table 3: H-1B Lottery Win Rate and the Probability of Receiving Subsequent Funding
This table reports regression analysis of the effect of win rate in H-1B visa lotteries on the
probability of receiving subsequent funding. The dependent variable is Funded, which is an
indicator that equals 100 if a firm receives subsequent external funding in the three years
following the lottery and zero otherwise. The main independent variable is Win Rate, which is
the number of H-1B visas a firm wins through the lottery in a year divided by the number of
applicants. Column (1) does not include any control variables or fixed effects. Column (2)
includes industry-city-year fixed effects and the following firm controls: log(number rounds of
financing), log($ amount raised previously), log(months since first round), log(months since last
round), log(number of H-1B applications), log($ salary for H-1B positions), and log(1 + number
of prior patents). The numbers in brackets are t-statistics based on standard errors clustered by
firm. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1-percent, 5-percent, and 10-percent
levels, respectively.
                                                 (1)                            (2)
 Win Rate                                       8.14 ***                       9.85 ***
                                              [3.68]                         [3.18]
 log(number rounds financing)                                                 14.86 ***
                                                                             [3.85]
 log(amount raised)                                                            1.87
                                                                             [1.61]
 log(months since first round)                                               -12.33 ***
                                                                             [4.05]
 log(months since last round)                                                 -5.68 ***
                                                                             [2.64]
 log(number of H-1B applications)                                             -3.44 *
                                                                             [1.79]
 log(salary)                                                                   6.84
                                                                             [1.37]
 log(1 + number of prior patents)                                              2.05
                                                                             [1.37]
 Industry-City-Year fixed effects?               No                            Yes
 R2                                           0.005                          0.558
 Adjusted-R2                                  0.005                          0.119
 Number of Observations                       2,570                          2,570




                                                38
                          Table 4: Venture Capital Funding by High-Reputation Venture Capital Firms

This table reports regression analysis of the effect of win rate in H-1B visa lotteries on funding by high-reputation venture capital
firms. The dependent variables are equal to 100 if the firm receives funding from a venture capital firm identified as being a high-
reputation firm based on proxies identified in prior studies (e.g., Atanasov, Ivanov, and Litvak, 2012; Puri and Zarutskie, 2012). In
column (1), the venture capital reputation measure is based on the VC firm being in the top decile of firm age. In column (2), the
venture capital reputation measure is based on the VC firm being in the top decile by number of deals completed. In column (3), the
venture capital reputation measure is based on the VC firm being in the top decile of number of portfolio firms that went public. In
column (4), the venture capital reputation measure is based on the VC firm being in the top decile for any of the three preceding
measures. The main independent variable is Win Rate, which is the number of H-1B visas a firm wins through the lottery in a year
divided by the number of applicants. All specifications include industry-city-year fixed effects and controls for log(number rounds of
financing), log($ amount raised previously), log(months since first round), log(months since last round), log(number of H-1B
applications), log($ salary for H-1B positions), and log(1 + number of prior patents). Each specification also controls for whether the
firm received funding from a high reputation VC prior to the H1-B visa lottery using the same definition of high reputation VC as that
for the dependent variable. The numbers in brackets are t-statistics based on standard errors clustered by firm. ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1-percent, 5-percent, and 10-percent levels, respectively.

                                                             Receive Funding from a High-Reputation VC as measured by
                                                      VC Age         VC Number of Deals VC Number of IPOs        VC Composite
                                                        (1)                  (2)                    (3)               (4)
 Win Rate                                              6.26 **              5.52 **                5.41 **           8.23 ***
                                                     [2.55]               [2.09]                 [2.09]            [2.96]
 Received Prior Funding from High-Rep VC?              5.72 **              7.56 ***               7.47 ***          7.62 **
                                                     [2.03]               [2.67]                 [2.59]            [2.45]
 Control Variables?                                    Yes                    Yes                      Yes                 Yes
 Industry-City-Year fixed effects?                     Yes                    Yes                      Yes                 Yes
 R2                                                  0.481                  0.492                    0.497               0.507
 Adjusted-R2                                        -0.035                 -0.014                   -0.003               0.017
 Number of Observations                              2,570                  2,570                    2,570               2,570




                                                                   39
          Table 5: Funding, Successful Exit, and Initial Public Offerings over Time

This table reports regression analysis of the effect of the win rate in H-1B lotteries on the
probabilities of obtaining additional funding, having a successful exit, and going public during a
specified period. In Panel A, the dependent variable is set equal to 100 if the firm obtains
external financing. In Panel B, the dependent variable is set equal to 100 if the firm has an IPO
or is acquired for at least $25 million (in 2008 inflation adjusted dollars). In Panel C, the
dependent variable equals 100 if the firm has an IPO. In column (1), the period is one year
starting when the H-1B visas from the lottery become valid. In columns (2) and (3), the period is
three and five years, respectively. The main independent variable is Win Rate, which is the
number of H-1B visas a firm wins through the lottery in a year divided by the number of
applicants. All specifications include industry-city-year fixed effects and controls for
log(number rounds of financing), log($ amount raised previously), log(months since first round),
log(months since last round), log(number of H-1B applications), log($ salary for H-1B
positions), and log(1 + number of prior patents). The number of observations is 2,570 for each
regression. The numbers in brackets are t-statistics based on standard errors clustered by firm.
***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1-percent, 5-percent, and 10-percent levels,
respectively.

                                                        Panel A: Funded in
                                      One Year             Three Years             Five Years
                                         (1)                   (2)                    (3)
 Win Rate                               5.04 *                9.85 ***              10.56 ***
                                      [1.77]                [3.18]                 [3.43]

 R2                                    0.518                 0.558                  0.560
 Adjusted-R2                           0.041                 0.119                  0.124
                                                     Panel B: Successful Exit in
                                      One Year             Three Years             Five Years
                                         (1)                   (2)                    (3)
 Win Rate                               1.75 *                2.87 *                 6.61 ***
                                      [1.82]                [1.71]                 [3.21]

 R2                                    0.510                 0.530                  0.527
 Adjusted-R2                           0.024                 0.064                  0.059
                                                          Panel C: IPO in
                                      One Year             Three Years             Five Years
                                         (1)                   (2)                    (3)
 Win Rate                               0.83                  2.05 *                 3.48 **
                                      [1.22]                [1.77]                 [2.36]

 R2                                    0.509                 0.527                  0.526
 Adjusted-R2                           0.022                 0.058                  0.056



                                                40
                                                     Table 6: Patenting Outcomes

This table reports regression analysis of the effect of win rate in H-1B visa lotteries on patenting outcomes. All of the patenting
outcome variables are based on patents that were applied for, and eventually granted, during the three-year period following the H-1B
lottery. The dependent variables are: log(1 + Number of Patents), log(1 + Adjusted Number of Patents), log(1 + Number of Adjusted
Citations), and log(1 + Average Number of Adjusted Citations). The main independent variable is Win Rate, which is the number of
H-1B visas a firm wins through the lottery in a year divided by the number of applicants. All specifications include industry-city-year
fixed effects and controls for log(number rounds of financing), log($ amount raised previously), log(months since first round),
log(months since last round), log(number of H-1B applications), and log($ salary for H-1B positions). The specifications also include
values of the patenting activity used in the dependent variable in the three-year period before the H-1B visa lottery. Panel A includes
observations for all sample years. Panel B includes observations for federal government fiscal years 2008 and 2009 only. The
numbers in brackets are t-statistics based on standard errors clustered by firm. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1-
percent, 5-percent, and 10-percent levels, respectively.




                                                                    41
Panel A: Full Sample
Dependent variable                  log(1 + # patents)   log(1 + adj. # patents)   log(1 + adj. # cites)   log(1 + avg. # adj. cites)
                                           (1)                    (2)                     (3)                       (4)
Win Rate                                  0.11 **               0.06 ***                 0.09 **                   0.03 *
                                        [2.53]                [2.59]                   [2.11]                    [1.78]
Log(patent activity                       0.70 ***              0.76 ***                 0.73 ***                  0.65 ***
during prior 3 years)                 [23.63]                [20.06]                  [20.15]                   [12.09]
Control Variables?                        Yes                    Yes                     Yes                        Yes
Industry-City-Year fixed effects?         Yes                    Yes                     Yes                        Yes
R2                                      0.803                  0.831                   0.813                      0.732
Adjusted-R2                             0.608                  0.664                   0.628                      0.466
Number of Observations                  2,570                  2,570                   2,570                      2,570
Panel B: 2008 & 2009 Only
Dependent Variable                  log(1 + # patents)   log(1 + adj. # patents)   log(1 + adj. # cites)   log(1 + avg. # adj. cites)
                                           (1)                    (2)                     (3)                       (4)
Win Rate                                  0.26 ***              0.15 ***                 0.27 ***                  0.06
                                        [2.65]                [3.06]                   [2.72]                    [1.51]
Log(patent activity                       0.80 ***              0.89 ***                 0.76 ***                  0.65 ***
during prior 3 years)                 [14.90]                [10.61]                  [13.05]                    [6.86]
Control Variables?                        Yes                    Yes                     Yes                        Yes
Industry-City-Year fixed effects?         Yes                    Yes                     Yes                        Yes
R2                                      0.810                  0.839                   0.810                      0.734
Adjusted-R2                             0.556                  0.624                   0.555                      0.378
Number of Observations                    825                    825                     825                        825




                                                               42
                              Internet Appendix Table 1:
            Comparison of Crunchbase Firms that File versus Do Not File LCAs
This table compares firms in the Crunchbase dataset that file LCAs with those that do not file
LCAs. LCA filers are the firms in our sample. Non-filers are firms in Crunchbase that satisfy
the following conditions: (1) the firm is a private firm based in the U.S., (2) it has completed at
least one round of external financing in the previous 60 months, (3) the dollar amount of the
prior external financing is available, and (4) the firm does not file LCAs for new employment in
the given fiscal year. The table reports the means for various characteristics of the two groups of
firms. Number of Prior Financing Rounds is the number of funding rounds a firm receives
before the lottery. Prior amount Raised is the total amount of funds raised before the lottery.
Time Since First Round is the number of months between the first round of funding and the
lottery. Time Since Last Round is the number of months between the most recent round of
funding and the lottery. Funded is an indicator that equals 100 if a firm receives subsequent
external funding in the three years following the lottery and zero otherwise. Funded High
Reputation VC is an indicator that equals 100 if a firm receives subsequent funding in the three
years following the lottery from a VC firm that is in the top decile of VC firms by age, number
of deals, or number of IPOs. IPO is an indicator variable that equals 100 if the firm goes public
in the three years following the lottery and zero otherwise. ***, **, and * (displayed in the
second column) indicate the statistical significance of the difference in means between the two
samples at the 1-percent, 5-percent, and 10-percent levels, respectively.


                                                            LCA Filers             Non-Filers
 Number of Prior Financing Rounds                              2.8                   2.1***
 Prior Amount Raised ($M)                                     40.1                  15.1***
 Time Since First Round (months)                              56.0                  38.2***
 Time Since Last Round (months)                               26.3                  20.5***
 Funded(t,t+2)                                                44.7                  32.5***
 Funded High Reputation VC(t,t+2)                             24.3                  13.3***
 IPO(t,t+2)                                                    4.3                   1.1***




                                                43
                                Internet Appendix Table 2:
             False Negative and False Positive Rates by LCA Submission Month

This table reports, for each month from December 2016 through April 2017, the number of
workers filing LCAs for new employment, the share of all LCAs filed that are for new
employment, the false negative rate, and the false positive rate. A false negative is defined as an
LCA for new employment that does not have a start date that is five to six months in the future.
A false positive is defined as an LCA with a start date five to six months in the future that is not
for new employment.

                 # of workers filing     New employment            False               False
                for new employment       share of all LCAs      negative rate       positive rate
 December                21                     9.7%               90.5%               84.6%
 January                 64                    22.5%               29.7%               34.8%
 February             1,150                    82.4%                1.4%                5.9%
 March                2,292                    78.5%                1.7%               10.5%
 April                   18                     6.0%               83.3%               96.7%




                                                 44
                              Internet Appendix Table 3:
       H-1B Lottery Win Rate and the Probability of Receiving Subsequent Funding:
                           Alternative Application Windows
This table reports regression analysis of the effect of win rate in H-1B visa lotteries on the
probability of receiving subsequent funding. The dependent variable is Funded, which is an
indicator that equals 100 if a firm receives subsequent external funding in the three years
following the lottery and zero otherwise. The main independent variable is Win Rate, which is
the number of H-1B visas a firm wins through the lottery in a year divided by the number of
applicants. In columns (1) and (2), the number of applications is measured using LCA filings in
January through March of the prior fiscal year (as opposed to February through March as in
Table 3). In columns (3) and (4), the number of applications is measured using LCA filings in
December through March of the prior fiscal year. The even numbered columns include industry-
city-year fixed effects and the following firm controls: log(number rounds of financing), log($
amount raised previously), log(months since first round), log(months since last round),
log(number of H-1B applications), log($ salary for H-1B positions), and log(1 + number of prior
patents). The numbers in brackets are t-statistics based on standard errors clustered by firm.
***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1-percent, 5-percent, and 10-percent levels,
respectively.
                                            January ­ March               December ­ March
                                          (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)
 Win Rate                                 8.67***       10.24***         8.62***      10.09***
                                        [3.97]         [3.33]          [3.94]        [3.27]
 Control Variables?                       No            Yes              No             Yes
 Industry-City-Year fixed effects?        No            Yes              No             Yes
 R2                                    0.006          0.558           0.006           0.558
 Adjusted-R2                           0.006          0.119           0.006           0.119
 Number of Observations                2,615          2,615           2,617           2,617




                                                45
               Internet Appendix Table 4: Logit and Conditional Logit Results
This table reports robustness tests of the regression analysis of the effect of win rate in H-1B visa
lotteries on the probability of receiving subsequent funding. The dependent variable is Funded,
which is an indicator that equals 100 if a firm receives external funding in the three years
following the lottery and zero otherwise. The main independent variable is Win Rate, which is
the number of H-1B visas a firm wins through the lottery in a year divided by the number of
applicants. Column (1) reports results from a logit model. Column (2) reports results from a
conditional logit model that conditions out the effect of industry-city-year effects and includes
the following firm controls: log(number rounds of financing), log($ amount raised previously),
log(months since first round), log(months since last round), log(number of H-1B applications),
log($ salary for H-1B positions), and log(1 + number of prior patents). The number in brackets
is a robust z-score. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1-percent, 5-percent, and
10-percent levels, respectively.
 Estimation Method                                Logit                      Conditional Logit
                                                   (1)                              (2)
 Win Rate                                         0.33***                          0.44***
                                                 [3.69]                          [3.15]
 Control Variables?                                No                               Yes
 Industry-City-Year fixed effects?                 No                               Yes
 Pseudo-R2                                        0.004                            0.125
 Number of Observations                           2,570                            2,570




                                                 46
