                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              BE CAUTIOUS WITH THE PRECAUTIONARY PRINCIPLE:
            EVIDENCE FROM FUKUSHIMA DAIICHI NUCLEAR ACCIDENT

                                      Matthew J. Neidell
                                      Shinsuke Uchida
                                      Marcella Veronesi

                                      Working Paper 26395
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26395


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2019




We thank Michele Baggio, Geoffrey Barrows, Francois Cohen, Olivier Deschenes, Tatyana
Deryugina, Lucija Muehlenbachs, Peter Martinsson, Jisung Park, Alberto Salvo, Reed Walker,
and Hendrik Wolff for their suggestions. The authors would also like to thank for their comments
participants at the 6th IZA Workshop on "Environment and Labor Market," 6th World Congress
of Environmental and Resource Economists, Workshop on "Environment & Health: An
Economic Perspective" at the Ecole Normale Supérieure Paris-Saclay, Cachan, 6th IAERE
Conference, 23rd Annual Meeting of the Society of Environmental Economics and Policy
Studies, and seminar participants at American University, Asian Development Bank, Hitotsubashi
University, Nagoya City University, Shinshu University, and University of Verona. We
acknowledge data support from the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare of Japan that provided
mortality counts by cause and age class upon special tabulation request. We also acknowledge
financial support from Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Murata Science Foundation,
and Shikishima Research and Cultural Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Matthew J. Neidell, Shinsuke Uchida, and Marcella Veronesi. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Be Cautious with the Precautionary Principle: Evidence from Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear
Accident
Matthew J. Neidell, Shinsuke Uchida, and Marcella Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 26395
October 2019
JEL No. I12,K32,Q41

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper provides a large scale, empirical evaluation of unintended effects from invoking the
precautionary principle after the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear accident. After the accident, all
nuclear power stations ceased operation and nuclear power was replaced by fossil fuels, causing
an exogenous increase in electricity prices. This increase led to a reduction in energy
consumption, which caused an increase in mortality during very cold temperatures. We estimate
that the increase in mortality from higher electricity prices outnumbers the mortality from the
accident itself, suggesting the decision to cease nuclear production has contributed to more deaths
than the accident itself.

Matthew J. Neidell                                       Marcella Veronesi
Department of Health Policy and Management               Department of Economics
Columbia University                                      University of Verona
722 W 168th Street, 6th Floor                            Via Cantarane 24
New York, NY 10032                                       Verona 37129
and NBER                                                 Italy
mn2191@columbia.edu                                      and ETH Zurich
                                                         marcella.veronesi@univr.it
Shinsuke Uchida
Graduate School of Economics
Nagoya City University
1 Yamanohata, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku
Nagoya 467-8501
Japan
suchida@econ.nagoya-cu.ac.jp
         As a regulatory tool, the precautionary principle has been met with mixed reactions.

While many variants exist, a generally accepted definition of the principle is that activities

should not proceed when the threats of damage are not fully understood.1 A major concern with

this principle is that by focusing solely on the risk from action, it fails to consider the risk from

the alternative action. Something abandoned out of precaution is replaced by something else,

which may also carry risk. From an economic perspective, it fails to consider the tradeoffs

inherent in policy decisions.

         In this paper, we provide a large scale, empirical evaluation of the tradeoff from invoking

the precautionary principle using the nuclear power plant shutdowns resulting from the accident

at Fukushima, Japan.2 The accident, which resulted from a Tsunami caused by the 4th largest

earthquake in recorded history, led to a nuclear meltdown at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear

power plant. Driven by long-standing concerns over the unknown effects from radiation risk, this

rejuvenated the anti-nuclear movement.3 Within 14 months of the accident, nuclear power

production came to a complete halt in Japan.4

         The decrease in nuclear energy production did not come without a cost: higher electricity

prices. To meet electricity demands, the reduction in nuclear energy production was offset by

increased importation of fossil fuels, which increased the price of electricity by as much as 38

percent in some regions. These higher electricity prices led to a decrease in electricity



1
  E.g., World Charter for Nature (1983); Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (1992, principle 15).
2
  While there are several case studies that evaluate this tradeoff (see, for example, those described in Adler 2000;
Sunstein 2003), we are unaware, to the best of our knowledge, of large scale, systematic evidence.
3
  While there may be many reasons behind the anti-nuclear movement, nearly all are rooted in the precautionary
principle. The main damages from nuclear power include risk from an accident, risk from nuclear waste and routine
radioactive releases, all of which raise concerns with risks from radiation exposure. Additional concerns include
increased nuclear proliferation and threats of terrorism, both of which also relate to unknown risks and damages, and
thus relate to the precautionary principle.
4
  The accident also triggered opposition to nuclear production around the globe, with several nations ceasing nuclear
operations shortly after the Fukushima accident.


                                                                                                                   2
consumption, particularly during times of the year with greater heating demand. Given the role

that climate control plays in providing protection from extreme weather events, we find that the

reduced electricity consumption caused an increase in mortality. Our estimated increase in

mortality from higher electricity prices significantly outweighs the mortality from the accident

itself, suggesting the decision to cease nuclear production caused more harm than good.

           We produce these results using the following strategy. First, we document that the

shutdown of nuclear power plants increased electricity prices, with strong variation throughout

the country depending on the initial energy mix within a region. For example, regions with

almost no nuclear energy before the accident experienced electricity prices increases around 10

percent, whereas regions with higher dependence on nuclear experienced prices increases up to

40 percent. The highly regulated nature of residential electricity markets in Japan means that

supply factors contributed to these price changes, suggesting the price changes are exogenous to

consumer demand for electricity.

           Second, we explore how the price changes affected electricity consumption, estimating

models that include multiple fixed effects to control for many possible sources of confounding.

For example, in our richest specification we compare electricity consumption in Tokyo in

January, 2012 to electricity consumption in Tokyo in January, 2011. We find that electricity

consumption decreased roughly 1-2 months after price changes occur, a finding consistent with

models of rational inattention (e.g., Salee 2013, Auffhammer and Rubin 2018). The decreases in

electricity consumption are more pronounced during the winter5, suggesting less protection

during the coldest times of the year.




5
    Most sources of heating and cooling in Japan rely on energy from the grid except for Northern Japan.


                                                                                                           3
         Third, we explore the consequences from the reduced electricity consumption by

estimating how it moderates the temperature-mortality relationship. We estimate fixed effect

models with flexible temperature bins to relate exogenous changes in monthly temperature to

mortality. Similar to previous research, we find that extreme temperatures affect mortality (e.g.,

Deschenes and Moretti 2009, Deschenes and Greenstone 2011, Barreca et al. 2016, Karlsson and

Ziebarth 2018), in particular during very cold temperatures, though the effects from higher

temperatures are small given high rates of air conditioning penetration, comparable to more

recent estimates in the US. We then interact temperature with electricity prices to explore how

electricity prices moderate the relationship between temperature and mortality. We find

increased mortality effects from extreme cold weather, suggesting the decreased consumption of

electricity that resulted from higher electricity prices increased mortality.6 Our findings are

robust to a wide variety of specification tests.

         To put these estimates in context, we calculate that the higher electricity prices resulted in

at least an additional 1,280 deaths during 2011-2014. Since our data only covers the 21 largest

cities in Japan, which represents 28 percent of the total population, the total effects for the entire

nation are even larger. Meanwhile, the number of deaths due to the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear

accident is much lower. No deaths have yet to be directly attributable to radiation exposure,

though projections estimate a cumulative 130 deaths (Ten Hoeve and Jacobson 2012). An

estimated 1,232 deaths occurred as a result of the evacuation after the accident.7 Therefore, the

deaths from the higher electricity prices likely outnumber the deaths from the accident in only




6
  This finding is consistent with the evidence from Chirakijja et al. (2019), who find that lower energy prices in the
US as a result of natural gas expansion decreased mortality rates, and Bhattacharya et al. (2003), who find that cold
shocks lead to decreased nutrition.
7
  These estimates we gathered from interviews conducted in local municipalities in Fukushima in March 2015 by the
Tokyo Shimbun Newspaper (Tokyo Shimbun 2016).


                                                                                                                    4
four years if we extrapolate our estimates to the entire country, and almost certainly outnumber

the deaths over a longer time period given that the higher electricity prices persisted beyond the

end of our study. This suggests that ceasing nuclear energy production has contributed to more

deaths than the accident itself.



Electricity markets in Japan

         For the period of our analysis, 2007-2014, the electricity market in Japan was heavily

regulated.8 The market consisted of ten regions (Figure 1). In each region, there was only one

electric power company where households can purchase their electricity. Household electricity

bills consist of nonlinear price schedules: a basic delivery charge and 3-tier energy charges based

on consumption in the previous month (1-120kWh, 121-300kWh and over 300kWh).9 To change

the rate of the basic charge and/or 3-tier energy charges for residential electricity, electricity

companies were required to apply to the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI) for

permission. Any request for a price change must relate to the electric power company's operating

costs, the level of investment, and the dependence on fossil-fuel based power generation (coal,

liquefied natural gas, and oil).

         As shown in Figure 2, prices were relatively steady and quite comparable across the

regions before the Fukushima accident in 2011. In fact, during this time, applications for a price

change were approved almost simultaneously for the ten electricity companies. Between 2007




8
 The residential electricity market in Japan has been deregulated since April 2016.
9
 Six regions (Hokkaido, Tohoku, Tokyo, Hokuriku, Chubu and Kyushu) and the remaining four regions (Kansai,
Chugoku, Shikoku and Okinawa) have slightly different pricing systems; the first group of regions applies the
monthly basic charge per 10A and the latter a minimum charge of 1-15kWh.


                                                                                                                5
and 2011, each region underwent just one approved price change (in 2008), due to the surge in

world oil prices.10

          Shortly after the Fukushima disaster, all nuclear power reactors ceased production in

Japan.11 Shortage of power generation from these shutdowns was mostly offset by increasing the

importation of fossil fuels. The electricity power companies resumed operations of old, often idle

coal, gas, and oil-fired power generators to convert the fuel into energy. The share of power

generation from fossil fuels rose from 62 to 88 percent in the four years after the earthquake,

while the share of nuclear power generation declined from over 30 percent to zero (U.S. Energy

Information Administration, 2015). This led to significant increases in energy prices.

          Furthermore, the dependence on nuclear power prior to Fukushima varied across

regions, ranging from zero to 44 percent. Therefore, the replacement of nuclear power with fossil

fuels also differed regionally after the shutdowns (Table 1). This resulted in a non-uniform

increase in electricity prices across regions after 2011 (Figure 2).12

          The size of the increase in electricity prices depended on the initial proportion of

nuclear-powered generation as well as the choice of how to replace it. As shown in Figure 2,

some regions (e.g., Hokkaido, Kansai, and Tokyo) underwent a sharp increase in electricity

prices while other regions (e.g., Chugoku and Okinawa) experienced a smaller increase. For

instance, comparing the average price index of residential electricity in January 2011 and

December 2014, there was an increase of 33 percent in the Hokkaido region, 29 percent in the


10
   Changes in imported oil prices explain the smaller price shifts across years in Figure 2.
11
   At the time of the Fukushima accident, 37 of the 54 reactors were in operation (The Independent Investigation
Commission on the Fukushima Nuclear Accident 2014). After the accident, all reactors were shutdown until one
reactor, in Kyushu, was allowed to restart in August 2015.
12
   In addition, the oil price peaked at more than $100/barrel in 2012 due to political instability in the Middle East (Iran,
Syria, Egypt, Libya, and Iraq). In general, per unit, the operation cost of coal/gas/oil-fired power stations is much
higher than in nuclear power stations, so the net effect of the replacement of nuclear by fossil fuels is negative.
According to METI (2015), the average annual cost of replacement was about 3.1 trillion yen (0.65 percent of GDP)
in 2011-2014.


                                                                                                                          6
Kansai region, and 38 percent in the Tokyo region. Table 1 shows that, before 2011, the energy

dependence of these three regions on nuclear power was considerable (44 percent in Hokkaido

and Kansai; 28 percent in Tokyo). In contrast, the price schedule did not increase as much in the

Chugoku and Okinawa regions (15 percent and 14 percent, respectively) where the share of

electricity generated by nuclear power stations was very small before 2011 (three percent in

Chugoku and zero in Okinawa).13 We exploit this regional variation in prices over time to

identify the causal effects of interest.



Data

         We collected monthly data in the 21 largest municipalities in Japan from 2007 to 2014 on

residential electricity prices, electricity expenditure, mortality rates, population, and weather.

The 21 largest municipalities consist of the special wards of Tokyo and 20 so-called "designated

cities" (see Figure A1 of the Appendix). A municipality with a population greater than 500,000

can be designated by government ordinance. These cities are located in seven of the ten

electricity regions: Hokkaido, Tohoku, Tokyo, Chubu, Kansai, Chugoku, and Kyushu. The

monthly average price (per kWh) of electricity, obtained from the Japanese statistical office, is

computed as the weighted average of the unit price paid by five groups of households in each

region, where the groups are defined by the consumption level and contract.14



          A. Residential Electricity Price Data


13
   The price schedule in Hokuriku and Shikoku regions did not increase much despite high nuclear dependence. This
is because of a smaller population (and industrial size) than other regions that required a smaller production of the
absolute amount of electricity. Also, they replaced nuclear mostly by coal, which was relatively cheap. Hokkaido,
on the other hand, experienced higher price increase than Shikoku despite having similar nuclear dependence and
economy size. This arose from greater dependence on oil, which was more expensive than coal, after the shutdown.
14
   The five groups are those who consume 160kWh electricity per month with a 20A contract, 250kWh (30A),
330kWh (40A), 440kWh (50A), and 720kWh (60A). The number of households in each group is used as a weight.


                                                                                                                    7
Monthly residential electricity prices are obtained from the Retail Price Statistics Survey by the

Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications of Japan. Given the regulated nature of

electricity markets, these prices are uniform for cities within the same electricity region.



       B. Electricity expenditure

        Given the lack of access to electricity consumption data we instead collected publicly

available data on household electricity expenditure at the municipality level. These data are

obtained from the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, which conducts a monthly

survey to collect information from sample households regarding monthly household expenditure

on various goods including electricity. Households are randomly selected from the stratified

census in each municipality, and asked to record their expenditures for six consecutive months.

In each month, one-sixth of the sample households are replaced by new observations. Because

the collected number of single-member households is very limited at the municipality level, data

are only available for the subgroup of households with two or more members. This monthly

average electricity expenditure is then used to examine electricity consumption by estimating the

price elasticity of demand in the 21 cities during our sample period.

        It is important to note that the vast majority of heating and cooling devices in Japan rely

on electricity for power. For example, air conditioners, which rely on grid electricity, are the

primary source of both cooling and heating, which differs from places like the US. Kerosene and

gas stoves are used at much lower rates, though they are more prevalent in the northern regions

of Hokkaido and Tohoku. As a robustness check, we estimate models that exclude these two

regions (Sapporo, Sendai, and Niigata cities).




                                                                                                     8
       C. Mortality and Population Data

        Monthly mortality data at the municipality level are from the Survey on Population

Dynamics by the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare of Japan. Mortality data are combined

with age-specific city population data to compute age-adjusted mortality rates (per 100,000

population). The annual population of the designated cities by age groups is available from the

Statistics Bureau of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications. We also use

information on cause of mortality to evaluate the robustness of our results.



       D. Weather Data

        We use hourly weather information from the Meteorological Agency of Japan. All but

five designated cities have weather stations in the city center. For those five cities (Kawasaki,

Kitakyushu, Saitama, Sagamihara, and Sakai) data are replaced by the nearest stations in

neighboring municipalities (ranging from 9 to 28 km away). A key variable for our analysis is

hourly average temperature. We follow Deschenes and Greenstone (2011) and Barreca et al.

(2016) to construct temperature bins to approximate the distribution of temperatures. Figure 3

illustrates the annual average distribution of hourly average temperature over eight temperature

bins (<0, 0-4, 5-9, 10-14, 15-19, 20-24, 25-29, >30°C). Each bar represents the weighted average

number of hours per year in each temperature bin, using the total population in a city-year as

weights. Table 2 shows the annual average mortality rates and temperature distributions by

region. Regional variations in hourly temperature are mainly observed in both tails of the

temperature distribution.

        Other meteorological elements and air pollution are potential confounders in the

relationship between temperature and mortality. To address this, we also collected data on




                                                                                                    9
precipitation and average wind speed from the Japanese Meteorological Agency, and air

pollution data (Suspended Particulate Matter, SPM; Photochemical Oxidant, Ox) from the

National Institute for Environmental Studies.



Econometric Models

           In this section, we describe the two econometric models we estimate. First, we estimate

the effect of electricity prices on consumption. Second, we estimate the effect of temperature on

mortality, and explore whether energy prices shift this relationship.



           A. Electricity prices and demand

            To explore the relationship between residential electricity prices and electricity demand,

we follow the empirical model developed by Auffhammer and Rubin (2018). Specifically, we

estimate the following equation:



(1) log(EXPct) = log(Pct-k) + Xct + ct + ct



where EXPct is the average household expenditure of electricity in city c and month t, and Pct-k is

the average residential electricity price in month t-k. The parameter of interest is (-1), which

represents the price elasticity of residential electricity demand.15 As previously discussed, the

regulated electricity market dictates that price changes are driven solely by supply-side factors,

suggesting price changes are exogenous to demand-side factors, enabling identification of the




                                                                                                                
15
     Recall that we only observe electricity expenditure data. Since      =      + 1, the price elasticity is      =
                                                                                                                
 - 1.


                                                                                                                10
parameter . Based on the law of demand, we hypothesize that higher electricity prices reduces

energy consumption (-1<0) (hypothesis 1).

         Although energy prices change monthly, consumers may not respond immediately to

price changes because of rational inattention (Salee 2013, Auffhammer and Rubin 2018). For

example, households in Japan usually learn about residential electricity prices when they receive

their electricity bill, which specifies the price during the previous period (i.e., the first price lag).

The bill of the previous month arrives about ten days into the current billing period, with

payment due within two weeks for automatic billing and within 30 days for cash payments.

Given this billing structure, household decisions about electricity consumption may respond to

electricity prices with a lag, as evidence within the US supports (Auffhammer and Rubin 2018).

Therefore, we allow for a possible delayed effect of price changes on consumption by allowing

price to enter equation (1) with a lag as denoted by t-k, where k = {0, 1, 2}. We also use the

average price rather than the marginal price given previous evidence that suggests that

consumers respond to the average electricity price and not to the marginal price because of the

cognitive burden of understanding complex pricing (e.g., Shin 1985; Metcalf and Hassett 1999;

Bushnell and Mansur 2005; Borenstein 2009; Ito 2014).

        To control for other factors that may explain energy consumption, we include several

additional variables in this model. The variable Xct includes several time-varying covariates.

First, we control for weather flexibly as the number of hours in city c and month t where hourly

temperature is categorized in one of the seven temperature bins i < 0, 0-4, 5-9, 10-14, 20-24, 25-

29, >30 degrees Celsius (the 15-19 degrees Celsius bin is the excluded category). Second, we

control for unusually low or high precipitations by using two dummy variables equal to one if

monthly precipitation is less than the 25th or more than the 75th percentile of the 2007-2014




                                                                                                       11
average monthly precipitation in a given city-month, respectively. Third, we include a vector of

household characteristics, such as the total number of household members, the percentage of

children under 18 years of age, the percentage of the elderly (65 or above), the percentage of

adults with a job, the age of the household head, the logarithm of total household expenditure,

the percentage of home ownership, the size of the house, and the percentage of farm households.

Fourth, we account for the destruction and reconstruction of power-supply lines in Sendai after

the earthquake by including a dummy variable equal to one for Sendai city in March 2011.

         This model also includes several fixed effects to account for various fixed

characteristics, denoted by the term ct. We include city-by-month fixed effects to account for

seasonality in electricity use by city, and year-by-month fixed effects to control for time-varying

factors common to all cities (e.g., macro business cycles, national policies such as government

information policy on energy use). We also account for the change in the awareness of energy

saving behavior after the earthquake by including city-by-period fixed effects, where the period

is defined equal to one after the March 2011 earthquake and zero before then. After the

Fukushima accident, energy-saving campaigns were conducted at both national and region/city

levels for several years. As a result, some households reduced electricity consumption and others

replaced heating and cooling devices with more energy-efficient appliances regardless of the

change in the electricity price. Finally, standard errors are clustered at the city level, and

regressions are weighted by the number of households within a city.



       B. Temperature and mortality

         After exploring the relationship between energy prices and consumption, we next turn to

how this affects the temperature-mortality relationship. We begin by estimating the temperature




                                                                                                  12
mortality relationship, adhering to the specification by Barreca et al. (2016). Specifically, we

estimate the following equation:



(2) log(Mct) = iiTcti + Xct + ct + ct.



In this equation, Mct is the monthly mortality rate (per 100,000) in city c and month t. As

specified in Barreca et al. (2016), Tcti represents temperature values over the past two months to

account for lagged physiological effects, with hourly temperature indicators as discussed above.

Based on previous findings, we expect extreme temperatures to increase mortality (hypothesis

2).

         The vector Xct includes controls for precipitation as defined above and a dummy variable

for the excess mortality from the earthquake and tsunami in Sendai city in March, 2011. A series

of fixed effects are included in the vector ct, which includes city-by-year to adjust for

unobservable city-specific, dynamic determinants of mortality rates (e.g., age distribution,

income distribution, and hospital quality),16 year-by-month to control for time factors common to

all the cities (e.g., national business cycles), and city-by-month fixed effects to account for

unobservable city-specific, seasonal factors that may affect mortality (e.g., migration, seasonal

employment, and epidemics such as influenza). Regressions are weighted by city-level

population, and standard errors are clustered by city.

          This model fits temperature semi-parametrically, with the only assumption that the

impact of hourly temperature on the monthly mortality rate is constant within five-degree Celsius



16
  In this equation, we can include city-by-year (instead of city-by-period) fixed effects because there is considerable
variation in temperature within cities over time, unlike electricity prices, which move slowly over time (see Figure
2).


                                                                                                                    13
intervals. Our use of fixed effects allows us to identify the causal effect of temperature on

mortality rates by relying on random variations in the temperature distribution for a given city

and month. This model builds on existing models of temperature and mortality (Deschenes and

Greenstone 2011; Barreca et al. 2016) and the climate-economy literature more generally (Dell et

al. 2014). An important deviation in our model is that we include hourly temperature to avoid

having to distinguish between maximum, mean, and minimum temperatures.



        C. Electricity prices, temperature and mortality

        After exploring the dose-response relationship between temperature and mortality, we

then investigate the effect of residential electricity prices on the temperature-mortality

relationship. This model extends equation (2) by adding the residential electricity price and its

interaction with temperature. Specifically, we estimate the following equation:



(3) log(Mct) = i'iTcti + 'log(Pct-k) + iiTcti*log(Pct-k) + Xct' + 'ct + vct.



where all variables are defined as in equations (1) and (2), with the prime superscript separating

this equation from the previous one. Our main focus is on the interaction term of the temperature

bins and lagged price, , which indicates whether price moderates the effect of temperature on

mortality. Based on hypotheses 1 and 2 above, we hypothesize that mortality rates increase with

the rise of the electricity price during extreme temperatures (>0) (hypothesis 3). That is, if

higher electricity prices reduce the usage of heating and cooling devices, this increases exposure

to extreme temperatures, and therefore the risk of dying. This is a strong hypothesis because we

only expect the interaction terms () to be significant for the temperature bins that affect




                                                                                                    14
mortality, as uncovered from estimation of equation (2). During moderate temperatures,

however, we expect =0 because, although electricity consumption may decline, moderate

temperatures do not affect mortality. Given the same set of fixed effects as before, identification

in this model follows from the exogeneity of temperature and prices as described above.



Results

        A. Electricity prices and demand

        We first provide graphical evidence before discussing estimation results of equation (1).

Figure 4 plots annual average residential electricity consumption per capita by region and shows

a sharp decline in electricity consumption after 2011.17 Correlation between electricity

consumption and prices is about -0.9 in every region in 2007-2014. This is also consistent with

findings from household surveys conducted by the Japanese Ministry of the Environment in the

winter and summer of 2012, which indicate that the average electricity consumption per

household decreased from the previous year by about 1-8 percent, with larger reductions in

regions that experienced large price increases, such as Tokyo and Kansai (Ministry of the

Environment, 2012, 2013). These surveys also show that the annual reduction rates in electricity

consumption are larger in winter (4.9 percent on average) than in summer (2.7 percent).

        Panel A of Table 3 provides the price elasticity estimates of residential electricity

demand, -1, obtained from fitting equation (1) with the different lagged prices to test

hypothesis 1.18 The estimates in columns 1-3 uses the second price lag, the first price lag, and




17
   Data on total residential electricity consumption at the regional level are from the Federation of Electric Power
Companies of Japan. The consumption per region is divided by the size of the respective populations to calculate the
annual average consumption per capita.
18
   Given the slow movements in prices, and therefore high degree of collinearity across lags, we include each lag
separately in these models.


                                                                                                                 15
the contemporaneous price, respectively. We find that the second lag-based elasticity (-0.303) is

significantly different from zero at the 5 percent level. This estimated elasticity accords with the

recent estimate of -0.38 in Japan (Krishnamurthy and Kristrm, 2015). Estimates using the first

lag or contemporaneous price are smaller and less precise than the second lag, a pattern

consistent with the billing and payment structure of residential electricity previously described,

and in line with the findings by Auffhammer and Rubin (2018) who also find the largest

household response to the second lag of energy prices.

         To explore how this response varies by whether families are heating or cooling their

homes, we follow Auffhamer and Rubin (2018) and Chirakijja et al. (2019) and estimate the

price elasticity by season. Winter is a dummy variable equal to one during winter months

(October through March) when electricity use is mostly for heating; summer is a dummy variable

equal to one when energy is mostly used for cooling (June through August). Panel B of Table 3

shows that the price elasticity is significantly different from zero during the winter months (-

0.249), and is more elastic than during the summer months (-0.180). This suggests that people

are more sensitive to electricity price during winter months.19 There are two possible

explanations. One, heating requires more electricity and hence higher payments than cooling (for

instance, increasing the temperature from 0°C to 20°C costs roughly twice as much as decreasing

the temperature from 35°C to 25°C). Two, inexpensive substitutes are more abundant in the cold:

people can wear warmer clothes and use blankets; on the other hand, there are few alternatives to

the use of cooling devices for coping with heat.




19
  Our results are robust to alternative definitions of winter and summer. For instance, if we define winter as
November to March the price elasticity is -0.241; if we define summer as June to September the price elasticity is -
0.129.


                                                                                                                  16
         Our results are robust to several different specifications as shown in Table 4. Column 1

applies the wild cluster bootstrap-t procedure suggested by Cameron et al. (2008) to account for

the small number of clusters (21). Columns 2-4 experiment with excluding different control

variables and fixed effects. Columns 5-6 exclude the northern regions of Hokkaido and Tohoku

where kerosene or gas heaters are more often used rather than electricity. As shown in this table,

our estimates are insensitive to these various changes.



         B. Temperature and mortality

         Figure 5 displays the temperature-mortality relationship from the estimation of equation

(2) to test hypothesis 2. Following Barreca et al. (2016), our estimates account for lagged

physiological effects of temperatures over the past 2 months.20 Estimates for colder temperatures

generally follow patterns from previous studies. The temperature effect generally decreases in

temperatures, with estimates for the two coldest bins significantly different from zero. The point

estimates indicate that the effect of an additional hour below 0°C or between 0°C and 4°C

significantly increases the mortality rate by 0.028 percent compared to temperatures in the 15-

19°C range. This implies that one day below 0°C increases mortality by 0.672 percent. For

comparison purposes, Barreca et al. (2016) find that in US each day below 40°F, which

translates to 4°C, increases mortality by 0.34 percent, though their estimate is based on average

daily temperatures.21

         Estimates for warmer temperatures are small in magnitude and imprecisely estimated.

Although this appears to diverge from previous studies, a likely explanation is the high rates of



20
   Each of the reported estimates represents the sum of the estimated coefficients for the respective temperature bin
in the current and previous months.
21
   We use their estimate from Table 3 for the 1960-2004 period.


                                                                                                                    17
air conditioning penetration, which is close to 90 percent. For example, Barreca et al. (2016) find

that temperatures above 90°F, which corresponds with 32°C, affect mortality during periods

when AC penetration rates were low, but have much smaller effects as AC rates increased.

During the 1990-2004 period, when AC penetrations rates in the US were comparable to those in

Japan, the effect of a day over 90°F is small and statistically insignificant. In light of this, our

estimates align quite closely with the previous literature. We also investigate the underlying

cause of death in Table 5 (columns 1, 2).22 Results indicate that the increase in mortality from

cold temperatures is mainly due to cardiovascular disease. Cold temperatures are related to an

increase in blood viscosity and vasoconstriction, harming elderly people in particular. A similar

effect is found by Deschenes and Moretti (2009) in the US. On the other hand, we do not find

any effect of temperature on mortality due to respiratory disease.

        Finally, we perform a number of robustness checks in Table 5. Column 3 presents our

baseline specification, which includes the full set of fixed effects. In column 4, we omit city-by-

year fixed effects and find that the cold temperature effect is robust. We show that our results

remain robust when we control for air pollution and windchill23 (column 5), and also when we

account for the small number of clusters (column 6).



        C. Electricity prices, temperature and mortality

        Given that we have found a relationship between price and electricity usage and a

relationship between temperature and mortality, we next probe our main hypothesis 3 that

electricity prices affect the temperature-mortality relationship from fitting equation (3). Given


22
   For the sake of brevity, we report estimates for only the most extreme temperature bins (< 0°C, 0-4°C, 25-29°C,
and  30°C).
23
   We use the Steadman index to measure windchill, which is a nonlinear combination of temperature and wind
speed (Steadman 1984).


                                                                                                                 18
that we only found effects on mortality from the coldest temperatures, our strong hypothesis is

that we only expect prices to affect the temperature-mortality gradient at colder temperatures, but

not to affect the temperature-mortality gradient at other temperatures. This is precisely the

pattern we find.

        We present the effect of electricity prices on the temperature-mortality relationship in

Table 6. Our preferred specification focuses on the second price lag given that this had the

largest effect on electricity usage, and is shown in column 1. Recall that we found statistically

significant effects on mortality for temperatures below 0°C and between 0-4°C, making these the

only bins where we might expect an interaction effect. We find a statistically significant

interaction term for temperatures below 0°C, although we do not find one for temperatures 0-

4°C. The positive coefficient on the interaction term suggests that higher temperatures have a

larger effect on mortality when energy prices increase. A 10 percent increase in the residential

electricity prices significantly increases mortality due to very cold hours by 0.01 percent. This is

a sizeable effect on cold-related mortality, contributing about one third of the temperature-

mortality relationship in Figure 5. Meanwhile, for all other temperatures, we do not find a

statistically significant interaction term, which is the pattern we expect given that we did not find

a level effect.24

        Table 6 also shows results using the first price lag and contemporaneous price of

electricity in columns 2 and 3, respectively. Consistent with our previous evidence, we find that

the second price lag has the largest impact, followed by the first price lag. These results are in

line with the billing and payment schedule of residential electricity previously discussed and our

analysis on the relationship between electricity prices and consumption.


24
  Table 6 only shows results for the two highest and the two lowest temperature bins. Appendix Figure A2 shows
the results for all temperature bins.


                                                                                                                 19
       We also perform a robustness analysis with alternative specifications and samples in

Table 7. Column 1 reports the baseline estimates including the full set of fixed effects. Column 2

shows that the cold-price effect remains positive and significant when we exclude city-by-year

fixed effects. Our results hold also when we control for air pollution and windchill (column 3),

when we account for the small number of clusters by wild cluster bootstrap-t procedure as

described by Cameron et al. (2008) with 1,000 replications (column 4, p-values in square

brackets); or when the northern regions of Hokkaido or Tohoku are excluded, where households

use kerosene or gas for heating more often than electricity (columns 5-6).



Welfare Impacts

       We assess the welfare impacts of temperature and residential electricity price on

mortality. We use the parameter estimates of the temperature variables ('s) from equation (2)

and the interaction terms between electricity price and temperature ('s) from equation (3) to

compute the average annual number of deaths from temperatures below 0°C and the proportion

of deaths due to the change in electricity price in our 21 sample cities after the disaster in 2011-

2014. Table 8 shows that the average annual number of cold-related deaths is 1,683, of which

320 deaths are due to the annual average price increase of about 5.8 percent. Combining across

the four years suggests a total of 1,280 deaths. This suggests that 19 percent of cold-related

deaths are associated with the price increase due to the nuclear power shutdown.

       To put these estimates in context, we compare the number of deaths from the replacement

of nuclear power to those from the accident itself. Since our data only covers 28 percent of the

population, the total death toll is likely to be much higher than 1,280 deaths. Assuming the same

elasticity of electricity consumptions, temperature-mortality relationship, and temperature




                                                                                                   20
distribution, this estimate would imply over 4,500 deaths from 2011-2014 across the entire

nation. Meanwhile, the number of deaths due to the Fukushima accident is much lower. No

deaths have yet to be directly attributable to radiation exposure, though projections estimate a

cumulative 130 deaths (Ten Hoeve and Jacobson, 2012). An estimated 1,232 deaths occurred as

a result of the evacuation after the accident as of March 2015 (Tokyo Shimbun, 2016). The

estimated number of deaths from the higher electricity prices outnumber the deaths from the

accident in only four years, and a gap that is likely to grow with time given that the higher

electricity prices have persisted since the end of our study period.25 This suggests that ceasing

nuclear energy production has contributed to more deaths than the accident itself.



Conclusion

          In this paper, we evaluate the downstream effects from invoking the precautionary

principle following the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear accident in which Japan ceased operation at

all nuclear power plants throughout the country. In an effort to meet the energy demands, nuclear

power was replaced by imported fossil fuels, which led to increases in electricity prices. The

price increases led to a reduction in electricity consumption but only during the coldest times of

the year. Given its protective effects from extreme weather, the reduced electricity consumption

led to an increase in mortality during very cold temperatures. We estimate that the increased

mortality resulting from the higher energy prices outnumbered the mortality from the accident

itself, suggesting that applying the precautionary principle caused more harm than good.

          Another potential welfare impact from replacing nuclear power with fossil fuels is the

health effects from local air quality. In addition to the lower marginal costs of energy production,


25
  Electricity prices in all years after 2014 remain at least 10 percent higher than pre-2011 prices (authors'
calculations using residential electricity data described in the Data section).


                                                                                                                21
nuclear power has minimal impacts on local air quality. Fossil fuels, on the other hand, emit a

wide range of pollutants that deteriorate local air quality and have significant effects on

morbidity and mortality (see, for example, Graff Zivin and Neidell 2013, and references within).

Indeed, estimates from the US show that closure of nuclear power plants after the Three Mile

Island accident led to increased particle pollution and higher infant mortality (Severnini 2017).26

Therefore, the total welfare effects from ceasing nuclear production in Japan are likely to be even

larger than what we estimate, and represents a fruitful line for future research.

          Given this surprising result, why do governments invoke this principle? One possible

explanation is that salient events, such as a nuclear disaster, affect perceived risk, which is often

based more on emotions and instincts than on reason and rationality (Ropeik 2011). For example,

after the Fukushima accident, housing prices were affected in places as far away as the US

despite no change in underlying risk (Tanaka and Zabel 2018).27 Meanwhile, deaths from higher

energy prices are largely unnoticed; we cannot attribute any particular death to the higher energy

prices, but can only estimate population level impacts. Although the public and policy makers

place greater fears on the deaths directly attributable to the accident, the two are equivalent from

a cost-benefit perspective, and should be treated accordingly. The precautionary principle

emphasizes salient events ­ the worst case scenario ­ and in doing so ignores the alternative,

thereby encouraging inefficient policy-making.




26
   Although replacing nuclear with renewable resources, such as wind and solar, would not worsen local air quality,
renewables would likely have had higher price impacts, and therefore mortality impacts, given the higher marginal
costs of production. For example, in 2014, wind and solar had 2-2.5 times higher power generation costs than
nuclear (Advisory Committee for Natural Resources and Energy 2015).
27
   Interestingly, the price changes were limited to properties within 2 km of a nuclear plant, despite the fact that the
radiation risk is much wider than 2 km, and rebounded roughly 1 year after the accident.


                                                                                                                      22
REFERENCES


Adler, J. H. 2000. "More Sorry than Safe: Assessing the Precautionary Principle and the
       Proposed International Biosafety Protocol," Texas International Law Journal 35(1): 173-
       210.
Advisory Committee for Natural Resources and Energy. 2015. "Report on Analysis of
       Generation Costs, Etc. for Subcommittee on Long-term Energy Supply-demand
       Outlook." https://www.meti.go.jp/english/press/2015/pdf/0716_01b.pdf. Last accessed
       October 5, 2019.
Auffhammer, M. and Rubin, E. 2018. "Natural Gas Price Elasticities and Optimal Cost Recovery
       Under Consumer Heterogeneity: Evidence from 300 Million Natural Gas Bills," NBER
       Working Paper No. 24295.
Barreca, A., K. Clay, O. Deschenes, M. Greenstone, and J. S. Shapiro. 2016. "Adapting to
       Climate Change: The Remarkable Decline in the US Temperature-Mortality Relationship
       over the Twentieth Century," Journal of Political Economy 124(1): 105-159.
Bhattacharya, J., T. DeLeire, S. Haider and J. Currie. 2003. "Heat or Eat? Cold-Weather Shocks
       and Nutrition in Poor American Families." American Journal of Public Health 93(7):
       1149-1154.
Borenstein, S. 2009. "To What Electricity Price Do Consumers Respond? Residential Demand
       Elasticity Under Increasing-Block Pricing."
       http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/borenste/download/NBER_SI_2009.pdf. Last accessed
       September 27, 2019.
Bushnell, J. B., and E. T. Mansur, E.T. 2005. "Consumption under Noisy Price Signals: A Study
       of Electricity Retail Rate Deregulation in San Diego." Journal of Industrial Economics
       53(4): 493­513.
Cameron, A. C., J. B. Gelbach, and D. L. Miller. 2008. "Bootstrap-Based Improvements for
       Inference with Clustered Errors," Review of Economics and Statistics 90(3): 414­427.
Chan, H. R. and T. Kiso. 2018. "The Effect of Electricity Prices on Residential Solar
       Photovoltaic Panel Adoption: Fukushima as a Natural Experiment," Discussion Papers in
       Economics and Finance No. 18-10, University of Aberdeen.
Chirakijja, J., S. Jayachandran, and P. Ong. 2019. "Inexpensive Heating Reduces Winter



                                                                                                23
       Mortality," NBER Working Paper No. 25681.
Dell, M., B. Jones, and B. Olken. 2014. "What Do We Learn from the Weather? The New
       Climate­Economy Literature," Journal of Economic Literature, 52(3): 740-798.
Deschenes, O. and E. Moretti. 2009. "Extreme Weather Events, Mortality, and Migration,"
       Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(4): 659-681.
Deschenes, O. and M. Greenstone. 2011. "Climate Change, Mortality, and Adaptation: Evidence
       from Annual Fluctuations in Weather in the US," American Economic Journal: Applied
       Economics, 3(4): 152-185.
Federation of Electric Power Companies of Japan. "Electricity Statistics Information."
       http://www.fepc.or.jp/english/library/statistics/. Last accessed March 25, 2019.
Graff Zivin, J., and M. Neidell. 2013. "Environment, Health, and Human Capital." Journal of
       Economic Literature, 51(3): 689-730.
Ito, K. 2014. "Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence from Nonlinear
       Electricity Pricing," American Economics Review 104(2): 537-563.
Karlsson, M. and N. R. Ziebarth. 2018. "Population Health Effects and Health-related Costs of
       Extreme Temperatures: Comprehensive Evidence from Germany." Journal of
       Environmental Economics and Management 91: 93-117.
Krishnamurthy, C. K. B., and B. KA Cross -country Analysis of Residential
       Electricity Demand in 11 OECD-countries." Resource and Energy Economics 39: 68-88.
Metcalf, G., and K. A. Hassett. 1999. "Measuring the Energy Savings from Home Improvement
       Investments: Evidence from Monthly Billing Data." The Review of Economics and
       Statistics 81(3): 516-528.
Meteorological Agency of Japan. "Tables of Monthly Climate Statistics."
       http://www.data.jma.go.jp/gmd/risk/obsdl/index.php. Last accessed March 25, 2019.
Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI). 2015. "Report on Analysis of Generation
       Costs, etc. for Subcommittee on Long-term Energy Supply-demand Outlook." The
       Government of Japan. http://www.meti.go.jp/english/press/2015/pdf/0716_01b.pdf. Last
       accessed March 25, 2019.
Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare. "Survey on Population Dynamics." The Government of
       Japan. http://www.mhlw.go.jp/toukei/list/81-1.html. Last accessed March 25, 2019.
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications. "Retail Price Statistics Survey." The



                                                                                                24
       Government of Japan. http://www.soumu.go.jp. Last accessed March 25, 2019.
Ministry of the Environment. 2012. Survey on the Residential Energy Saving Behavior in the
       Winter 2012." The Government of Japan. https://www.env.go.jp/press/files/jp/20922.pdf.
       Last accessed March 25, 2019.
Ministry of the Environment. 2013. "Survey on the Residential Energy Saving Behavior in the

       Summer 2012." The Government of Japan.

       https://www.env.go.jp/press/files/jp/22132.pdf. Last accessed March 25, 2019.

Rio Declaration on Environment and Development. 1992. U.N. Doc./CONF.151/5/Rev.1.

       https://wedocs.unep.org/handle/20.500.11822/19163. Last accessed September 27, 2019.

Ropeik, D. 2011. "The Perception Gap: An Explanation for Why People Maintain Irrational

       Fears." Scientific American February 3, 2011.

Sallee, J. M. 2013. "Rational Inattention and Energy Efficiency". Journal of Law and Economics
       57(3): 781-820.
Severnini, E. 2017. "Impacts of Nuclear Plant Shutdown on Coal-fired Power Generation and
       Infant Health in the Tennessee Valley in the 1980s." Nature Energy 2(4), 17051.
Shin, J.-S. 1985. "Perception of Price when Price Information is Costly: Evidence from
       Residential Electricity Demand." Review of Economics and Statistics 67(4): 591­598.
Steadman, R. G. 1984. "A Universal Scale of Apparent Temperature." Journal of Climate
       Applied Meteorology 23: 1674-1687.
Sunstein, C. 2003. "Beyond the Precautionary Principle." University of Pennsylvania Law
       Review 151(3): 1003-1058.
Tanaka, S. and J. Zabel. 2018. "Valuing Nuclear Energy Risk: Evidence from the Impact of the
       Fukushima Crisis on U.S. House Prices." Journal of Environmental Economics and
       Management 88: 411-426.
Ten Hoeve, J.E. and M.Z. Jacobson. 2012. "Worldwide health effects of the Fukushima Daiichi
       nuclear accident." Energy and Environmental Science 5(9): 8743.
The Independent Investigation Commission on the Fukushima Nuclear Accident (IIC). 2014. The
       Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Station Disaster: Investigating the Myth and Reality,
       New York: Routledge.


                                                                                              25
Tokyo Shimbun Newspaper. (2016) "Fukushima-related death reaches 1368, with an annual
       increase of 136 in 2015." March 6, 2016 (in Japanese).
U.S. Energy Information Administration (U.S. EIA). 2015. "Japan Plans to Restart some Nuclear
       Stations in 2015 after Fukushima Shutdown."
       https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=19951. Last accessed March 25, 2019.
World Charter for Nature. 1983. Environmental Conservation 10(1): 67-68.




                                                                                          26
FIGURE 1. THE TEN REGIONS OF THE ELECTRICITY MARKET IN JAPAN
    Source: The Federation of Electric Power Companies of Japan (FEPC)




                                                                         27
 FIGURE 2. MONTHLY AVERAGE PRICE INDEX OF RESIDENTIAL ELECTRICITY BY REGION,
                           2007-2014 (2010 = 100)

Notes: The figure shows the average monthly price index of residential electricity in Japan by region for
the period 2007-2014. The vertical dashed line indicates March 2011 when the Tohoku earthquake and
tsunami triggered the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster. Data are from the Retail Price Survey by the
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications (https://www.stat.go.jp/english/data/kouri/index.html).




                                                                                                            28
                                    1,000 1,250 1,500 1,750
         Number of Hours per Year
                                    750
                                    500
                                    250




                                                              <0°C   0-4°C   5-9°C 10-14°C 15-19°C 20-24°C 25-29°C >30°C


                                    FIGURE 3. DISTRIBUTION OF HOURLY TEMPERATURES, 2007-2014
Notes: The figure represents the average number of hours per year in each temperature bin (< 0, 0-4, 5-9,
10-14, 15-19, 20-24, 25-29, and  30 degrees Celsius) weighted by the total population in a city-year. The
figure refers to the seven electricity regions included in our analysis (Hokkaido, Tohoku, Tokyo, Chubu,
Kansai, Chugoku, and Kyushu). Data are from the Meteorological Agency of Japan for years 2007-2014.




                                                                                                                           29
  FIGURE 4. ANNUAL AVERAGE RESIDENTIAL ELECTRICITY CONSUMPTION PER CAPITA
                      BY REGION, 2007-2014 (2010 = 100)


Notes: The figure represents average residential electricity consumption per capita by region before (blue
squares) and after (red diamonds) the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Station accident in 2011 with
electricity consumption in 2010 as baseline. The first figure refers to the national distribution of residential
electricity consumption while the remaining figures refer to the seven electricity regions included in our
analysis (Hokkaido, Tohoku, Tokyo, Chubu, Kansai, Chugoku, and Kyushu). Data are from the Electricity
Statistics Information by the Federation of Electric Power Companies of Japan for years 2007-2014.




                                                                                                                   30
      .002
      .001
      0
      -.001




              <0          0-4        5-9      10-14        15-19       20-24        25-29        >30
                                      Hourly Average Temperature (°C)

                   Estimated Impact of an hour in 8 Temperature Bins on Log Mortality Rate,
                                   Relative to an hour in the 15-19 °C Bin


       FIGURE 5. CUMULATIVE DYNAMIC ESTIMATES OF TEMPERATURE-MORTALITY
                                RELATIONSHIP

Notes: The dependent variable is the logarithm of the monthly mortality rate. The figure plots the point
estimates (dots in continuous line) and the 95 percent confidence intervals (dots in dashed line) of the
temperature coefficients  obtained by fitting equation (2). The excluded category is a temperature in the
15°C-19°C range. Each of the plotted estimates is calculated by the sum of the coefficient estimates of each
temperature bin  in the current and the previous months. Regressions are weighted by city population.
Standard errors are clustered at the city level. Data refer to the period 2007-2014.




                                                                                                               31
 TABLE 1. COMPOSITION OF JAPAN ELECTRICITY PRODUCTION BY REGION (2010, 2014)

                               Panel A                                      Panel B
                          Fuel types in 2010                          Change in 2010-2014
                            (percentage)                               (percentage point)
                Nuclear       Coal       Oil      Gas       Nuclear       Coal        Oil    Gas
 Hokkaido              44        31         8         0          -44        20        20         1
 Tohoku                26        34         3        22          -26          6         5       12
 Tokyo                 28        10        10        45          -28          7        -3       23
 Chubu                 15        26         4        46          -15          0        -3       15
 Hokuriku              28        44         3         0          -28        21          5        0
 Kansai                44        21         5        20          -44          3       12        26
 Chugoku                3        58        13        19           -3         -3        -4        6
 Shikoku               43        36         6         5          -43        20        13         3
 Kyushu                39        27         7        19          -39          5         8       20
 Okinawa                0        77        21         0            0       -12         -8       18
Notes: Panel A shows the percentage of electricity production by fuel type and region in 2010. Panel B
shows the change in percentage point of the electricity production by fuel type and region. We omit
renewable energy (hydro and others) from the table to improve readability. Their share was small and
changed little in 2010-2014. Source: Chan and Kiso (2018).




                                                                                                         32
 TABLE 2--DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS ON AVERAGE MORTALITY RATE AND
               TEMPERATURE EXTREMES, 2007-2014

                              All-age mortality rate             Number of hours per year
                         Total       Male        Female          < 0       0-4°C      30
Total                   846.16      926.90       768.49           173       882       371
By electricity region
   01 Hokkaido            824.73     936.24       725.51          2,011 1,355          27
   02 Tohoku              837.33     917.18       762.67           403      1,650     156
   03 Tokyo               790.79     865.83       716.07            43       779      357
   04 Chubu               905.08     979.58       832.12            68       878      403
   05 Kansai              965.33    1,068.85      868.93            31       846      495
   06 Chugoku             822.62     880.36       768.55            82      1,006     480
   07 Kyushu              855.07     929.75       787.86            29       660      438
Notes: The mortality rate indicates the number of deaths per 100,000 weighted by the total
population in a city-year. The number of hours per year is calculated as the average number
of hours per year in each temperature bin (< 0°C, 0-4°C, and  30) weighted by the total
population in a city-year in the 2007-2014 period. The table refers to the seven electricity
regions included in our analysis (Hokkaido, Tohoku, Tokyo, Chubu, Kansai, Chugoku, and
Kyushu). Data on temperature are from the Meteorological Agency of Japan. Data on
mortality rate are from the Survey on Population Dynamics by the Ministry of Health, Labor
and Welfare of Japan.




                                                                                               33
          TABLE 3 PRICE ELASTICITY OF RESIDENTIAL ELECTRICITY DEMAND
Log(price)                                       2 lags                  1 lag               Current
                                                   (1)                    (2)                  (3)
Panel A. Baseline
                                                -0.303**                -0.198                -0.163
                                                 (0.108)               (0.122)               (0.135)
Panel B. Seasonality
Winter                                            -0.249**               -0.155                 -0.119
                                                   (0.110)              (0.113)                (0.116)
Summer                                              -0.180               -0.004                  0.039
                                                   (0.184)              (0.218)                (0.220)
Notes: Each column denotes a separate regression with different lags of the average residential electricity
price: column 1 uses the second lag of price, column 2 the first lag of price, and column 3 the
contemporaneous price. Panel A shows price elasticities for the baseline model. They refer to the
estimated coefficients -1 obtained by fitting equation (1) where the dependent variable is the logarithm
of the average household expenditure of electricity in city c and month t. Panel B shows the price
elasticity for winter months (October through March) and summer months (June through August). All
regressions include city-by-month fixed effects, year-by-month fixed effects, city-by-period fixed
effects, and other control variables, that is a dummy variable equal to one for Sendai city in March 2011;
the number of hours where hourly temperature is categorized in one of the seven temperature bins < 0,
0-4, 5-9, 10-14, 20-24, 25-29, >30°C; two dummy variables equal to one if monthly precipitation is less
than the 25th or more than the 75th percentile of the 2007-2014 average monthly precipitation in a given
city-month, respectively; a vector of household characteristics, such as the total number of household
members, the percentage of children under 18 years of age, the percentage of the elderly, the percentage
of adults with a job, the age of the household head, the logarithm of total household expenditure, the
percentage of home ownership, the size of the house, and the percentage of farm households. All
regressions are weighted by the number of households, and standard errors clustered at the city level are
presented in parentheses. Data refer to the period 2007-2014. ** indicates significance at the 5% level.




                                                                                                              34
                   TABLE 4-- PRICE ELASTICITY OF RESIDENTIAL ELECTRICITY DEMAND:
                                        ROBUSTNESS CHECKS

                                           (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)
Price elasticity                        -0.303**     -0.292***     -0.338**      -0.303**      -0.242**    -0.277**
                                         (0.108)       (0.041)      (0.108)       [0.011]       (0.097)     (0.115)
City-by-month fixed effects                Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
Year-by-month fixed effects                Yes           No           Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes
Other controls                             Yes           No           No            Yes           Yes         Yes
Notes: The price elasticity is computed by using the estimate of the logarithm of the average residential electricity
price with two-month lagged from fitting equation (1). Column 1 shows our main specification with the full set of
fixed effects and controls. Column 2 includes only city-by-month fixed effects and column 3 adds year-by-month
fixed effects. Column 4 presents in square brackets p-value obtained by wild cluster bootstrap-t procedure as
described by Cameron et al. (2008) with 10,000 replications to account for the small number of clusters. Column 5
excludes Hokkaido and column 6 excludes Tohoku. All regressions are weighted by the number of households, and
standard errors clustered at the city level are presented in parentheses. Data refer to the period 2007-2014. ***, **
indicate significance at the 1% and 5% level, respectively.




                                                                                                                35
                                  TABLE 5-- TEMPERATURE-MORTALITY RELATIONSHIP:
                                      CAUSE OF DEATH AND ROBUSTNESS CHECKS

                                  Cardiovascular      Respiratory      Baseline      No city-by-year     Air pollution     Wild cluster
                                     disease            disease                       fixed effects      and windchill      bootstrap
                                       (1)                (2)             (3)              (4)                (5)              (6)
Number of hours
     < 0°C                          0.058***              0.028         0.028**          0.040**            0.030**          0.028**
                                     (0.020)            (0.016)         (0.012)          (0.018)             (0.015)         [0.015]
        0-4°C                       0.062***              0.028        0.027***          0.024**            0.028**         0.027***
                                     (0.016)            (0.020)         (0.009)          (0.011)             (0.011)         [0.004]
        25-29°C                       0.003               0.010          0.008            0.013               0.006           0.008
                                     (0.016)            (0.025)         (0.011)          (0.010)             (0.010)         [0.428]
         30°C                        -0.009              -0.019          0.000            0.007               -0.003          0.000
                                     (0.030)            (0.040)         (0.014)          (0.010)             (0.012)         [1.000]
SPM                                                                                                           4.374
                                                                                                            (56.350)
Ox                                                                                                           57.883
                                                                                                            (60.091)
Windchill                                                                                                     0.094
                                                                                                             (0.216)
City-by-month fixed effects            Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes                 Yes             Yes
City-by-year fixed effects             Yes                Yes             Yes              No                  Yes             Yes
Year-by-month fixed effects            Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes                 Yes             Yes
Notes: Coefficients estimates are multiplied by 100 for readability. The dependent variable is the logarithm of the monthly mortality
rate. Column 1 refers to mortality due to cardiovascular disease while column 2 due to respiratory disease. Column 3 reports our
baseline estimates computed as the sum of the coefficient estimates for each temperature bin in the current and previous months by
fitting equation (2). Column 4 excludes city-by-year fixed effects. In column 5, we report estimates where in equation (2) we control
also for air pollution (Suspended Particulate Matter, SPM; Photochemical Oxidant, Ox) and windchill. Column 6 presents in square
brackets p-values obtained by wild cluster bootstrap-t procedure as described by Cameron et al. (2008) with 1,000 replications to
account for the small number of clusters. The excluded category is the hourly average temperature in the 15°C-19°C range.
Regressions are weighted by city population. Standard errors clustered at the city level are presented in parentheses. Data refer to the
period 2007-2014. ***, ** indicate significance at the 1% and 5% level, respectively.




                                                                                                                           36
TABLE 6-- THE IMPACT OF RESIDENTIAL ELECTRICITY PRICES ON THE TEMPERATURE-
    MORTALITY RELATIONSHIP WITH ELECTRICITY PRICES AT DIFFERENT TIMES

                                         2 lags       1 lag       Current
                                          (1)          (2)          (3)
               Number of hours
                    < 0°C                0.108** 0.099**             0.044
                                         (0.038)      (0.042)       (0.034)
                       0-4°C              -0.049       -0.059        -0.065
                                         (0.045)      (0.047)       (0.051)
                       25-29°C            0.011        -0.001       -0.015
                                         (0.029)      (0.022)       (0.029)
                        30°C              -0.060       -0.075        -0.094
                                         (0.059)      (0.062)       (0.055)
               Notes: Coefficients estimates are multiplied by 100 for
               readability. The dependent variable is the logarithm of the
               monthly mortality rate. The reported estimates are obtained
               by fitting equation (3) and computed by the sum of the
               coefficient estimates of each interaction term  between
               the average residential electricity price and the temperature
               bins in the current and the previous months. Column 1 uses
               the second price lag of the average residential electricity
               price, column 2 the first price lag, and column 3 the
               contemporaneous price. The excluded category is the
               hourly average temperature in the 15°C-19°C range.
               Regressions are weighted by city population. Standard
               errors clustered at the city level are presented in
               parentheses. Data refer to the period 2007-2014. **
               indicates significance at the 5% level.




                                                                               37
         TABLE 7-- THE IMPACT OF RESIDENTIAL ELECTRICITY PRICES ON THE TEMPERATURE-
                        MORTALITY RELATIONSHIP: ROBUSTNESS CHECKS

                                 Baseline     No city-by-year     Air pollution     Wild cluster       No           No
                                               fixed effects      and windchill      bootstrap       Hokkaido     Tohoku
                                    (1)             (2)                (3)              (4)            (5)          (6)
Number of hours
     < 0°C                       0.108**         0.181***             0.106**         0.108***         0.148**      0.101**
                                 (0.038)          (0.028)              (0.039)         [0.002]         (0.072)      (0.040)
        0-4°C                     -0.049          -0.020                -0.052         -0.049           -0.054       -0.040
                                 (0.045)          (0.028)              (0.045)         [0.240]         (0.053)      (0.056)
        25-29°C                    0.011          -0.004                0.006           0.011           -0.001        0.002
                                 (0.029)          (0.025)              (0.030)         [0.698]         (0.003)      (0.003)
         30°C                     -0.060          -0.144                -0.063         -0.060           -0.089       -0.039
                                 (0.059)          (0.073)              (0.059)         [0.250]         (0.059)      (0.061)
SPM                                                                    34.753
                                                                      (55.899)
Ox                                                                     72.280
                                                                      (58.817)
Windchill                                                               0.147
                                                                       (0.204)
City-by-month fixed effects         Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes              Yes          Yes
City-by-year fixed effects          Yes              No                  Yes             Yes              Yes          Yes
Year-by-month fixed effects         Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes              Yes          Yes
Notes: Coefficients estimates are multiplied by 100 for readability. The dependent variable is the logarithm of the monthly
mortality rate. Column 1 reports our baseline estimates computed as the sum of the coefficient estimates for each
temperature bin in the current and previous months by fitting equation (3). Column 2 excludes city-by-year fixed effects.
In column 3, we report estimates where in equation (3) we control also for air pollution (Suspended Particulate Matter,
SPM; Photochemical Oxidant, Ox) and windchill. Column 4 presents in square brackets p-values obtained by wild cluster
bootstrap-t procedure as described by Cameron et al. (2008) with 1,000 replications to account for the small number of
clusters. Column 5 excludes Hokkaido and column 6 excludes Tohoku. The excluded category is the hourly average
temperature in the 15°C-19°C range. Regressions are weighted by city population. Standard errors clustered at the city
level are presented in parentheses. Data refer to the period 2007-2014. ***, ** indicate significance at the 1% and 5%
level, respectively.




                                                                                                                   38
          TABLE 8--ANNUAL WELFARE IMPACTS OF
    COLD TEMPERATURES AND ELECTRICITY PRICE INCREASES

Total population in 21 cities (million)                               35.2
Total number of deaths (million)                                      0.31
Number of hours < 0°C                                                  237
Average change in electricity prices                                  5.8%
Number of deaths < 0°C                                                1,683
Number of deaths < 0°C due to electricity price increase               320
Notes: We compute the annual average number of deaths in our 21 sample
cities during the period of 2011-2014. The annual average number of deaths
below 0 are calculated by              ×  ×  ×  , where                  is the
parameter estimate of the temperature below 0 in age group j ( j = 0-4, 5-19,
20-44, 45-64, or above 65),  represents the number of hours in the
temperature below 0 in city c and month t;  and  are the monthly
mortality rate and the annual population, respectively, in city c, year y, month
t, and age group j. We sum the average number of deaths across the 21 cities
for each year, and then take the average across all years. The annual average
number of deaths due to the electricity price increase when the temperature is
below 0 are calculated by             ×  ×  ×  ×  , where                     is
the parameter estimate of the electricity price for the temperature bin below
0 in age group j, and  represents the actual year-to-year percentage
change in electricity prices in city c and year y. Estimates by age group are
available upon request.




                                                                                   39
                                    APPENDIX




                  FIGURE A1. LOCATION OF 21 DESIGNATED CITIES
Source: Authors' drawing based on the Federation of Electric Power Companies of
Japan map.




                                                                                  40
      .003
      .001 .002
      0
      -.003 -.002 -.001




                          <0          0-4        5-9      10-14      15-19      20-24     25-29       >30
                                                  Hourly Average Temperature (°C)

                               Estimated Impact of an hour in 8 Temperature Bins on Log Mortality Rate,
                                               Relative to an hour in the 15-19 °C Bin


                                FIGURE A2. THE IMPACT OF RESIDENTIAL ELECTRICITY PRICES
                                     ON THE TEMPERATURE-MORTALITY RELATIONSHIP

Notes: The dependent variable is the logarithm of the monthly mortality rate. The figure plots the point
estimates (dots in continuous line) and the 95 percent confidence intervals (dots in dashed line) of the
coefficients  associated with the interaction terms between the second lag of the average residential
electricity price and the temperature bins. Each of the plotted estimates is obtained by fitting equation (3)
and calculated by the sum of coefficient estimates of each interaction term  in the current and the previous
months. The excluded category is a temperature in the 15°C-19°C range. Regressions are weighted by city
population. Standard errors are clustered at the city level. Data refer to the period 2007-2014.




                                                                                                                41
