                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            CITIES IN THE DEVELOPING WORLD

                                          Gharad Bryan
                                         Edward Glaeser
                                         Nick Tsivanidis

                                       Working Paper 26390
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26390


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




Valentine Gilbert and Matthieu Teachout provided excellent research assistance. Astrid Haas and
Jonathan Leape provided helpful comments. The International Growth Centre provided financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26390.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Gharad Bryan, Edward Glaeser, and Nick Tsivanidis. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cities in the Developing World
Gharad Bryan, Edward Glaeser, and Nick Tsivanidis
NBER Working Paper No. 26390
October 2019
JEL No. H23,J61,O10,R11

                                          ABSTRACT

The fast and often chaotic urbanization of the developing world generates both economic
opportunity and challenges, like contagious disease and congestion, because proximity increases
both positive and negative externalities. In this paper, we review the expanding body of economic
research on developing world cities. One strand of this literature emphasizes the economic
benefits of urban connection, typically finding that agglomeration benefits are at least as high in
poor countries as they are in rich countries. Yet there remains an ongoing debate about whether
slums provide a path to prosperity or an economic dead end. A second strand analyzes the
negative externalities associated with urban density, and the challenges of building and
maintaining infrastructure to moderate those harms. Researchers are just beginning to understand
the links between institutions (such as Public Private Partnerships), incentives (such as congestion
pricing) and the effectiveness of urban infrastructure spending. A third line of research addresses
the spatial structure of cities directly with formal, structural models. These structural models
seem particularly valuable when analyzing land use and transportation systems in the far more
fluid cities of the developing world.

Gharad Bryan                                     Nick Tsivanidis
London School of Economics                       University of California, Berkeley
Houghton Street                                  2220 Piedmont Ave.
London WC2A 2AE                                  Berkeley, CA 94720
United Kingdom                                   ntsivanidis@berkeley.edu
g.t.bryan@lse.ac.uk

Edward Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu
 I.    Introduction

The United Nations forecasts that "Africa's urban population is likely to nearly triple between
2018 and 2050." Together Africa and India account for almost two-thirds of the projected
growth in the world's urban population from 4.2 billion in 2018 to 6.7 billion in 2050. The
urbanization of our planet's poorer countries is one of the most important phenomena of the
twenty-first century, yet our intellectual tools for dealing with the great challenges of developing
world cities remain underdeveloped. In this paper, we survey the economics of developing world
cities, and try to make the case that development economists should spend more of their time
thinking about and working in cities, and that urban economists should spend more of their time
thinking about and working in developing countries.

Throughout most of history, agricultural prosperity and transportation infrastructure generally
preceded mass urbanization, because agricultural surpluses were needed to feed city dwellers.
Today, much of the developing world is urbanizing at lower levels of income and with less
developed governance than America enjoyed when it became a majority urban nation in 1920.
Consequently, developing world cities must face the ubiquitous challenges of urban life with far
fewer resources.   The difficulties of developing world urbanization only increase when national
leaders seek to stymie urbanization, perhaps out of a fear that cities will enable the mobilization
of political opposition.

The study of developing world cities provides a window into topics at the heart of economics.
Cities are home to externalities, both positive and negative. They present both the angels and
demons of human behavior. The knowledge-based growth described by Paul Romer and Robert
Lucas takes tangible form in urban areas. Pigouvian problems, such as traffic congestion and
contagious disease, become hyper-charged in the extreme densities of poorer cities.

In this paper, we divide the field of urban development economics into three broad categories:
agglomeration economies, density's downsides, and spatial models of transportation and
housing. The central question of agglomeration economics is whether cities actually increase
productivity, or whether the observed relationship between density and earnings represents the
selection of more skilled people into cities or omitted variables that both attract people and make
them wealthier. The growing urban development literature appears to confirm the positive effects
                                                 2
of urbanization on earnings that have been found in the wealthy world (Chauvin et al., 2017).
Randomized control trials that induce migrants to come to cities have provided some of the most
compelling evidence supporting the hypothesis that density increases earnings (Bryan,
Chowdhury, and Mobarak, 2014).

Yet there is also evidence suggesting that slums contain millions of people who have been in
cities for decades and remain poor (Marx, Stoker, and Suri, 2013). Resolving the question of
whether developing world slums are dead ends or pathways to prosperity remains central to
research on developing world agglomeration. There is also a need for research that uncovers
means of improving the productivity of developing world cities, or that discovers how to spread
the benefits of urban productivity more widely.

Urban proximity enables poorer workers to connect with employers, but it also enables the
spread of disease and the perpetration of crimes.     Western cities were known for epidemics
until the early 20th century, and water-borne illnesses remain a serious challenge in the world's
poorest cities. New York had high murder rates through the early 1990s, and homicide continues
to bedevil many Latin American and African cities today. Demand for urban density can collide
with limited supply of housing and make living space seem unaffordable. The challenges
created by density create scope for research and public policy action that can potentially make
developing world cities more livable.

Historically, the poorer urbanites of the west typically walked to work and that made the traffic
congestion problem manageable. As the car came to places with limited public capacity, traffic
congestion became particularly severe. Workers in highly congested cities, such as Jakarta and
Sao Paulo, can often face commutes that exceed one hour.

Economists are increasingly analyzing the roles that incentives, infrastructure, and institutions
can play in moderating urban crime, traffic congestion, and disease in developing world cities.
High levels of homicide in many poor world cities has been linked to extremely low probabilities
of arrest and punishment. A large and growing literature is examining how institutions, such as
Public Private Partnerships, impact road maintenance and demand management. One major
finding of this literature is that weak public institutions do not imply better performance by


                                                  3
private institutions; such private providers of public services often have incentives to subvert the
government that is allegedly overseeing them (Engel, Fischer, and Galetovic, 2014).

Analyzing the impact of land use in a city requires fully fledged spatial models that can assess
the full equilibrium implications of building up one area of the city. Similarly, large scale
changes in transportation infrastructure may have impacts that ripple throughout a metropolitan
area. Section IV of this paper particularly focuses on the growing subfield of developing
structural spatial models that can use empirically estimated parameters and forecast the city-wide
impact of policy changes.

While many development economists have been appropriately excited about the scientific
precision generated by randomized control trials, cities are complex systems and many urban
problems cannot be addressed only with research interventions that can be randomized at the
individual. The structural approach to urban economics typically embeds a series of optimization
problems, including the locations and employment decisions of people and firms, and
developers' decisions about construction. These models' parameters are then estimated directly
from the data or by using other sources of information, including randomized control trials.
Different policy choices can then be simulated using these parameter estimates. These models
are just starting to be applied to contemporary policy challenges, but structural spatial models
seem well-suited for land use and transportation decisions in developing world cities.

The future of the developing world is urban, and that generates both challenges and
opportunities. The research that we now discuss represents the beginnings of a robust literature
on developing world cities. There is every reason to believe that this literature will continue to
grow and that it will provide fascinating policy-relevant results.

II.    Agglomeration Economies in the Developing World

Should national governments promote or restrain the process of urbanization? The case for an
active spatial policy depends on many factors, particularly whether cities actually enhance
productivity or are more correlated with productivity.    Empirical estimates of the true causal
magnitude of agglomeration economies are therefore crucial elements in this most basic urban
policy question.

                                                 4
Figure 1 documents two remarkable facts. The first panel plots, at the country level, the
correlation between non-agricultural labor share, and the log of output per worker in agriculture
and non-agriculture. The poorest countries in the world are predominantly rural and agricultural,
implying that these countries lie in the left of the figure. Not only are developing countries
relatively worse at agriculture, most of their workers labor on farms (Vollrath, 2014). The second
panel shows the correlation between urbanization in 1960 and growth between 1960 and 2010
among a sample of poor countries in 1960.




                                                            3
                                                                                                       Korea, Rep.
                                                                                                                                                                           Singapore
                                                                                                                                          Japan
                                                                                                                                  Spain                      Hong Kong SAR, China
                                                                                                             Portugal

                                                            2
                                                                                                                       Brazil
                                                                                                                    Greece
                                                  GDP Growth 1960-2010                     China
                                                                                              Thailand

                                                                                                     Malaysia                Mexico
                                                                                                        Dominican Republic
                                                                                                          Congo, Rep.Colombia
                                                                                                                         Peru
                                                                                                                                             Chile        Uruguay
                                                                                                                    Panama
                                                                                                            Costa Rica
                                                                                                          Turkey
                                                                1


                                                                                         Sri             Algeria
                                                                                             Lanka Morocco      Egypt, Arab
                                                                                                            Ecuador          Rep.
                                                                                                                         South Africa
                                                                                    Sudan  India               Syrian
                                                                                                                 El Salvador
                                                                                                                       Arab Republic
                                                                             Rwanda
                                                                              Papua New Guinea Pakistan
                                                                                                Honduras       Bolivia
                                                                                                            Jamaica
                                                                                                          Guatemala
                                                                                                                  Nicaragua
                                                                                                                     Iraq
                                                                              Nepal    Cameroon
                                                                               Uganda
                                                                                  Afghanistan
                                                                                 Kenya
                                                                                   Benin Cote Ghana
                                                                               Bangladesh
                                                                               Malawi                   Philippines
                                                                                                 d'Ivoire
                                                       0




                                                                                    Togo
                                                                                    Cambodia
                                                                                             Central African Republic
                                                                                           Zambia
                                                                                                 Senegal
                                                                             Burundi
                                                                                            Sierra Leone
                                                            -1




                                                                                Niger
                                                                                        Zimbabwe
                                                                                             Liberia
                                                            -2




                                                                                                 Congo, Dem. Rep.

                                                                         0                  .2                .4              .6                     .8                1
                                                                                                             Urbanization in 1960




Figure 1a: Cross Country Productivity Gaps      Figure 1b: Urbanization and Growth




To paraphrase Lucas (1988), these figures suggest enormous possibilities. Is there something that
Malawi could do, some action that its government could take, that would allow the 75% of its
workers that work in rural areas in agriculture to access the productivity levels of its non-
agricultural, more urban workers, increasing their productivity above that of agricultural workers
in Great Britain? In this section we will try to understand whether these possibilities are real or




                                                  5
whether higher urban productivity might just reflect the selection of more skilled people or better
firms into cities. 2

Is there economic opportunity in developing country cities?

Figure 1a invites the hope that if more people lived in cities in the developing world then
productivity and wages would be higher. In this section we review three classes of theories, each
consistent with the facts, but which have different implications for whether these opportunities
are real or merely illusory.

The first model is that more able people choose to live in cities, which would occur if people
who have an absolute ability advantage also enjoy a comparative advantage at producing in
cities. 3 A second possibility is that the urban wage premium is real but that the amenity losses or
high housing prices ensure that there is no welfare benefit from increasing urbanization. 4 That
model still suggests an urban productivity premium (for why else would private sector employers
be willing to pay higher wages in cities?) but not a welfare premium for rural to urban migrants.

A third model is that city size generates positive externalities that might be static or dynamic in
nature. Static externalities might occur because a larger market size encourages the entry of new




2
    Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh (2014) investigate and reject the hypothesis that the urban productivity advantages
suggested by Figure 1a are purely measurement error.

3
    Lagakos and Waugh (2013) note that if absolute and comparative advantage are independent, then a small wedge
or friction can lead to large differences in productivity between rural and urban dwellers. Bryan and Morten (2019)
use a structural model that assumes that absolute and comparative advantage are uncorrelated and Indonesian data to
estimate the speed with which average wages drop with movement across space. They find that the elasticity of
average wages with respect to the proportion of an original population moving is around -0.039. In their setting, this
implies that despite large spatial wage differences there are only moderate gains to moving people across space.

4
    In the classic Harris and Todaro model, urban unemployment is higher than rural unemployment, but urban

workers earn higher wages if they are lucky enough to be employed.


                                                           6
product varieties, as in Krugman (1991). Dynamic externalities might occur if cities spread ideas
and speed up the right kind of technological progress, as suggested by Lucas (1988).

If the urban wage premium just represents omitted individual characteristics, then there is little
reason to think that moving to cities will make people or the country as a whole more productive.
If the urban wage premium represents place specific assets, then moving to that area will make
people more productive, but it will not have any positive effect on overall regional welfare. If the
urban wage premium represents local externalities, then relocating to the area may generate
benefits for existing residents or for the country as a whole. These externalities typically
represent market failures.

Empirical Estimates of Agglomeration Economies

Urban workers do typically earn more, but does this represent a true effect of place or merely
selection of more able people into cities? The simplest and most common approach to measuring
the economic benefits of agglomeration is to run an individual level regression, where earnings
are regressed on individual characteristics, such as age and education, and local characteristics,
such as area density or total population agglomeration. Within the U.S., such estimates typically
yield a coefficient of .05 when the logarithm of wages are regressed on the logarithm of
population (Ciccone and Hall, 1996, Glaeser and Gottlieb, 2008, Ahlfeldt and Pietrostefani,
2019) meaning that wages increase by about 5% when total population or density doubles. 5
Chauvin et al. (2017) perform three comparable exercises for Brazil, China, and India, finding
much larger effects of density on earnings for India and China.

Young (2013) uses Demographic and Health Survey data to construct consumption equivalents
of education, and uses his data to document large differences in consumption levels between
rural and urban areas in a sample of 65 countries that includes many of the poorest in the world.
His results show that the urban rural wage gap accounts for about 40% of within country




5
    Combes et al. (2010) is a particularly effective paper estimating agglomeration effects in France that controls for
firm characteristics and usees soil characteristics as an exogenous source of variation for density.


                                                             7
inequality in his sample, but he also notes strong sorting on observable characteristics which
suggests that sorting on unobservables may also be important. Gollin, Kirchberger, and Lagakos
(2017) document large consumption differences across density levels in twenty African
countries.

To address the problem of selection on unobservable attributes, researchers have increasingly
relied on migration, natural experiments, and even randomized control trials to estimate the
treatment effect of place on earnings. Glaeser and Mare (2001) began the literature that estimates
the urban wage premium by looking at the wage gains experienced by urban-rural migrants. The
key identifying assumption is that unmeasured worker ability doesn't change over time, or at
least that changes in unobserved worker ability are not correlated with moving across space.
Glaeser and Mare (2001) find that workers who come to cities experience faster wage growth in
the years after they move to large urban areas, which is compatible with the view that cities
enable human capital accumulation. De la Roca and Puga (2017) use administrative data that
enables them to follow the wage patterns of almost all Spanish workers as they move across
geographies. They also find that workers who come to large cities, like Barcelona and Madrid,
experience wage gains over time. 6

In the developing world, Hicks et al. (2017) use panel data from Kenya and Indonesia to present
fixed effect estimates of the urban rural wage gap. Their fixed effect estimates show that urban
workers in Indonesia earn 2.8% more per hour while urban Kenyans earn 26% more.

Limited by the lack of panel data sets, other researchers have produced work surveying rural-
urban migrants who moved first to impoverished neighbourhoods. Perlman (2010) starts with an
initial sample of favela-dwellers in Brazil in 1969 and looks at the outcomes for their children
and grandchildren. She finds that while 72% of the grandparents' generation were illiterate and
94% worked in manual jobs, only 6% of their children in 2001 were illiterate and 63% held




6
    Chetty and Hendren (2018) use income tax data in the U.S. to look at families who move across areas and establish
the impact of place on economic opportunity.


                                                           8
manual jobs. Sixty-one percent of the grandchildren's primary job is non-manual. Alesina et al.
(2019) similarly find that intergenerational upward mobility is related to urbanization in Africa.

By contrast, Marx, Stoker, and Suri (2013) examine a cross-section of migrants in a number of
slums today and focus on whether the migrants who came earlier now earn more. They find no
relationship between time in the city and earnings in Kenya's Kibera and a negative relationship
between tenure in the city and earnings in Bangladesh's Tongi. If successful people just leave the
slum then these facts may reflect the selection of who remains in the slum over 40 years, not a
broader lack of upward urban mobility. Yet it is undoubtedly true that many of those who come
to the city remain quite poor for decades afterwards.

A second approach has been to seek cases in which people, typically immigrants, have been
literally allocated by government programs across space. Edin et al. (2004) provide a classic
example in which the Swedish government directed new immigrants to particular places across
Sweden. However, administrators are rarely willing to completely ignore the idiosyncratic needs
of individuals, and so unobserved immigrant characteristics may well have influenced the choice
of location and biased the results. 7

Sarvimaki et al. (2019) study Finnish farmers who were forced to move after World War II and
given a similar farm in a different part of the country. Relative to a comparison group who were
geographically nearby, the forced migrants were more likely to be urban in the long run and had
substantially higher earnings. Nakamura, Sigurdsson, and Steinsson (2016) study individuals
from a wealthy fishing village whose homes were destroyed by a volcano. Using a spatial
discontinuity design, this study shows that 30 years later the displaced workers were more likely
to be urban, had higher education, and had much higher earnings.

A third approach has seen researchers help design social programs that provide incentives for
people to move across location. The Moving-to-Opportunity experiment required a randomized
share of recipients of housing vouchers to move to lower poverty neighbors in order to receive



7
    The so-called Gautreaux experiment in the U.S. is an earlier experiment where apparent administrative randomness
was used to estimate the effect of place.


                                                          9
the vouchers. Early estimates of the program found few impacts on the children who moved out
of poverty (Katz, Kling, and Liebman, 2001), but more recent work has found quite sizable
impacts on the adult earnings of children who moved out of poverty at an early age (Chetty et al.,
2016).

Bryan et al. (2014) take a similar approach and provide small incentives (about the cost of bus
fare) for rural Bangladeshi workers to move (at least temporarily) to a nearby city. A small
incentive generated a 22 percentage point increase in the number of families reporting that at
least one of their family members had sought work in the city, and a sizeable impact on average
household expenditure which increased by about 33 percent. The study also showed that up to
three years after the small incentive was paid, treatment households were about 10 percentage
points more likely to have a migrant worker from their household. This work suggests real utility
gains from moving to the city, because workers continued to come to cities when the incentive
was no longer available, perhaps suggesting that initial migration was limited by credit
constraints Small scale experiments, however, cannot estimate the general equilibrium effects of
large scale migration to the city, and may also lack external validity.

While the latter studies seem to rule out the possibility that selection explains all of the
agglomeration earnings effect, they use data on migrants themselves, and so cannot look at
whether urban location generates positive or negative externalities. A final form of experiment
shocks the place not the person, and then looks at the impact on people who were in the place
originally. Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti (2010) measured the differing fates of medium
density communities that did and did not receive the investment generated by a "million dollar
plant." The results suggest a 12% increase in total factor productivity for incumbent plants,
indicative of strong positive spillovers that are not internalized in plant opening decisions. This
work requires the place-based shock to be independent of unobserved, time-changing attributes
at the place level. While the "million-dollar plant" experiment comes close, few private or public
investment are completely independent of local characteristics.

Greenstone et al.'s (2010) results on agglomeration economies open up the possibility that levels
of agglomeration are not optimal, but it is not clear that they are directly relevant to developing
countries, where movement costs may be higher even in dense areas, and technologies are


                                                  10
different. As Glaeser and Gottlieb (2009) emphasize, policy requires comparing the benefits that
the winning place gains from having a new plant with the losses that the losing place faces.
Relocation policies require us to know the full functional form of agglomeration economies.

Imbert et al. (2018) uses variation in international agricultural prices to generate plausibly
exogenous variation in earnings across rural areas in China and thus plausibly exogenous
variation in the number of migrants moving to nearby urban areas. In-migration leads to a
reduction in wages and value added per worker along with a move to more labor-intensive
production. These results seem to suggest a standard downward-sloping demand curve rather
than positive externalities from the in-migration of low skill workers.

A firm-level literature links area-level characteristics and plant productivity (Henderson, 1999).
In this case, the selection problem is that more productive plants may move into more productive
places. A parallel "quantities" approach looks at the co-location of industries and tests whether
firms locate near other firms that buy and sell it goods, near other firms that use that same type of
workers, or near other firms that exchange ideas (Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr, 2010). In the U.S.,
the co-agglomeration estimates point to the importance of transportation costs for goods and
people, at least in manufacturing industries.

The literature linking urbanization with dynamic externalities and national growth is smaller and
necessarily less compelling. Many classic theories could also rationalize a causal effect of
urbanization on growth. If fixed cost technologies required large market sizes, as in Rosentein-
Rodan (1943), then urbanization could provide the "big push" that leads to industrialization.
Cities might enable poorer countries to trade with rich countries. The apparent ease of shopping
in Dongguan and Shenzhen's famous electronics markets for all the parts required to create a
state of the art smart phone illustrates this possibility nicely. A final hypothesis is that cities
enable political change, and dictatorships certainly face more revolutions in more urbanized
countries.

The scale of these theories makes them hard to test. Rauch's (1993) pioneering work estimating
human capital spillovers in cities was directly motivated by Lucas's paper. Henderson (2000),
for example, links country-level growth and the level of urban primacy and finds a non-


                                                   11
monotonic relationship. The endogeneity of urbanization levels and their correlations with other
growth-enhancing factors makes causal inference from cross-national data difficult.

A more plausible research path may be to examine the links between cities and the ingredients of
growth, such as new patent creation and patent citation (e.g. Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson,
1993), foreign direct investment (Guimaraes, Figueiredo, and Woodward, 2000), and education
(Muralidharan and Sundararaman, 2015). Sub-national data makes identification more plausible
and makes it easier to see the mechanisms, if any, through which cities are enabling national
transitions from poverty to prosperity.

Can developing world cities become more productive?

The simple cross-national growth correlation shown in Figure 1b warns that restricting
urbanization may have adverse consequences. Yet for most developing world cities, the pressing
policy questions are smaller. City governments need to know whether investment in road quality
or reforming the permitting process will enhance urban productivity.


Transportation infrastructure is one obvious place to look for productivity gains. Firms operate in
particular locations and they need a supply of physical space, access to workers, customers, and
suppliers. Government involvement in transport infrastructure is ubiquitous because transport
infrastructure has some of the characteristics of a natural monopoly (limited non-rivalry) and
usually requires large-scale coordination. As the relationship between transportation, building
supply, and firm productivity cannot be studied in simple partial equilibrium models, we devote
Section IV to this topic.

Productivity may also benefit from improvement in the legal infrastructure that governs firm
behavior. The dense urban environment - and the negative externalities it gives rise to -
intensifies the need for government rules that create both the rights and obligations of firms.
These rules, if too onerous, can reduce productivity (Djankov et al., 2003), but some regulations
seem likely to be beneficial. Designing the optimal set of rights and obligations is difficult
enough under ideal circumstances, but developing countries often have small budgets and a
dearth of effective legal infrastructure (Besley and Burgess, 2000, World Justice Project, 2019).


                                                 12
A system that provides the ability to determine property rights also gives rise to the potential to
abuse that power (Goldstein and Udry, 2008), red tape that appears inefficient and the cause of
corruption may be functioning as a second best means to fund public goods in the presence of
tight government budgets (Banerjee, 1997, Banerjee, Hanna, and Mullainathan, 2013) and, more
generally, the enforcement of any rights or obligations needs some kind of solution to the
guardians problem (Hurwicz, 2008, Björkman, and Svensson, 2009).

Research on institutional improvements requires viable actual or natural experiments and a small
but growing literature now attempts to understand solutions to these problems. Khan, Khwaja,
and Olken (2015) work with government in Punjab, Pakistan to randomize an incentive pay
scheme that rewarded property tax collectors for the revenue they raise. They find a large
increase in government revenues at little cost in terms of tax payer satisfaction or assessment
accuracy. In Kyrgyz Republic, Amodio et al. (2018) provide incentives to reduce bribe-taking
among business tax inspectors and found that this reduction in bribes was passed through to
consumers in the form of lower prices. The work of Banerjee et al. (2014) with the Rajashthan
police provides a more nuanced view. The negative results from several seemingly sensible
strategies serves to remind us of the difficulty of reforming complicated institutions.

The permitting and regulatory environment will be particularly important if local
entrepreneurship is a significant determinant of local success, as appears to be true in the U.S.
(Glaeser, Kerr, and Kerr, 2015). Yet it is unclear if poor countries need more local
entrepreneurship or more foreign direct investment. If developing world cities today will be built
by new versions of Soichiro Honda, who began with a small repair shop, then improving the
permitting and regulatory process for small businesses is crucial. If foreign inputs are critical,
then that leads to an emphasis on making the urban environment more attractive for outside
talent.

How can the economic benefits of cities be more widely shared?

Even the most productive cities often have islands of poverty amidst seas of plenty.      Policy-
makers often want to improve the welfare of their least fortunate citizens. For many urban
leaders, the most pressing policy question is how the prosperity of a few can be expanded into
the prosperity of the many.

                                                 13
Plato's Republic famously noted that "any city, however small, is in fact divided into two, one
the city of the poor, the other of the rich; these are at war with one another." As successful cities
attract both rich and poor people, the existence of urban poverty or inequality is not a sign of
urban failure. The important question is whether cities are turning poor people into middle-class
people or whether the poor are remaining trapped in perpetual pockets of deprivation.

The opportunity atlas of Chetty et al. (2018) documents the low levels of upward mobility for
poorer children growing up in America's cities. While urban America may be productive, it does
not seem to be providing much opportunity for many of its poorer residents. In China, Combes et
al. (2019) find that better educated rural-urban migrants seem to experience much larger wage
gains than less educated workers who come to cities, which is echoed in the U.S. by Autor
(2019).

As these studies suggest, individual education is strongly linked with upward mobility in cities
(Psacharopoulos and Patrinos, 2018). Schools teach children skills that facilitate communication,
such as reading, writing, and grammar, and those skills then enable urban interactions. The
overall level of education in a city is also strongly linked to its success, as measured both by
earnings (Rauch, 1993, Moretti, 2004, Chauvin et al., 2017) and by population growth (Glaeser,
Scheinkman, and Shleifer, 1995). Urban density and education appear to be complements
(Glaeser and Resseger, 2010), which suggests that better education may enable poorer children
to take advantage of urban opportunities.

Next Steps and Research Priorities

Policy makers in developing world cities need evidence on the strength and nature of
agglomeration, and the constraints that restrain their productivity potential. First, new work
should measure the size and nature of the returns to concentration across formal and informal
activity. Do cities facilitate matching between firms and workers and encourage the exchange of
goods and services, or are they escalators that facilitate rapid learning of new skills and
techniques? For residents, how do neighborhoods and slums help or hinder access to economic
opportunity and mobility across social and vulnerable classes? Second, there is a need to
understand the forces that reduce these potential agglomeration benefits. Which constraints on
firms --such as a lack of skills, access to input and output markets, burdensome regulations or

                                                 14
limited energy access--constrain labor demand and support such high unemployment amongst
the young and vulnerable population? What limits workers' abilities to acquire skills and learn
from employers and co-workers as they have in the developed world? And how do the specific
features of developing country cities--unplanned spatial expansion, the persistence of
informality across land and labor markets--drag down economic performance? Evidence on the
size and nature of these forces will require a range of empirical work from RCTs and historical
policy quasi-experiments to structural modeling, but the answers will help policy makers identify
policies with the greatest potential to raise urban productivity.



III.   Infrastructure, Institutions, Incentives and Density's Downsides

Urban proximity enables the spread of ideas and the sale of services, but it also leads to the
movement of bacteria and congestion of city roads. In the developing world, urbanization has
proceeded far more quickly than institutional development. Consequently, massive developing
world cities must address the downsides of density, such as contagious disease, crime, and traffic
congestion, with limited wealth and scarce public capacity. In this section, we focus on three
central downsides of density: pollution, congestion, and crime.

We begin by discussing the costs of different urban harms and then explore several central
themes that cut through the policy responses to most urban disamenties, such as behavioral
responses to policy changes, social returns to infrastructure and public capacity. We then apply
these more general ideas to the topics of housing, planning, municipal finance and water and
waste management.      We end with a brief discussion of climate change and sustainability.

What are the social costs of urban contagion, congestion, and crime?

The first and most basic task is to estimate the size of the costs created by urban disamenities.
This question is particularly crucial for policy-makers with limited time and resources, who are
trying to focus on the urban problems that do the most harm. If air pollution does little damage,
but bad water causes enormous illness, then policy-makers may want to invest more in water
systems. Conversely, if air pollution is more harmful, then policy-makers may want to turn their
regulatory energy towards the factors and vehicles that belch smoke into the air.

                                                 15
The economics literature on the impact of urban air pollution is large and compelling. The air
pollution literature has focused on the adverse health consequences of bad air quality. Currie,
Neidell, and Schmeider (2009) examine air quality monitor data in New Jersey and find that
infant health suffers as air quality deteriorates. One challenge with this work is that poorer
people, who are sicker for many reasons, live in places with worse air. The authors address this
issue by looking at air quality changes over time for a panel of families. Alexander and
Schwandt (2019) look at air quality deterioration that is associated with cheating on automobile
inspections and find that bad air increases asthma and decreases birth weight.

While these papers focus on the U.S., there is also a literature, surveyed by Currie and Vogl
(2013), that looks at developing world cities as well. Arceo-Gomez, Hanna, and Oliva (2016)
find that bad air quality has more serious effects in Mexico City than in the U.S. Cesur, Tekin,
and Ulker (2017, 2018) show that switching from coal to natural gas led to air quality
improvements in Turkey, which in turn improved health outcomes for children and adults. 8 A
smaller literature links air pollution to economic outcomes, such as labor supply, and also finds
negative effects of air pollution (Hanna and Oliva, 2015, Fan and Grainger, 2019). 9 At the city
level, air pollution can also harm the local economy by repelling skilled high-productivity
individuals (Kahn, 1999).

Among economists, Cutler and Miller (2005) and the work of Werner Troesken (e.g. Troesken,
2008) has been particularly important in establishing the historic link between water
infrastructure and public health. More recently, there has been a dramatic increase in the work of
economists on water in the developing world. Gamper-Rabindran, Khan, and Timmins (2010)
found that piped water decreased infant mortality in Brazil. Devoto et al. (2012) found that piped




8
    Quah and Boon (2003) place a dollar value on health outcomes with tools like multiplying mortality estimates by
the value of a statistical life.

9
    Heath, Mansuri and Rijkers (2018) find that high frequency health shocks significantly reduce female labor supply.


                                                          16
water in urban Morocco increased happiness, but not health, presumably because families
already had access to high quality non-piped water. Buchmann et al. (2019) find the particularly
striking result that a health campaign to reduce exposure to arsenic-contaminated water increased
infant mortality by inducing households in Bangladesh to switch to water sources with higher
fecal contamination. 10

As traffic congestion is defined by excessive time spent in travel relative to driving on an
uncrowded road, economists have valued this lost time by multiplying minutes lost by the after
tax wage (Alonso, 1964). More sophisticated papers have used survey instruments and found that
the cost of time spent in traffic is lower than lost wages (Calfee and Winston, 1998). 11
Investment in transportation infrastructure may lead towards urban growth (Duranton and
Turner, 2012) or suburbanization (Baum-Snow, 2007). While reduced form methods can
estimate these impacts, interpreting those estimates requires the structural models that we will
discuss in Section IV.

Most urban leaders accept on faith that reducing crime, and particularly violent crime, to wealthy
country norms is desirable. Government have, after all, long sought a monopoly on violence.
Consequently, the economics of crime and punishment has rarely focused on the costs of crime,
but has instead tried to estimate the impact on crime of different policies, such capital
punishment (Ehrlich, 1975), more policing (Levitt, 1997) and lengthier prison sentences (Kessler
and Levitt, 1999).

The most standard approach to estimating the costs of crime is to estimate the loss to the victims
of crimes that do occur (Chalfin, 2015), so that murders cost millions and robberies cost




10
     The economics literature on solid waste management remains as limited as the literature on water before 2000.
There is however a sizable epidemiological literature that finds robust correlations between disease and proximity to
a wide range of solid waste (Giusti, 2009).

11
     While U.S. studies typically assume that traffic speeds in the absence of the congestion would have been the
speed limit, the poor quality of roads in the developing can reduce travel speeds considerably even in the middle of
night (Kreindler, 2018).


                                                           17
hundreds. These costs may overestimate the true social cost of crime because they omit the
benefits of crime to the criminal, but it seems far more likely that they underestimate the costs of
crime because they neglect fear and avoidance behavior. 12 Ludwig and Cook (2001) use a
contingent valuation survey to estimate the willingness to pay to live in communities without
fear of crime. Hedonic price models can also use the difference in housing prices between safe
and unsafe areas to estimate the social losses due to fear of crime (Thaler and Rosen, 1976).
Most estimates find that urban crime, unsurprisingly, generates significant costs, including
spurring out-migration (Cullen and Levitt, 1999) and reducing tourism (Biagi and Detotto,
2014).

Incentives and Behavioral Change

Much urban infrastructure, such as subways and aqueducts, can be interpreted as adding
effective space to a city where space is scarce. Yet adding infrastructure may not be as cost
effective as reducing the behavior, especially when added infrastructure induces more socially
harmful behavior. Duranton and Turner (2011) empirically document the "Fundamental Law of
Highway Traffic," which is that vehicular miles travelled increase roughly one-for-one with
highway miles built. If this law holds, then building more roads does little to solve traffic
problems, because new drivers will congest the new roads. Consequently, the problems
associated with density often need some combination of infrastructure and incentives.

The crime and economics literature has long asked whether incentives can reduce harmful
behavior (e.g. Ehrlich, 1975, Levitt, 1998, Nagin, 2013), but much of this U.S. based literature
may not translate easily to developing world cities. While over 50% of murders typically lead to
an indictment in the U.S., under 15% of murders in Brazil are solved (Misse and Vargas, 2007).
Corruption, malfeasance, and gang power may be worse in developing world cities.




12
     When person A steals person B's bicycle, then presumably this is a transfer from person B to person A rather than
a pure loss of welfare. Applying this logic to murder, however, is somewhat more problematic, since even if person
A receives some psychic benefit from killing person B, few observers would be willing to include murderous
enjoyment as a reasonable element in any social welfare function.


                                                          18
The pollution and congestion literatures focus more on the impact of regulations than on flexible
incentives. Davis (2008) documents the impact on air quality in Mexico City of the Hoyo No
Circula program, which limited cars ability to drive on certain days. Kreindler (2016) similarly
shows that license-place based bans on driving effectively reduced congestion in Delhi.

The introduction of congestion pricing in London, Stockholm, Oslo and Singapore all provide
case studies on the impact of pricing roads. Typically, the best that can be done with these
interventions is to compare before and after congestion pricing, and it does appear that London's
roads become more passable after it imposed its congestion charge (Leape, 2006). Yet it is not
obvious the results for London will generalize to Jakarta, as in Hanna, Kreindler, and Olken
(2018).

Kreindler (2018) estimates a model of demand for driving trips in Bangalore using an
experimental structure where individual drivers were randomly offered incentives to avoid peak
times on crowded roads. Strikingly, he found that the behavioral adjustment was modest, and
Indian roads wouldn't flow that quickly even if congestion was reduced substantially. This type
of experimental model has promise, yet any small experiment will shortchange the general
equilibrium effects that are ubiquitous in cities.

In congestion, the key behavior that can reduce the benefits of new infrastructure is driving. In
public health interventions, the usual problem is take-up where people choose not to pay
connection fees that cover the "last mile." Ashraf, Glaeser, and Ponzetto (2016) note that both in
New York City history and in African cities today poorer citizens were often unwilling to pay the
marginal cost for connections to cleaner water sources. One empirical question is whether they
will connect if given subsides, or whether penalties imposed on people who don't connect will be
more effective.

Estimating the Social Benefits of Infrastructure

Randomized control trial methods are much harder to implement for infrastructure than for
incentives because infrastructure impacts an area and because randomly relocating infrastructure
is cost-prohibitive. In some cases, simple difference-in-difference methods can estimate the
impact of infrastructure, as Alsan and Goldin (2019) did for sewerage in greater Boston or

                                                     19
Duranton and Turner (2011) did for roads within the U.S. Yet these estimates may tell us little
about any particular new project in Delhi or Nairobi.

The primary tool that economists have brought to infrastructure is cost-benefit analysis, which
attempts to catalogue the gains and losses from building new roads, tunnels, and sewerage
systems. Typically, this work brings together the knowledge of economists and engineers, as in
Meyer, Kain, and Wohl (1965). A central result of the early forays into urban infrastructure
analysis was that bus systems, sometimes on dedicated lanes, are far more cost effective than rail
systems. This analysis helped inspire the Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) systems that have been
implemented in Curitiba, Bogotá, and elsewhere.

In early years, the benefits of infrastructure largely focused on the benefits gained by users
directly. Infrastructure boosters then forecast high projected ridership levels which were disputed
by economists (Kain, 1992). User fee financing creates some fiscal discipline, since projects are
expected to cover their costs, but if user fees are too low to pay for total costs or even operating
costs, then that discipline vanishes. Low fees are typically justified because marginal costs are
below average costs or because of a desire to redistribute to poorer infrastructure users. As
infrastructure investment increasingly relies on alleged agglomeration benefits, the scope for
overselling becomes even larger, which only increases the need for the rigorous structural
modelling that we discuss in Section IV.

New infrastructure projects are often given precedence over maintenance, which is especially
problematic if there are particularly high returns to maintaining older roads and bridges
(Gramlich, 1994). While World Bank statistics claim that Lusaka, Zambia, has almost complete
water connections, in practice some areas of the city seem to lack viable connections much of the
time (Ashraf et al., 2017). The quality of the management of infrastructure will depend on
institutions and incentives. Ashraf et al. (2017) show that the water company in Lusaka is much
quicker to respond to supply problems for customers who pay by the liter than for customers who
pay by the month. We turn now to the institutional side of urban management.

Institutional Reform and Public Capacity




                                                 20
Public institutional capacity is a precondition for any meaningful reform, but it is often difficult
to use modern empirical methods, like randomized control trials, to understand paths towards
better institutions. Some studies measure whether changes in incentives can alter the behavior of
public officials. Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2011) show that Indian teachers appear more
often when pay is linked to performance. Ferraz and Finan (2011) show the Federal auditing of
mayors in Brazil reduces corruption. Yet the impact of any incentives can easily be distorted in a
corrupt institution, so that proving that an innovation can work is not the same as showing that it
will actually change institutional performance.

Most work on the institutions that matter for developing world cities is descriptive or involves
simple comparison. For example, Engel, Fischer, and Galetovic (2014) present a magisterial
overview of Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) throughout the world. Their work typically
reviews the performance of PPPs and sometimes compares that performance with governmental
alternatives. Singh (2018) presents a similar, persuasive study comparing road roughness on
Indian roads that are maintained by public and private entities. In that case, the private roads are
far smoother than their public alternatives.

More generally, private provision of public services has a far more mixed track record. As Engel,
Fischer, and Galetovic (2014) show, private companies often manage to renegotiate with public
entities and radically increase their compensation. Theoretically, private entities should have
better incentives to maintain quality because they can only reap returns if customers use them,
but in some cases, even quality is poor. Certainly, private entities that are paid with public
money have a strong incentive to subvert the system and extract more public resources.

While much institutional research focuses on the executive branch, the judiciary is also critical,
for every market failure is ultimately a failure in the maintenance of property rights (Coase,
1960). If courts fail to protect land rights then people lack the incentives to develop that land.
When courts fail, ordinary people waste time protecting their property from expropriation (Field,
2007).

Property rights over urban land are actually a nexus of rights including the right to use, the right
to develop, the right to sell, the right to rent, and the right to mortgage. In many developing
world cities, these rights are far more fragmented than they are in the west. For example, the

                                                  21
residents of informal settlements may well be protected in their right to use a particular piece of
land, but since they have no title, they cannot sell that land or mortgage their property to start a
business (de Soto, 2000). Economic theory makes predictions about the impact of limitations on
property rights, but there is little research that fully teases apart the impact of partial control over
urban land.

Housing, Planning, Public Finance, and Water and Waste Management

Four large policy areas relate to the downsides of density and the issues that we have just
discussed: local finance, water and waste management, housing and urban planning and zoning.
We now briefly discus the ways in which public capacity, behavioral responses and cost-benefit
analysis play out in this core areas of urban policy-making in the developing world.

Municipal finance is particularly central to almost all efforts to improve urban quality of life. If
a city can't raise public funds, then it will have trouble providing better police or fix potholes or
manage waste. A city without public capacity it may find it difficult to collect the tax that it
needs to fix its public capacity problems. Consequently, cities can get caught in a low
capacity/low revenue trap that may be particularly problematic. Consequently, it is particularly
valuable to learn whether some taxes, such as simple land value taxes, are easiest to collect in
weak capacity environments.

Naturally, the ease of collection needs to be traded off against the other behavioral distortions
induced by particular tax rates. There is a large literature on the behavioral impact of different
tax rates in the wealthy world. The literature is smaller in the developing world, and there is a
particularly a need to understand what taxes particular deter workers and firms from entering into
the formal sector.   The long run research goal should be to generate serious cost-benefit
analysis of different taxes by combining evidence on implementation challenges with evidence
on the magnitude of distortions.

When cities fail to provide decent waste and water management, their residents face the ancient
urban scourge of contagious disease. The externalities that come from disease and waste
disposal explain why governments have been engaged with these issues at least since Rome built
is Cloaca Maxima under the Tarquin kings.        Households appear to have a greater willingness to

                                                  22
pay for better water than to pay to dispose their waste, because it is their neighbors who largely
pay from accumulated rubbish and excrement, but more research estimating private willingness
to pay for water and waste management is important.         Such work needs to be combined with
larger estimates of the costs of water and waste management failure to understand the total
benefits of provides better services. The gap between total benefit and private benefit can help
inform any public decision either to subsidize adoption of better services or to tax non-adoption
of those services.

Since water and waste management typically involve significant infrastructure, these policy areas
also involve institutional choices.    When should these services be provided be governments and
when should cities turn to private provision? How does the institutional nature of service
provision determine service quality and access?       Are there particular local characteristics, such
as public capacity, that should shape the choice of institutional forms?

Cities typically manage their physical land areas, both through land use planning and housing
policy. These policy actions can have profound long-run impacts on housing costs, urban
mobility and the very shape of the city. Once again, policy action should be informed by basic
studies that estimate the far-ranging impacts of planning decisions. The decision to provide
public funding for housing can become better informed if there are better estimates of the long-
run impacts of such housing on economic and social outcomes for its residents.

Access to public housing can be evaluated through randomized-control trials, but changes to
zoning rules are far more complex to evaluate. As local land use rules can have complicated
impacts that reverberate through the city, the structural models that we discuss in the next section
seem particularly well suited for evaluating those rules.     A final important question concerns
the institutional choices for housing and planning authorities. How can public entities acquire
the capacity to do these tasks well?

Cities and Climate Change

We end this section by noting the particularly critical issue of climate change, which may end up
generating large costs for many of the world's cities. Holding wealth constant, urban density is
associated with lower, not higher, carbon emissions (Glaeser and Kahn, 2010). Moreover, many

                                                 23
of the risks associated with climate change are far larger for subsistence farmers than for
urbanites who are enmeshed in a global trading system, where food can be provided by formerly
colder areas that may become more productive due to climate change.

Kahn (2010) argues that poorer countries will be able to adapt to climate change by moving
population centers inland and towards higher elevation areas. As long as sea levels rise slowly,
the adaptation process that Kahn envisions may be plausible. But if climate change is related to
rare natural disasters, such as cyclones and tidal waves, then cities ­ particularly those in coastal
areas ­ face tremendous risk.

Next Steps and Research Priorities

The unique nature of density's downsides in the developing world suggests that porting solutions
from high income cities may be at best sporadically successful. More evidence is required to
understand these downsides of density and the policies best-suited to limit them. Perhaps the
most pressing question is how can sanitation and health services be provided to effectively
maintain public health and a clean environment.

Second, can governments facilitate functioning land markets to allocate space efficiently and
housing for lower income residents? There are a rich variety of housing policies, such as public
housing projects, slum upgrading programs, and land readjustment, but we have limited evidence
on the efficacy of many of these programs. One research agenda is to better evaluate the impact
of these programs on resident welfare, land prices, productive activity and fiscal costs. Evidence
on the effect of land use regulations, including rules that promote or reduce economic inclusion,
would also help policy-makers understand the costs and benefits of those policies. Ideally, we
would want to understand the consequences both for housing costs and for a wider range of
social outcomes.

Third, research is badly needed on urban mobility. The costs of congestion, which include not
only hours lost to traffic but also distortions in the land and labor markets, appear to be
considerable. There is a dearth of evidence surrounding the informal networks that dominate
transit in African cities. Can regulation or new technology improve its performance? Can these
networks complement the more expensive mass rapid transit being introduced across the

                                                 24
developing world? Is it more cost-effective to invest in improving those networks or to introduce
traditional mass transit systems? What do new technologies like ride sharing pose for the future
of mobility in these cities?

Fourth, the challenges in managing and financing service provision suggest a great need for
research about the functioning of government itself. Are there ways to enhance existing tax
enforcement and compliance? What can new instruments, such as programs that capture land
value, do for areas low state capacity and high rates of informality?



IV.    The Structural Approach to Transportation and Land Use

To many architects and land use planners, the city is synonymous with the built environment.
While urban economics emphasizes that cities are better seen as massed humanity, the physical
city is still profoundly important. Land-use planning plays a particularly central role for many
city governments. Yet typically, economists have had little to say about efficient land use rules
or the costs of bad planning. The growing field of formal spatial modeling offers the possibility
of delivering pragmatic tools that can help policy makers to plan better and more fully anticipate
the far-ranging impacts of any large scale change to the built environment.

The randomized control trial approach to development economics is ideal when considering
targeted interventions that are akin to medical drug trials. Large scale urban investments are
more akin to macroeconomic policies, like changes to monetary or fiscal policy, that reverberate
throughout the layers of the economy. Just as macroeconomics has turned to simulations using
tools like dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models, urban economics has begun using
complex structural models that largely rely on simulations to understand how new investments or
policies will change life within a city.

The Basic Form of Structural Urban Models


The first wave of urban models made drastic simplifications that reduce cities to a sequence of
locations that differ only in their distance to a central business district (Alonso, 1964, Mills,
1967, Muth, 1969). A day spent exploring a real city's streets shows how this belies the

                                                  25
immensely rich spatial differences that make cities so complex and interesting. Economic
activity, in fact, occurs in locations that vary in air quality, crime rates, infrastructure, and access
to shops and restaurants. Recent models have combined rich spatially disaggregated data with
tools from the trade and economic geography literature to confront this richness head on (see
Redding and Rossi-Hansberg (2016) for a comprehensive review). These frameworks allow
researchers to quantify the aggregate implications of economic policies, assess how their impacts
reverberate through agents' behavioral responses and linkages across space, and simulate the
effect of counterfactual policies to evaluate how competing approaches might best achieve policy
goals.

Quantitative models consist of a series of building blocks whose elements are chosen to fit the
focus of the research question and the type of data available: geography, workers, firms, the
supply of land and housing, and general equilibrium conditions.

The geography of a city is comprised of a large number of discrete locations (such as census
tracts or blocks). They differ in attributes such as the time it takes to commute to every other
location, the supply of land available, and other exogenous characteristics (such as views, access
to roads, or the type and slope of land) that affect its amenities, productivity, or the cost of
housing development.


Workers must choose where to live and work across pairs of locations. This choice depends on
attributes that determine how attractive locations are to live in (e.g. their level of amenities and
residential floorspace prices), work in (e.g. the wage paid by firms), as well as on the cost of
commuting between each pair. Depending on the model, residents can differ in their attributes
(such as education or location of prior residence; Tsivanidis, 2019, Bryan and Morten, 2019),
may make additional choices such as where to shop or which mode of transit to commute with
(Allen, Arkolakis, and Li, 2015), and often have idiosyncratic preferences for each live-work
pair (generating upward sloping resident and labor supply curves as functions of location
attributes; Ahlfeldt et al. 2015).


Firms similarly must choose their locations. Production can potentially take place in every
location, and depends on characteristics like productivity, access to labor, and supply of

                                                  26
commercial floorspace. Technologies can allow for perfect or imperfect competition, constant or
increasing returns, fixed or free entry (Redding 2016), multiple industries (Caliendo, Dvorkin,
and Parro, 2019), and differing extents of firm mobility (Fajgelbaum et al., 2018).


Housing supply and usable production space is constructed by developers using capital and
developable land available in each location. Land use is determined by land owners who trade
off the return to residential or commercial use, potentially subject to zoning restrictions (Ahlfeldt
et al. 2015).


These individual optimization decisions are then connected through general equilibrium market
clearing conditions that equate the demand and supply for each factor in each location and pin
down prices. For example, equating the demand and supply for labor and floorspace determine
wages and house prices respectively. These models also allow for externalities: the level of
productivities, amenities, or travel time across (pairs of) locations are often endogenous (Ahlfeldt
et al. 2015; Fajgelbaum and Schaal 2019). In this case, the levels of these variables taken as
given by agents must be consistent with equilibrium choices.


Once the researcher fully specifies the model, three steps must be taken in order to conduct
quantitative analysis. First, the "deep" parameters assumed to be invariant to the counterfactual
policy must be estimated. These typically consist of elasticities that govern, for example, the
sensitivity of commute choices to commute costs or of housing supply to housing prices. Second,
the model's unobserved location characteristics (such as amenities and productivities) must be
recovered. These models are typically exactly identified, so that there exists a unique mapping
from observed data (such as residence, employment, and house prices in each location) to
unobservables given the model's deep parameters. Third, the researcher can use the now-
identified system of equilibrium equations to simulate the effects of alternative policy scenarios
(such as new transport infrastructure or zoning regulations) on the full urban equilibrium.



What's different about the developing world?




                                                 27
The majority of these models have been developed within the contexts of cities in rich countries.
Should we expect the results of frameworks built to fit Chicago or Berlin to port to Mumbai or
Nairobi? Transit and land use are vastly different in cities of the emerging world characterized
by poverty, informality, and coordination problems. The options available to financially and
capacity constrained governments also differ. We now discuss recent work that has sought to
adapt quantitative models to the context of cities in the developing world, and outline areas of
promise for future work.

Bus rapid transit (BRT) systems have quickly become a popular alternative to subways in
developing country cities. They provide similar reductions in commute times at a fraction of the
construction cost. New public transit such as BRT may also have profound distributional
implications, since the poor rely on public transit that is often slow in these settings due to the
oversupply and lack of coordination amongst informal minibuses. In his analysis of the world's
largest system in Bogotá, Colombia, Tsivanidis (2019) develops a model that allows for multiple
skill groups of workers with non-homothetic preferences over different modes of transit. By
accounting for the impacts of transit on the residence, employment, and transit mode choices of
heterogenous workers, Tsivanidis uses the model to trace out the system's impact on aggregate
performance not only through reducing time lost in transit but also by improving the allocation
between workers and places of employment and residence. He finds the welfare gains are 20-
40% larger after accounting for reallocation and general equilibrium effects.

Quantitative models can provide insights into what other policies might complement expensive
infrastructure to maximize returns on investments. Tsivanidis shows the feeder bus system that
reduces the last-mile problem of getting residents from poor, dense neighborhoods at the city's
edge to the BRT improve welfare more than any single trunk line. He also runs a counterfactual
exercise to show that welfare gains would have been 18% larger had the government
implemented a land value capture scheme in which zoning densities were increased near stations
with permits to build auctioned off to developers. Revenues from the permit sales would have
covered around 10-40% of construction costs depending on the extent of in-migration from the




                                                 28
rest of Colombia. 13Future work needs to incorporate more features of transit in developing
country cities. First, we require evidence that quantifies the wider costs of congestion through
distorting the behavior of firms and residents. New infrastructure may have different effects in
Nairobi or Lagos than in Berlin or Bogotá due to the vast informality of jobs and housing.


Second, these models need to confront the fact that the vast majority of public transit is informal.
Tools from industrial organization combined with recent work on routing and congestion (Allen
and Arkolakis, 2019, Fajgelbaum and Schaal, 2019) should be used to understand how this
industry responds to mass transit interventions, how policy makers can ensure it complements
rather than competes with it, and what other forms of regulation could improve its performance.


Third, new technologies such as ride-sharing are changing the nature of mobility in cities. Work
is needed to understand how developing country-specific variants such as motorbike hailing or
Uber bus will impact mobility, demand for cars, and existing public transit services.


Land markets in developing country cities are characterized by a high rate of informality. To
understand patterns of land use and density in these contexts, Henderson, Regan, and Venables
(2016) develop a structural, dynamic, monocentric city model that allow for formal and informal
construction. They use the estimated model to infer high costs of converting slums to formal use.
Gechter and Tsivanidis (2018) develop a quantitative model that allows for formal and informal
housing. They use the framework to quantify the implications for both equity and efficiency of
the redevelopment of Mumbai's 58 textile mills during the 2000s. This increased the stock of
formal housing in the city center but also displaced poor residents from nearby slums whose
homes were converted following ensuing house price appreciation.


Quantitative models are well-placed to help inform policy makers about the consequences of
zoning or land use policies. Allen, Arkolakis, and Li (2015) develop a model that allows them to
characterize optimal zoning across residential and commercial use around an observed



13
     See Suzuki et al. (2015) for a comprehensive review of land value capture instruments.


                                                           29
equilibrium. Since agents do not account for the externalities arising from colocation in space,
applying their framework to Chicago the authors find too little specialization of land use with
excess residence (employment) in the city center (outskirts). Bird and Venables (2019) apply a
similar framework to evaluate the impact of tenure reform in Kampala.


The prevalence of rent control, density restrictions, mixed use zoning, and minimum floorspace
requirements for formal housing sector construction in developing country cities suggests a need
for more work in this area. Governments will also spend vast sums on housing investments that
reshape the structure of cities, from slum upgrading (Harari and Wong, 2018) to constructing
massive new housing developments at the urban periphery (Franklin 2019). Quantitative work
should strive to understand the trade-offs, equilibrium implications, and unintended
consequences associated with this menu of options.


The degree of shared prosperity that arises from transit and housing policy also depends on the
sorting response of residents. Will new transit or slum developments that increase surrounding
property prices simply benefit rich land owners and displace poor renters? Tsivanidis (2019)
shows that Bogotá's BRT increased the spatial segregation between low- and high-skilled
workers, a feature that is replicated by the model due to the non-homothetic preferences for
residential amenities. Couture et al. (2019) develop a model with non-homotheticities and find
that sorting responses and endogenous amenities amplified the increase in wealth inequality in
the US since 1990 by 1.7 percentage points in terms of welfare inequality. More work to
understand the sorting of residents in developing country cities and its implications for the
distributional consequences of spatial policies is clearly needed.


Lastly, these models should address the coordination problems particularly salient in land
markets of the developing world where urban growth is typically haphazard, unorganized, and
sprawling. Motivated by the ring of vacant land surrounding Detroit's central business district,
Owens, Rossi-Hansberg, and Sarte (2019) highlight the coordination problems between residents
and developers in the presence of residential externalities. When amenities depend on the
number of residents, land may remain vacant even if its fundamentals are sound. Dynamic
inefficiencies may arise, for example, if land use is sticky and agents fail to internalize

                                                 30
agglomeration externalities in production. As more migrants arrive in a city, it may simply run
out of large enough plots to allow for concentration of large manufacturing plants in accessible
areas. 14 Empirical work by Brandily and Rauch (2018) and Michaels et al. (2018) highlight the
dynamic consequences of land use planning in African cities. The dynamic quantitative models
of Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2015) and Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2019) could be
extended to understand these effects.


Providing Better Parameter Estimates to Make Structural Models More Useful


If quantitative models are to provide useful policy insights, their results have to be trusted. First,
researchers must establish that their model captures relevant features of the data or (ideally) can
replicate the real-world response to a policy change. Second, they must provide credible
estimates of the model's "deep", policy-invariant parameters. The increasing availability of new,
large-scale sources of data in developing country cities provides an immense potential to validate
and estimate these models in the contexts of quasi-natural experiments or, occasionally, through
randomized interventions.


The most basic form of model validation involves showing key parametric relationships defined
in the model capture the salient features of the data relevant for the question at hand. For
example, if a model is used to simulate the impact of new transit infrastructure then the
relationship between commute times and behavior posited by the model should provide a tight fit
to the data. Ahlfeldt et al. (2015) and Monte, Redding, and Rossi-Hansberg (2018) show how the
log-linear gravity equations for commuting and migration delivered by their models fit the data
in Germany and the United States respectively.

Our trust in these models increases if they can replicate the response of cities to real-world policy
changes. Heblich, Redding, and Sturm (2019) estimate a quantitative model using one year of




14
     Gollin, Jedwab, and Vollrath (2016) discuss the service-led nature of urbanization in African cities which has
missed the higher rates of industrialization commensurate with urban growth in other continents.


                                                           31
data from historical London, and then feed in a sequence of new commute times induced by the
expansion of the city's railway system over an eighty year period. They find the model is able to
replicate the gradual concentration of employment in the city center despite not being targeted in
estimation. Tsivanidis (2019) shows that in a wide class of gravity models, the impact of
changing transit infrastructure on equilibrium outcomes such as population or house prices is
summarized solely by its effect on model-defined measures of accessibility. These models
predict these relationships to be log-linear. Using the variation in accessibility provided by the
construction of Bogotá's BRT, he shows this is precisely what occurs in the data. Future work
should leverage increasingly available high frequency data discussed below to incorporate pre-
analysis plans into structural work. If researchers can show that quantitative models accurately
predict the effects of new infrastructure or other policy interventions they have yet to see, the
model's insights will become yet more believable.

The next task is to credibly estimate the model's parameters. Some randomized interventions do
exist. Akram, Chowdhury, and Mobarak (2018) assess the equilibrium impacts of urban
emigration on rural villages by randomly varying the fraction of residents offered transport
subsidies. Brooks and Donovan (2019) randomly construct bridges across Nicaraguan villages to
evaluate their effects through reducing the market access risk posed by seasonal flash floods. In a
more urban context, Gonzalez-Navarro and Quintana-Domeque (2016) exploit randomization in
road upgrading across Mexican neighborhoods to examine its impact house prices.


A second approach is to estimate the parameters of a structural model by matching reduced form
coefficients from (quasi-)experimental settings. Fogli and Guerrieri (2019) examine the extent to
which spatial sorting and neighborhood effects amplify wealth inequality. The authors estimate
the parameter governing the strength of neighborhood effects by ensuring a one standard
deviation increase in neighborhood quality as a child delivers a 10% higher income as an adult in




                                                 32
their model simulations, precisely the estimate from Chetty and Hendren (2018). 15 Randomized
housing interventions in developing country cities, such as the Ethiopian public housing lottery
studied by Franklin (2019), could provide new sets of relevant estimates to calibrate these
models.

The third and most common approach is to use quasi-natural experiments directly as sources of
identifying variation. This has long been popular in trade and economic geography (Donaldson
and Hornbeck, 2016, Donaldson, 2018) but has become increasingly popular in urban
economics. The seminal work by Ahlfeldt et al. (2015) exploits the construction and fall of the
Berlin wall as quasi-random variation in the density of economic activity. This allows them to
estimate the strength of agglomeration spillovers across space. Recent examples in Colombia and
India use large scale transit and land use policy changes to estimate quantitative urban models in
poorer countries (Tsivanidis and Gechter, 2018, Tsivanidis, 2019).


Quantitative work has so far focused on rich countries due to data availability, but new sources
of large-scale data will allow researchers to increasingly take this class of models to cities of the
developing world. Machine vision techniques have opened up the possibility of using daytime
satellite imagery to measure slums (Gechter and Tsivanidis, 2019) and urban areas (Vogel et al.
2019). Google Streetview can be used to predict income (Naik et al. 2015). Cellphone metadata,
Google Maps, and credit card data can be used to measure commute flows, congestion, and
consumption across space (Blondel, Decuyper, and Krings, 2015, Kreindler and Miyauchi, 2019,
Akbar et al., 2019, Donaldson et al., 2019).


These datasets nevertheless have drawbacks, often related to sample selection. The people or
countries who use cellphones and credit cards may be very different to those who do not. This
threatens to bias analyses, and runs the risk of steering urban work towards higher income




15
     Faber and Gaubert (2018) estimate the spillover parameters of a quantitative spatial model in Mexico through an
indirect inference approach that ensures the coefficient from an IV regression of employment on tourism
attractiveness on data generated from their model matches that from the reduced form analysis.


                                                          33
settings where digital traces are available. While large scale administrative datasets pose promise
(albeit with their own concerns of misreporting), there remains huge value in primary collection
efforts to uncover high-quality, representative data to complement and validate those from
alternative sources.


Structural work has limitations. These models make strong functional form assumptions for
tractability that are typically log-linear. Parameter estimates will therefore reflect first order
approximations around an observed equilibrium, but may no longer be invariant to large policy
changes considered in counterfactuals. Slight deviations from these functional forms may deliver
very different policy implications (Glaeser and Gottlieb, 2008). Static models used to evaluate
the impact of transit infrastructure, for example, may ignore adjustment costs involved in
individuals relocating from one neighborhood to another or the larger impacts this churn may
have on children. The results of structural models should therefore provide one additional input
to inform policy by quantifying the effects of alternative options along clearly stated dimensions,
rather than act as a sole guide to policy decisions.


Next Steps and Research Priorities


Two classes of research questions are particularly well-suited to the structural approach. The first
is one in which spillovers, linkages and general equilibrium effects may be important but hard to
disentangle from reduced form analyses. For example, investments in infrastructure, housing
stock or public goods like education may induce a host of sorting responses by households and
firms as well as feedback effects through prices. The second is one in which policy makers seek
to understand the aggregate impacts of recent policies or potential impacts of future reforms.
How large are the aggregate gains and tax revenues from infrastructure investments? Given the
unplanned expansion of cities, is the current spatial configuration of the city (such as the location
of ports, markets and schools in central areas) efficient given the current urban organization and
the opportunity cost of allocating that land to other purposes? These are first order questions
where parsimonious models estimated using developing country city data are well-positioned to
develop new insights.



                                                  34
V.      Conclusion

The population of the world's poorest cities is growing massively and will continue to expand
for decades. The existing empirical evidence suggests that agglomeration economies may be
particularly large the developing world, which suggests that urbanization can provide a pathway
from poverty to prosperity. Large cities in Africa and South Asia have long been conduits from
poor countries to rich countries that enable trade and the spread of knowledge, crucial
ingredients for long-term growth.

Yet even when rural-urban migrants come for economic opportunity, many of them remain poor
and live in slums for decades (Marx, Stoker, and Suri, 2013). Slum dwellers often face risks from
both criminal gangs and contagious disease. Many urbanites struggle with long commutes and
relatively high housing costs. More effective government may be able to alleviate these
downsides of urbanization, and more research is needed to learn how to make government more
effective.   One great hope is that the process of urbanization itself will lead to improvements in
governmental accountability and competence.

We conclude this paper with one clear message. The cities of the developing world are the stage
on which the lives of billions will be played out. These places are vitally important to the future
of the world and deserve far more research. Two-thirds of Africa's cities are yet to be built. If
these cities can be made safer and more efficient, then the prospects for Africa's economic
growth could be enormous.




                                                 35
References
Ahlfeldt, Gabriel M., and Elisabetta Pietrostefani. "The Economic Effects of Density: A
    Synthesis." Journal of Urban Economics 111 (May 1, 2019): 93­107.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2019.04.006.
Ahlfeldt, Gabriel M., Stephen J. Redding, Daniel M. Sturm, and Nikolaus Wolf. "The
    Economics of Density: Evidence From the Berlin Wall." Econometrica 83, no. 6 (2015):
    2127­89. https://doi.org/10.3982/ECTA10876.
Akbar, Prottoy A, Victor Couture, Gilles Duranton, and Adam Storeygard. "Mobility and
    Congestion in Urban India." Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic Research,
    November 2018. https://doi.org/10.3386/w25218.
Akram, Agha Ali, Shyamal Chowdhury, and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak. "Effects of Emigration
    on Rural Labor Markets." Working Paper, 2018.
Alesina, Alberto, Sebastian Hohmann, Stelios Michalopoulos, and Elias Papaioannou.
    "Intergenerational Mobility in Africa." Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic
    Research, February 2019. https://doi.org/10.3386/w25534.
Alexander, Diane, and Hannes Schwandt. "The Impact of Car Pollution on Infant and Child
    Health: Evidence from Emissions Cheating." Working Paper. Federal Reserve Bank of
    Chicago, 2019. https://doi.org/10.21033/wp-2019-04.
Allen, Treb, and Costas Arkolakis. "Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Economy." The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, no. 3 (August 1, 2014): 1085­1140.
    https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qju016.
Allen, Treb, Costas Arkolakis, and Xiangliang Li. "Optimal City Structure." Working Paper,
    2015.
Alonso, William. Location and Land Use: Toward a General Theory of Land Rent.
    Erscheinungsort nicht ermittelbar: Harvard University Press, 1964.
    http://www.degruyter.com/search?f_0=isbnissn&q_0=9780674730854&searchTitles=true.
Alsan, Marcella, and Claudia Goldin. "Watersheds in Child Mortality: The Role of Effective
    Water and Sewerage Infrastructure, 1880­1920." Journal of Political Economy 127, no. 2
    (2019): 586­638. https://doi.org/10.1086/700766.




                                                 36
Amodio, Francesco, Jieun Choi, Giacomo De Giorgi, and Aminur Rahman. "Bribes vs. Taxes:
    Market Structure and Incentives." Working Paper. IZA Discussion Papers. Institute of Labor
    Economics (IZA), July 2018. https://ideas.repec.org/p/iza/izadps/dp11668.html.
Arceo-Gomez, Eva, Rema Hanna, and Paulina Oliva. "Does the Effect of Pollution on Infant
    Mortality Differ Between Developing and Developed Countries? Evidence from Mexico
    City." The Economic Journal 126, no. 591 (March 1, 2016): 257­80.
    https://doi.org/10.1111/ecoj.12273.
Ashraf, Nava, Edward Glaeser, Abraham Holland, and Bryce Millett Steinberg. "Water, Health
    and Wealth." Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic Research, September 2017.
    https://doi.org/10.3386/w23807.
Ashraf, Nava, Edward L. Glaeser, and Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto. "Infrastructure, Incentives, and
    Institutions." American Economic Review 106, no. 5 (May 2016): 77­82.
    https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.p20161095.
Autor, David H. "Work of the Past, Work of the Future." AEA Papers and Proceedings 109
    (May 2019): 1­32. https://doi.org/10.1257/pandp.20191110.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, Esther Duflo, Daniel Keniston, and Nina Singh.
    "Improving Police Performance in Rajasthan, India: Experimental Evidence on Incentives,
    Managerial Autonomy and Training." Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic
    Research, 2014. https://doi.org/10.3386/w17912.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Rema Hanna, and Sendhil Mullainathan. "Corruption." In The Handbook of
    Organizational Economics, Course Book. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2013.
    https://doi.org/10.1515/9781400845354-029.
Banerjee, Abhijit V. "A Theory of Misgovernance." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112,
    no. 4 (November 1, 1997): 1289­1332. https://doi.org/10.1162/003355300555484.
Barwick, Panle Jia, Dave Donaldson, Shanjun Li, and Yatang Lin. "The Welfare Effects of
    Passenger Transportation Infrastructure: Evidence from China's HSR Network." Working
    Paper, 2019.
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. "Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?" The Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 122, no. 2 (May 1, 2007): 775­805. https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.122.2.775.




                                             37
Besley, Timothy, and Robin Burgess. "Land Reform, Poverty Reduction, and Growth: Evidence
    from India." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, no. 2 (May 1, 2000): 389­430.
    https://doi.org/10.1162/003355300554809.
Biagi, Bianca, and Claudio Detotto. "Crime as Tourism Externality." Regional Studies 48, no. 4
    (April 3, 2014): 693­709. https://doi.org/10.1080/00343404.2011.649005.
Bird, Julia, and Anthony J. Venables. "The Efficiency of Land-Use in a Developing City:
    Traditional vs Modern Tenure Systems in Kampala, Uganda." SSRN Scholarly Paper.
    Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network, March 1, 2019.
    http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3346354.
Björkman, Martina, and Jakob Svensson. "Power to the People: Evidence from a Randomized
    Field Experiment on Community-Based Monitoring in Uganda." The Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 124, no. 2 (May 1, 2009): 735­69. https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.2009.124.2.735.
Blondel, Vincent D., Adeline Decuyper, and Gautier Krings. "A Survey of Results on Mobile
    Phone Datasets Analysis." EPJ Data Science 4, no. 1 (December 2015): 1­55.
    https://doi.org/10.1140/epjds/s13688-015-0046-0.
Brandily, P., and Ferdinand Gordian Rauch. "Roads and Urban Growth." Working Paper, 2018.
Brooks, Wyatt, and Kevin Donovan. "Eliminating Uncertainty in Market Access: The Impact of
    New Bridges in Rural Nicaragua." Working Paper, 2019.
Bryan, Gharad, Shyamal Chowdhury, and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak. "Underinvestment in a
    Profitable Technology: The Case of Seasonal Migration in Bangladesh." Econometrica 82,
    no. 5 (2014): 1671­1748. https://doi.org/10.3982/ECTA10489.
Bryan, Gharad, and Melanie Morten. "The Aggregate Productivity Effects of Internal Migration:
    Evidence from Indonesia." Journal of Political Economy, 2019, 000­000.
    https://doi.org/10.1086/701810.
Buchmann, Nina, Erica M Field, Rachel Glennerster, and Reshmaan N Hussam. "Throwing the
    Baby out with the Drinking Water: Unintended Consequences of Arsenic Mitigation Efforts
    in Bangladesh." Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic Research, April 2019.
    https://doi.org/10.3386/w25729.
Calfee, John, and Clifford Winston. "The Value of Automobile Travel Time: Implications for
    Congestion Policy." Journal of Public Economics 69, no. 1 (July 1, 1998): 83­102.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/S0047-2727(97)00095-9.

                                               38
Caliendo, Lorenzo, Maximiliano Dvorkin, and Fernando Parro. "Trade and Labor Market
    Dynamics: General Equilibrium Analysis of the China Trade Shock." Econometrica 87, no.
    3 (2019): 741­835. https://doi.org/10.3982/ECTA13758.
Cesur, Resul, Erdal Tekin, and Aydogan Ulker. "Air Pollution and Infant Mortality: Evidence
    from the Expansion of Natural Gas Infrastructure." The Economic Journal 127, no. 600
    (March 1, 2017): 330­62. https://doi.org/10.1111/ecoj.12285.
------. "Can Natural Gas Save Lives? Evidence from the Deployment of a Fuel Delivery
    System in a Developing Country." Journal of Health Economics 59 (May 2018): 91­108.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2018.03.001.
Chalfin, Aaron. "Economic Costs of Crime." In The Encyclopedia of Crime & Punishment, 1­
    12. American Cancer Society, 2015. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118519639.wbecpx193.
Chauvin, Juan Pablo, Edward Glaeser, Yueran Ma, and Kristina Tobio. "What Is Different about
    Urbanization in Rich and Poor Countries? Cities in Brazil, China, India and the United
    States." Journal of Urban Economics, Urbanization in Developing Countries: Past and
    Present, 98 (March 1, 2017): 17­49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2016.05.003.
Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Maggie R Jones, and Sonya R Porter. "The
    Opportunity Atlas: Mapping the Childhood Roots of Social Mobility." Working Paper.
    National Bureau of Economic Research, October 2018. https://doi.org/10.3386/w25147.
Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren. "The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational
    Mobility I: Childhood Exposure Effects." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133, no. 3
    (August 1, 2018): 1107­62. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjy007.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F. Katz. "The Effects of Exposure to Better
    Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment."
    American Economic Review 106, no. 4 (April 2016): 855­902.
    https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20150572.
Ciccone, Antonio, and Robert E. Hall. "Productivity and the Density of Economic Activity." The
    American Economic Review 86, no. 1 (1996): 54­70.
Coase, R. H. "The Problem of Social Cost." The Journal of Law & Economics 3 (1960): 1­44.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Sylvie Démurger, Shi Li, and Jianguo Wang. "Unequal Migration and
    Urbanisation Gains in China." Journal of Development Economics, January 29, 2019.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdeveco.2019.01.009.

                                              39
Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton, Laurent Gobillon, and Sébastien Roux. "Estimating
    Agglomeration Economies with History, Geology, and Worker Effects." In Agglomeration
    Economics, edited by Edward L. Glaeser, 15­66. The University of Chicago Press, 2010.
    http://www.nber.org/chapters/c7978.
Couture, Victor, Cecile Gaubert, Jessie Handbury, and Erik Hurst. "Income Growth and the
    Distributional Effects of Urban Spatial Sorting," 2019, 87.
Cullen, Julie Berry, and Steven D. Levitt. "Crime, Urban Flight, And The Consequences For
    Cities." The Review of Economics and Statistics 81, no. 2 (1999): 159­69.
Currie, Janet, Matthew Neidell, and Johannes F. Schmieder. "Air Pollution and Infant Health:
    Lessons from New Jersey." Journal of Health Economics 28, no. 3 (May 1, 2009): 688­703.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2009.02.001.
Currie, Janet, and Tom Vogl. "Early-Life Health and Adult Circumstance in Developing
    Countries." Annual Review of Economics 5, no. 1 (2013): 1­36.
    https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-economics-081412-103704.
Cutler, David, and Grant Miller. "The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health Advances:
    The Twentieth-Century United States." Demography 42, no. 1 (February 1, 2005): 1­22.
    https://doi.org/10.1353/dem.2005.0002.
Davis, Lucas W. "The Effect of Driving Restrictions on Air Quality in Mexico City." Journal of
    Political Economy 116, no. 1 (February 1, 2008): 38­81. https://doi.org/10.1086/529398.
De La Roca, Jorge, and Diego Puga. "Learning by Working in Big Cities." The Review of
    Economic Studies 84, no. 1 (January 1, 2017): 106­42.
    https://doi.org/10.1093/restud/rdw031.
Desmet, Klaus, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. "On the Spatial Economic Impact of Global
    Warming." Journal of Urban Economics 88 (July 2015): 16­37.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2015.04.004.
Devoto, Florencia, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, William Parienté, and Vincent Pons.
    "Happiness on Tap: Piped Water Adoption in Urban Morocco." American Economic
    Journal: Economic Policy 4, no. 4 (May 2012): 68­99. https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.4.4.68.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. "Courts."
    The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, no. 2 (May 1, 2003): 453­517.
    https://doi.org/10.1162/003355303321675437.

                                                 40
Donaldson, Dave. "Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastructure."
    American Economic Review 108, no. 4­5 (April 2018): 899­934.
    https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20101199.
Donaldson, Dave, and Richard Hornbeck. "Railroads and American Economic Growth: A
    `Market Access' Approach." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, no. 2 (May 1, 2016):
    799­858. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjw002.
Duranton, Gilles, and Matthew A. Turner. "The Fundamental Law of Road Congestion:
    Evidence from US Cities." American Economic Review 101, no. 6 (October 2011): 2616­
    52. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.101.6.2616.
------. "Urban Growth and Transportation." The Review of Economic Studies 79, no. 4
    (October 2012): 1407­40. https://doi.org/10.1093/restud/rds010.
Edin, Per-Anders, Peter Fredriksson, and Olof Åslund. "Settlement Policies and the Economic
    Success of Immigrants." Journal of Population Economics 17, no. 1 (February 1, 2004):
    133­55. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00148-003-0143-4.
Ehrlich, Isaac. "The Deterrent Effect of Capital Punishment: A Question of Life and Death." The
    American Economic Review 65, no. 3 (1975): 397­417.
Ellison, Glenn, Edward L. Glaeser, and William R. Kerr. "What Causes Industry
    Agglomeration? Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns." American Economic Review
    100, no. 3 (June 2010): 1195­1213. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.100.3.1195.
Engel, Eduardo, Ronald D. Fischer, and Alexander Galetovic P. The Economics of Public-
    Private Partnerships: A Basic Guide. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2014.
Faber, Benjamin, and Cecile Gaubert. "Tourism and Economic Development: Evidence from
    Mexico's Coastline." American Economic Review 109, no. 6 (June 2019): 2245­93.
    https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20161434.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Owen Zidar. "State
    Taxes and Spatial Misallocation." The Review of Economic Studies 86, no. 1 (January 1,
    2019): 333­76. https://doi.org/10.1093/restud/rdy050.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D, and Edouard Schaal. "Optimal Transport Networks in Spatial
    Equilibrium." Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019.
    https://doi.org/10.3386/w23200.



                                              41
Fan, Mingxuan, and Corbett Grainger. "The Impact of Air Pollution on Labor Supply in China."
    Working Paper, 2019.
Ferraz, Claudio, and Frederico Finan. "Electoral Accountability and Corruption: Evidence from
    the Audits of Local Governments." American Economic Review 101, no. 4 (June 2011):
    1274­1311. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.101.4.1274.
Field, Erica. "Entitled to Work: Urban Property Rights and Labor Supply in Peru." The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, no. 4 (November 1, 2007): 1561­1602.
    https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.2007.122.4.1561.
Fogli, Alessandra, and Veronica Guerrieri. "The End of the American Dream? Inequality and
    Segregation in US Cities." Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic Research, August
    2019. https://doi.org/10.3386/w26143.
Franklin, Simon. "The Demand for Government Housing: Evidence from Lotteries for 200,000
    Homes in Ethiopia." Working Paper, 2019.
Gamper-Rabindran, Shanti, Shakeeb Khan, and Christopher Timmins. "The Impact of Piped
    Water Provision on Infant Mortality in Brazil: A Quantile Panel Data Approach." Journal of
    Development Economics 92, no. 2 (July 1, 2010): 188­200.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdeveco.2009.02.006.
Gechter, Michael, and Nick Tsivanidis. "The Welfare Consequences of Formalizing Developing
    Country Cities: Evidence from the Mumbai Mills Redevelopment." Working Paper, 2018.
Giusti, L. "A Review of Waste Management Practices and Their Impact on Human Health."
    Waste Management (New York, N.Y.) 29, no. 8 (August 2009): 2227­39.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2009.03.028.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Joshua Gottlieb. "The Economics of Place-Making Policies." Brookings
    Papers on Economic Activity 39, no. 1 (Spring) (2008): 155­253.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Joshua D. Gottlieb. "The Wealth of Cities: Agglomeration Economies
    and Spatial Equilibrium in the United States." Journal of Economic Literature 47, no. 4
    (December 2009): 983­1028. https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.47.4.983.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Matthew E. Kahn. "The Greenness of Cities: Carbon Dioxide Emissions
    and Urban Development." Journal of Urban Economics 67, no. 3 (May 1, 2010): 404­18.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2009.11.006.



                                                 42
Glaeser, Edward L., Sari Pekkala Kerr, and William R. Kerr. "Entrepreneurship and Urban
    Growth: An Empirical Assessment with Historical Mines." Review of Economics and
    Statistics, April 23, 2015. https://doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00456.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Matthew G. Resseger. "The Complementarity Between Cities and
    Skills*." Journal of Regional Science 50, no. 1 (2010): 221­44.
    https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9787.2009.00635.x.
Glaeser, Edward L., JoseA Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer. "Economic Growth in a Cross-
    Section of Cities." Journal of Monetary Economics 36, no. 1 (1995): 117­43.
Glaeser, Edward L., and David C. Maré. "Cities and Skills." Journal of Labor Economics 19, no.
    2 (April 1, 2001): 316­42. https://doi.org/10.1086/319563.
Goldstein, Markus, and Christopher Udry. "The Profits of Power: Land Rights and Agricultural
    Investment in Ghana." Journal of Political Economy 116, no. 6 (2008): 981­1022.
    https://doi.org/10.1086/595561.
Gollin, Douglas, Remi Jedwab, and Dietrich Vollrath. "Urbanization with and without
    Industrialization." Journal of Economic Growth 21, no. 1 (2016): 35­70.
Gollin, Douglas, Martina Kirchberger, and David Lagakos. "In Search of a Spatial Equilibrium
    in the Developing World." Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic Research, October
    2017. https://doi.org/10.3386/w23916.
Gollin, Douglas, David Lagakos, and Michael E. Waugh. "The Agricultural Productivity Gap."
    The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, no. 2 (May 1, 2014): 939­93.
    https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjt056.
Gonzalez-Navarro, Marco, and Climent Quintana-Domeque. "Paving Streets for the Poor:
    Experimental Analysis of Infrastructure Effects." The Review of Economics and Statistics
    98, no. 2 (November 16, 2015): 254­67. https://doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00553.
Gramlich, Edward M. "Infrastructure Investment: A Review Essay." Journal of Economic
    Literature 32, no. 3 (1994): 1176­96.
Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti. "Identifying Agglomeration
    Spillovers: Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plant Openings." Journal of
    Political Economy 118, no. 3 (June 1, 2010): 536­98. https://doi.org/10.1086/653714.




                                              43
Guimarães, Paulo, Octávio Figueiredo, and Douglas Woodward. "Agglomeration and the
    Location of Foreign Direct Investment in Portugal." Journal of Urban Economics 47, no. 1
    (January 1, 2000): 115­35. https://doi.org/10.1006/juec.1999.2138.
Hanna, Rema, Gabriel Kreindler, and Benjamin A. Olken. "Citywide Effects of High-Occupancy
    Vehicle Restrictions: Evidence from `Three-in-One' in Jakarta." Science 357, no. 6346 (July
    7, 2017): 89­93. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aan2747.
Hanna, Rema, and Paulina Oliva. "The Effect of Pollution on Labor Supply: Evidence from a
    Natural Experiment in Mexico City." Journal of Public Economics 122 (February 1, 2015):
    68­79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2014.10.004.
Harari, Mariaflavia, and Maisy Wong. "Slum Upgrading and Long-Run Urban Development:
    Evidence from Indonesia." 2018 Meeting Papers. Society for Economic Dynamics, 2018.
    https://ideas.repec.org/p/red/sed018/367.html.
Heath, Rachel, Ghazala Mansuri, and Bob Rijkers. "Labor Supply Responses to Illness Shocks:
    Evidence from High-Frequency Labor Market Data from Urban Ghana." Working Paper,
    2018.
Heblich, Stephan, Stephen J Redding, and Daniel M Sturm. "The Making of the Modern
    Metropolis: Evidence from London." Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic
    Research, September 2018. https://doi.org/10.3386/w25047.
Henderson, J. Vernon. "Marshall's Economies." Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic
    Research, September 1999. https://doi.org/10.3386/w7358.
------. "The Effects of Urban Concentration on Economic Growth." Working Paper. National
    Bureau of Economic Research, January 2000. https://doi.org/10.3386/w7503.
Henderson, J. Vernon, Tanner Regan, and Anthony J. Venables. "Building the City: Urban
    Transition and Institutional Frictions." SERC Discussion Papers. Spatial Economics
    Research Centre, LSE, April 2016. https://ideas.repec.org/p/cep/sercdp/0196.html.
Hicks, Joan Hamory, Marieke Kleemans, Nicholas Y Li, and Edward Miguel. "Reevaluating
    Agricultural Productivity Gaps with Longitudinal Microdata." Working Paper. National
    Bureau of Economic Research, March 2017. https://doi.org/10.3386/w23253.
Hurwicz, Leonid. "But Who Will Guard the Guardians?" American Economic Review 98, no. 3
    (June 2008): 577­85. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.98.3.577.



                                              44
Imbert, Clement, Marlon Seror, Yifan Zhang, and Yanos Zylberberg. "Migrants and Firms:
    Evidence from China." Working Paper. CESifo Working Paper Series. CESifo Group
    Munich, 2018. https://ideas.repec.org/p/ces/ceswps/_7440.html.
Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson. "Geographic Localization of
    Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations." The Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 108, no. 3 (August 1, 1993): 577­98. https://doi.org/10.2307/2118401.
Kahn, Matthew E. Climatopolis: How Our Cities Will Thrive in the Hotter Future. 1 edition.
    New York: Basic Books, 2010.
------. "The Silver Lining of Rust Belt Manufacturing Decline." Journal of Urban Economics
    46, no. 3 (November 1, 1999): 360­76. https://doi.org/10.1006/juec.1998.2127.
Kain, John F. "The Use of Straw Men in the Economic Evaluation of Rail Transport Projects."
    The American Economic Review 82, no. 2 (1992): 487­93.
Katz, Lawrence F., Jeffrey R. Kling, and Jeffrey B. Liebman. "Moving to Opportunity in Boston:
    Early Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
    116, no. 2 (May 1, 2001): 607­54. https://doi.org/10.1162/00335530151144113.
Kessler, Daniel, and Steven D. Levitt. "Using Sentence Enhancements to Distinguish between
    Deterrence and Incapacitation." The Journal of Law and Economics 42, no. S1 (April 1,
    1999): 343­64. https://doi.org/10.1086/467428.
Khan, Adnan Q., Asim I. Khwaja, and Benjamin A. Olken. "Tax Farming Redux: Experimental
    Evidence on Performance Pay for Tax Collectors." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
    131, no. 1 (February 1, 2016): 219­71. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjv042.
Kreindler, Gabriel. "Driving Delhi? Behavioural Responses to Driving Restrictions." Working
    Paper, 2016. https://www.ssrn.com/abstract=2966797.
Kreindler, Gabriel E. "The Welfare Effect of Road Congestion Pricing: Experimental Evidence
    and Equilibrium Implications." Working Paper, 2018.
Kreindler, Gabriel E, and Yuhei Miyauchi. "Measuring Commuting and Economic Activity
    inside Cities with Cell Phone Records," 2019, 47.
Krugman, Paul. "Increasing Returns and Economic Geography." Journal of Political Economy
    99, no. 3 (June 1, 1991): 483­99. https://doi.org/10.1086/261763.




                                              45
Lagakos, David, and Michael E. Waugh. "Selection, Agriculture, and Cross-Country
    Productivity Differences." American Economic Review 103, no. 2 (April 2013): 948­80.
    https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.103.2.948.
Leape, Jonathan. "The London Congestion Charge." Journal of Economic Perspectives 20, no. 4
    (December 2006): 157­76. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.20.4.157.
Levitt, Steven D. "Juvenile Crime and Punishment." Journal of Political Economy 106, no. 6
    (1998): 1156­85. https://doi.org/10.1086/250043.
------. "Using Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring to Estimate the Effect of Police on Crime."
    The American Economic Review 87, no. 3 (1997): 270­90.
Lucas, Robert E. "On the Mechanics of Economic Development." Journal of Monetary
    Economics 22, no. 1 (July 1, 1988): 3­42. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3932(88)90168-7.
Ludwig, Jens, and Philip J. Cook. "The Benefits of Reducing Gun Violence: Evidence from
    Contingent-Valuation Survey Data." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 22, no. 3 (2001): 207­
    26.
Marx, Benjamin, Thomas Stoker, and Tavneet Suri. "The Economics of Slums in the Developing
    World." Journal of Economic Perspectives 27, no. 4 (November 2013): 187­210.
    https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.27.4.187.
Meyer, J. R., J. F. Kain, and M. Wohl. The Urban Transportation Problem. Originally published
    1965 ; Im Original erschienen 1965. Cambridge, MA and London, England: Harvard
    University Press, 1965.
Michaels, Guy, Dzhamilya Nigmatulina, Ferdinand Rauch, Tanner Regan, Neeraj Baruah, and
    Amanda Dahlstrand-Rudin. "Planning Ahead for Better Neighborhoods: Long Run
    Evidence from Tanzania." Working Paper, 2019.
Mills, Edwin S. "An Aggregative Model of Resource Allocation in a Metropolitan Area." The
    American Economic Review 57, no. 2 (1967): 197­210.
Misse, Michel, and Joana Vargas. "O Fluxo Do Processo de Incriminação No Rio de Janeiro Na
    Década de 50 e No Período de 1997-2001: Comparação e Análise." In 13o Congresso
    Brasileiro de Sociologia, Recife, PE, 2007.
Monte, Ferdinando, Stephen J. Redding, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. "Commuting, Migration,
    and Local Employment Elasticities." American Economic Review 108, no. 12 (December
    2018): 3855­90. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20151507.

                                              46
Moretti, Enrico. "Estimating the Social Return to Higher Education: Evidence from Longitudinal
    and Repeated Cross-Sectional Data." Journal of Econometrics, Higher education (Annals
    issue), 121, no. 1 (July 1, 2004): 175­212. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeconom.2003.10.015.
Muralidharan, Karthik, and Venkatesh Sundararaman. "Teacher Performance Pay: Experimental
    Evidence from India." Journal of Political Economy 119, no. 1 (2011): 39­77.
    https://doi.org/10.1086/659655.
------. "The Aggregate Effect of School Choice: Evidence from a Two-Stage Experiment in
    India." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130, no. 3 (August 1, 2015): 1011­66.
    https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjv013.
Muth, R. F. Cities and Housing the Spatial Pattern of Urban Residential Land Use. The
    University of Chicago Press, 1969.
Nagin, Daniel S. "Deterrence: A Review of the Evidence by a Criminologist for Economists."
    Annual Review of Economics 5, no. 1 (2013): 83­105. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
    economics-072412-131310.
Naik, Nikhil, Scott Duke Kominers, Ramesh Raskar, Edward L Glaeser, and César A Hidalgo.
    "Do People Shape Cities, or Do Cities Shape People? The Co-Evolution of Physical, Social,
    and Economic Change in Five Major U.S. Cities." Working Paper. National Bureau of
    Economic Research, October 2015. https://doi.org/10.3386/w21620.
Nakamura, Emi, Jósef Sigurdsson, and Jón Steinsson. "The Gift of Moving: Intergenerational
    Consequences of a Mobility Shock." Working Paper. National Bureau of Economic
    Research, July 2016. https://doi.org/10.3386/w22392.
Owens III, Raymond, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, and Pierre-Daniel Sarte. "Rethinking Detroit."
    American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2019. https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.20180651.
Perlman, Janice. Favela: Four Decades of Living on the Edge in Rio de Janeiro. New York,
    N.Y.: Oxford University Press, 2010.
Plato. The Republic. Translated by Alexander Kerr. Stilwell: Neeland Media LLC, 2016.
Psacharopoulos, George, and Harry Anthony Patrinos. "Returns to Investment in Education: A
    Decennial Review of the Global Literature." Policy Research Working Paper Series. The
    World Bank, April 11, 2018. https://ideas.repec.org/p/wbk/wbrwps/8402.html.




                                              47
Quah, Euston, and Tay Liam Boon. "The Economic Cost of Particulate Air Pollution on Health
    in Singapore." Journal of Asian Economics 14, no. 1 (February 1, 2003): 73­90.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/S1049-0078(02)00240-3.
Rauch, James E. "Productivity Gains from Geographic Concentration of Human Capital:
    Evidence from the Cities." Journal of Urban Economics 34, no. 3 (November 1, 1993):
    380­400. https://doi.org/10.1006/juec.1993.1042.
Redding, Stephen J. "Goods Trade, Factor Mobility and Welfare." Journal of International
    Economics 101 (July 1, 2016): 148­67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinteco.2016.04.003.
Redding, Stephen J., and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. "Quantitative Spatial Economics." Annual
    Review of Economics 9, no. 1 (2017): 21­58. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-economics-
    063016-103713.
Rosenstein-Rodan, P. N. "Problems of Industrialisation of Eastern and South-Eastern Europe."
    The Economic Journal 53, no. 210/211 (1943): 202­11. https://doi.org/10.2307/2226317.
Sarvimäki, Matti, Roope Uusitalo, and Markus Jäntti. "Habit Formation and the Misallocation of
    Labor: Evidence from Forced Migrations." Working Paper, 2019.
    https://www.ssrn.com/abstract=3361356.
Singh, Ram. "Public­Private Partnerships vs. Traditional Contracts for Highways." Indian
    Economic Review 53, no. 1 (December 1, 2018): 29­63. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41775-
    018-0032-0.
Soto, Hernando de. The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails
    Everywhere Else. 1st pbk. ed. New York: Basic Books, 2000.
Suzuki, Hiroaki, Jin Murakami, Yu-Hung Hong, and Beth Tamayose. Financing Transit-
    Oriented Development with Land Values: Adapting Land Value Capture in Developing
    Countries. Washington, DC: World Bank Publications, 2015.
Thaler, Richard, and Sherwin Rosen. "The Value of Saving a Life: Evidence from the Labor
    Market." In Household Production and Consumption, edited by Nestor E. Terleckyj, 265­
    302, 1976. https://www.nber.org/chapters/c3964.
Troesken, Werner. "Lead Water Pipes and Infant Mortality at the Turn of the Twentieth
    Century." Journal of Human Resources 43, no. 3 (July 1, 2008): 553­75.
    https://doi.org/10.3368/jhr.43.3.553.



                                              48
Tsivanidis, Nick. "The Aggregate and Distributional Effects of Urban Transit Infrastructure:
    Evidence from Bogotá's TransMilenio," 2019, 62.
United Nations. "2018 Revision of World Urbanization Prospects." Press Release. United
    Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, May 16, 2018.
    https://www.un.org/development/desa/publications/2018-revision-of-world-urbanization-
    prospects.html.
Vogel, Kathryn Baragwanath, Ran Goldblatt, Gordon H Hanson, and Amit K Khandelwal.
    "Detecting Urban Markets with Satellite Imagery: An Application to India." Working Paper.
    National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019. https://doi.org/10.3386/w24796.
Vollrath, Dietrich. "Agriculture and Growth Reading List." Growth Economics (blog), May 18,
    2014. https://growthecon.com/blog/agriculture-and-growth-reading-list/.
World Justice Project. The World Justice Project: Rule of Law Index, 2019, 2019.
Young, Alwyn. "Inequality, the Urban-Rural Gap, and Migration*." The Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 128, no. 4 (November 1, 2013): 1727­85. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjt025.




                                               49
