                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY OF IMMIGRANTS
                         IN THE US OVER TWO CENTURIES

                                        Ran Abramitzky
                                       Leah Platt Boustan
                                         Elisa Jácome
                                        Santiago Pérez

                                      Working Paper 26408
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26408


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




We thank Chris Becker, Alvaro Calderón, Bruno Caprettini, Raj Chetty, Jennifer Hunt, Michele
Rosenberg, Martin Saavedra, Kjell Salvanes, seminar participants at Copenhagen Business
School, Copenhagen University, Munich, Princeton, Norwegian School of Economics in Bergen,
Rotterdam, Stanford, Tilburg, and UC Davis, as well as conference participants at the 12th
International conference on Migration and Development in Madrid, the "Intergenerational
Mobility, Gender, and Family Formation in the Long Run" conference in Oslo, and SITE
conference on immigration at Stanford for useful comments and discussions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ran Abramitzky, Leah Platt Boustan, Elisa Jácome, and Santiago Pérez. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Intergenerational Mobility of Immigrants in the US over Two Centuries
Ran Abramitzky, Leah Platt Boustan, Elisa Jácome, and Santiago Pérez
NBER Working Paper No. 26408
October 2019
JEL No. J15,J61,J62,N30

                                         ABSTRACT

Using millions of father-son pairs spanning more than 100 years of US history, we find that
children of immigrants from nearly every sending country have higher rates of upward mobility
than children of the US-born. Immigrants' advantage is similar historically and today despite
dramatic shifts in sending countries and US immigration policy. In the past, this advantage can be
explained by immigrants moving to areas with better prospects for their children and by "under-
placement" of the first generation in the income distribution. These findings are consistent with
the "American Dream" view that even poorer immigrants can improve their children's prospects.


Ran Abramitzky                                  Elisa Jácome
Department of Economics                         Princeton University
Stanford University                             Industrial Relations Section
579 Jane Stanford Way                           Louis A. Simpson International Bldg.
Stanford, CA 94305                              Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER                                        ejacome@princeton.edu
ranabr@stanford.edu
                                                Santiago Pérez
Leah Platt Boustan                              Department of Economics
Princeton University                            University of California at Davis
Industrial Relations Section                    One Shields Avenue
Louis A. Simpson International Bldg.            Davis, CA 95616
Princeton, NJ 08544                             and NBER
and NBER                                        seperez@ucdavis.edu
lboustan@princeton.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26408
1. Introduction

    Immigrants aspire to offer a better future for their children in the US. Both today and in the
past, many immigrants earn less than US-born workers upon first arrival and do not completely
catch up in a single generation. 1 However, a defining feature of the "American Dream" is the view
that even immigrants who come to the United States with few resources and little skills have a real
chance at improving their children's prospects.
    This paper studies the intergenerational mobility of the children of immigrants (the "second-
generation"). We ask whether the sons of immigrants achieve earnings parity with the sons of the
US-born, and how their relative intergenerational mobility changed during the last two centuries.2
On the one hand, children of immigrants might be in a particularly good position to move up the
ladder, given that their parents may earn less than their true talent or ability would suggest (for
example if they had little exposure to US education or if they faced discrimination in the labor
market). Immigrant families who have just arrived in the US might also be more footloose, thus
allowing them to settle in areas with better prospects for their children. On the other hand, children
of immigrants might grow up in segregated neighborhoods, suffer from discrimination themselves
and otherwise enjoy more limited opportunities than the children of the US-born.
    We find that, both historically and today, children of immigrants at the bottom of the income
distribution have higher rates of upward mobility than children of the US-born and to a strikingly
similar degree in each time period. Second-generation immigrants growing up at the 25th percentile
of the income distribution end up 3­6 percentile rank points higher than the children of the US-
born. Second-generation immigrants today exhibit a similar degree of upward mobility, despite
notable shifts in countries of origin away from Europe toward Latin America and Asia, as well as
major changes in US immigration policy from a regime of nearly open borders (to European
immigrants) to one of substantial restriction. We find a smaller mobility gap between children of
immigrants and children of the US-born at the top of the income distribution. Second-generation
immigrants growing up at the 75th percentile of the income distribution end up 2­5 percentile rank
points higher than the children of the US born in the past, and less than 2 percentiles higher today.



1
  See Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson (2014) for past immigrants and Lubotsky (2007) for more recent immigrants.
2
  In historical data, we are only able to link sons from their childhood homes into adulthood across census waves,
given that daughters often change their names at marriage. Thus, for consistency, we focus on father-son pairs
throughout our analysis.

                                                                                                                2
      Our analysis focuses on three cohorts of immigrants that span more than one hundred years of
US history. The first two cohorts consist of four million first-generation immigrants observed with
their children in the US in either the 1880 or 1910 Censuses. The 1880 cohort consists mostly of
immigrants from Northern and Western Europe (e.g., Ireland, Germany, and the United Kingdom),
whereas the 1910 cohort includes more immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe thought to
have faced greater initial disadvantages in the US labor market. 3 We follow their children to the
1910 and 1940 Censuses, respectively, using information on their name, year of birth and place of
birth.
      The third cohort includes first-generation immigrants observed around 1980 and their children
who are participating in the contemporary labor market. Immigrants in this cohort entered the US
during an era of substantial migration policy restrictions and came mainly from poorer countries
in Latin America and Asia. For this cohort, we use two sources of data. First, we use publicly
available administrative data linking parents and their 2.7 million sons using federal income tax
returns from the Opportunity Insights project (Chetty et al. 2018a, 2018b). Second, we use data
from the General Social Surveys (GSS), which have smaller sample sizes but includes some
undocumented immigrants as well as self-reported information on occupations to facilitate
comparison with the historical data. Note that, because we need sufficient time to observe children
of immigrants in the labor market, we are unable to analyze the most recent cohorts of immigrant
arrivals.
      A key limitation of the historical cohorts is that the US Censuses of Population did not collect
income data before 1940. Hence, our analysis of these cohorts relies on computing proxies for
individual-level income ("income scores"). Our preferred income scores use the 1940 Census to
predict income for an individual in earlier Censuses based on his detailed occupation, age,
immigrant status, and location (results are robust to alternative approaches for predicting income,
and for the treatment of farmers' earnings, which is harder to observe). Our results are qualitatively
similar when we use more contemporary data sources to compute income scores (the 1900 Census
of Agriculture and the 1901 Cost of Living Survey). Immigrants' mobility advantage is smaller
when we use the occscore variable computed by IPUMS (which assigns occupations their median
1950 income) This finding is not surprising because occscore assigns identical income levels to



3
    For more background on immigration during the Age of Mass Migration, see Abramitzky and Boustan (2017).

                                                                                                              3
immigrants and the US-born in the same occupation, thereby possibly overestimating immigrant
income and thus underestimating the mobility advantage of their children in the second generation.
   We start by documenting (occupation-based) earnings gaps between first- and second-
generation immigrants and US-born workers. In both the past and present, there is a wide variation
in labor market outcomes among first-generation immigrants from different countries. Immigrants
from countries like Finland and Norway in the past and Vietnam and the Dominican Republic
today earn below the US-born on average, whereas immigrants from countries like England
(historical) and India (today) out-earn their US-born counterparts. With a few exceptions, earnings
differences for immigrant groups range between +20 and -40 log points. For most sending
countries in which first-generation immigrants earned less than the US-born, we find that the
second-generation immigrants catch up or even overtake the earnings of the US-born.
   Our main analysis uses father-son links to compare the average rank that children can expect
to reach in the national income distribution, conditional on their parent's income rank and
immigration status (a similar approach to Chetty et al. 2014 and Chetty et al. 2018a). When
analyzing the historical cohorts and the modern GSS data, our ranks are based on occupation-based
earnings, whereas the Opportunity Insights results are based on individual-level income. In both
the past and present, we find that the children of immigrants are more upwardly mobile than the
children of the US-born: conditional on the rank of their parents, children of immigrants have a
higher expected rank in adulthood. The higher level of upward mobility among children of
immigrants is economically meaningful. The difference in outcomes for children of immigrants
with parents in the 25th percentile relative to children of US-born individuals is about one fourth
of the comparable difference between blacks and whites in the historical US (Collins and
Wanamaker 2017), and about one half of the contemporaneous gap between blacks and whites
(Chetty et al. 2018a). The estimated gaps imply that children of immigrants can expect to have
similar outcomes to children of US-born individuals whose parents were ranked about 10­15
percentiles higher in the income distribution.
   Importantly, our data also enable us to estimate rates of intergenerational mobility separately
by an individual's country of origin, both in the historical and the modern cohorts. When doing so,
we find that immigrants at the bottom of the income distribution from nearly every sending
country, including those with a sizable negative earnings gap in the first generation, have higher



                                                                                                 4
rates of upward mobility than the children of the US-born. This finding stands in contrast to the
view that immigrants of certain countries of origin are not be able to integrate into the US economy.
    In the last part of the paper, we explore the question of why children of immigrants were more
upwardly mobile, focusing primarily on the historical data but comparing with the modern data
whenever possible. We are more limited in our ability to investigate mechanisms in the modern
data since the Opportunity Insights data are available only in aggregate form and the GSS has
small sample sizes and contains limited information about parental background). First, we explore
whether the higher observed mobility of the children of immigrants can be explained by the fact
that their fathers' rank in the US income distribution did not fully reflect their ability or earnings
potential (for example, due to a lack of US-specific human capital, English language ability, or
labor market networks). Consistent with this explanation, we find the highest rates of upward
mobility for children whose fathers immigrated to the US as adults, compared to those who arrived
as children (and hence were in a better position to acquire US-specific human capital). Father's
age of arrival is particularly important for immigrants from non-English-speaking countries,
suggesting that fathers' lack of English ability is one reason why immigrant fathers' rank does not
fully reflect their earnings potential.
    Second, we consider the possibility that immigrant families invest more in the upward mobility
of their children, either by encouraging educational attainment or by moving to geographic areas
with higher mobility prospects for their children. Education does not explain the higher income
mobility of second-generation immigrants. The children of immigrants were not more educated
than the children of US-born of comparable family income (although it is important to note that
immigrant fathers had lower literacy rates at every income level, suggesting higher rates of
educational mobility within immigrant families). Geographic choices were important: first-
generation immigrants were more likely to settle in areas with higher mobility prospects for their
children. When we compare children growing up in the same US region, the intergenerational gap
between immigrants and the US-born is reduced by 70%. When comparing children growing up
in the same county, we no longer find an intergenerational gap between the children of immigrants
and US-born individuals. In other words, immigrant children did not earn more than others who
grew up in the same location. Rather, their parents chose to live in locations that offered high
mobility prospects to all.



                                                                                                    5
    Our paper contributes to the understanding of immigrant assimilation and intergenerational
mobility in the US more broadly. Most existing work on economic outcomes during the Age of
Mass Migration focus on assimilation within a generation (see for instance, Abramitzky, Boustan,
and Eriksson 2014; Ferrie 1997; Hatton 1997; and Minns 2000). Although immigrants do not fully
catch up to the US-born within one generation, we document substantial progress for the second
generation. Most closely related to our study is Ward (Forthcoming), which documents persistent
outcomes by country of origin in the early 20th century even after controlling for own father and
grandfather attainment. 4 We go beyond Ward by contrasting social mobility rates for the children
of immigrants and the US-born and by comparing mobility rates in both the past and present. Our
work also relates to a set of papers that focus on intergenerational progress of specific immigrant
groups, including the Irish famine immigrants who arrived in the US in the mid-19th century
(Collins and Zimran 2019), and Mexican-Americans in the early to mid-20th century (Kosack and
Ward 2018; Duncan et al. 2017).
    Second, we add to the broader empirical literature on intergenerational mobility in the US
which, to date, has not emphasized immigrant families. A number of papers estimate contemporary
levels of intergenerational mobility in the United States (e.g., Chetty et al. 2014, 2017; Davis and
Mazumder 2017; Hilger 2016; Lee and Solon 2009; Mazumder 2015). 5 A series of related studies
document historical rates of intergenerational mobility, and compare these historical rates to
present-day levels (e.g., Card, Domnisoru, and Taylor 2018; Derenoncourt 2019; Feigenbaum
2015, 2018; Ferrie et al 2016; Long and Ferrie 2013; Olivetti and Paserman 2015; Olivetti,
Paserman, and Salisbury 2018; Tan 2018). Borjas (1992) develops a theory of ethnic capital, which
suggests that the social mobility process may differ between immigrants and the US-born. 6

2. Data

A. Historical Datasets for Studying Economic Mobility


4
  In earlier papers, Borjas (1993) and Card, DiNardo, and Estes (2000) measured the average outcomes by country of
origin in the first and the second generations from Census cross-sections. Perlmann and Waldinger (1997) and
Perlmann (2005) compare the outcomes of second-generation immigrants in the past and the present (similar as in our
Figure 1) but do not have parent-child linkages to examine intergenerational mobility. Kasinitz, et al. (2009) offers a
detailed qualitative and quantitative study of second-generation children in New York City in the current period.
5
  Bhattacharya and Mazumder (2011), Chetty et al. (2018a) and Collins and Wanamaker (2017) focus on black-white
differences in mobility, and Hilger (2017) focuses on Asian Americans.
6
  Outside of the US, Aydemir, Chen, and Corak (2009) focus on the intergenerational mobility of immigrants to
Canada, Bolotnyy and Bratu (2018) on immigrants and refugees to Sweden, and Gielen and Webbink (2019) on
immigrants from Surinam to the Netherlands.

                                                                                                                     6
    Our main analysis estimates intergenerational mobility for the children of US-born parents and
children of immigrants from 1880 to 2015. We measure historical mobility rates using two new
datasets of linked Census records. The first dataset links children observed in the 1880 Census of
Population to the 1910 Census, and the second links children observed in the 1910 Census to the
1940 Census. 7 These data allow us to observe an individual's own labor market outcomes during
adulthood and his father's labor market outcomes during his childhood. Throughout the analysis,
we focus on men; women cannot be systematically matched across Censuses because they
typically change their last names after marriage. We define immigrant status based on the father's
place of birth, but Section 6 shows that the results are similar when defining immigrant status using
the mother's place of birth (or using both parents' birthplaces in the historical data when such
information is available).

    i. Linking Fathers and Sons

    To create each linked sample, we first identified all males aged 0­16 in the childhood Census
(that is, either in 1880 or in 1910). We then matched these individuals to a later Census using
information on first and last names, age, and state of birth. 8 Our baseline samples use the linking
algorithm in Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson (2014), although in a later section we show that
our findings are robust to alternative linking procedures. 9 We restrict the analysis to father-son
pairs in which: (1) both the father and the son were white, 10 (2) the son was living with his father


7
  For reasons of both data availability and historical interest, our analysis does not include immigrants in the 1940­
1970 cohorts. First, the 1940 Census is the last Census for which information on names is publicly available, allowing
for backward but not forward links from 1940. Second, neither of the two sources that we use to study the modern
period include immigrants in these mid-20th-century cohorts: the GSS started collecting data in 1972 and the
Opportunity Insights data covers children of immigrants born between 1978 and 1983. We also note that these cohorts
coincide with a period of relatively limited migration into the US: in 1970, only 4.7% of the US population was born
abroad (compared to nearly 15% in the past [1880­1920] and today).
8
  The fact that the linking is based on names could be problematic if the likelihood of an individual changing his name
was correlated with rates of intergenerational upward mobility. We find this argument unlikely for two reasons. First,
all matched individuals are born in the US and so do not go through the name Americanization process that often took
place at Ellis Island for immigrant arrivals. Second, we show that names of second-generation immigrants were very
unlikely to change over time. To do so, we use the cross-sectional data from 1880, 1910 and 1940 and show that the
proportion of a cohort with a given name is very stable across census years. Moreover, names of second-generation
immigrants do not appear to become less foreign-sounding in later census years. We provide further details on this
issue in Section 1 of the Online Appendix.
9
   For more details on the linking strategy, we refer the reader to Section 2 of the Online Appendix. An extended
comparison of linking algorithms can be found in Abramitzky et al. (2019).
10
   More than 95 percent of immigrants in this time period were white. Focusing on US-born whites as the comparison
group ensures that the higher mobility of second-generation immigrants that we observe is not driven by black-white
differences in intergenerational mobility. When including African Americans in the sample, immigrant mobility
advantage is even higher.

                                                                                                                     7
at the time of the earliest Census (so that we can observe a father's labor market outcomes), 11 (3)
the father was born in the US or in one of the most common immigrant sending countries during
this time period, 12 and (4) both the father and the son were aged 30­50 by the time we measure
their labor market outcomes. 13 Finally, we exclude father-son pairs with missing information on
occupation or income, although we show that our main findings are similar when we assign an
income of zero to those with missing occupation or income (see Appendix Figure A22).
    Appendix Table A1 shows the changing sample size of the cohorts as we impose each
restriction. In our baseline samples, we match 23% of individuals in the 1880 Census to 1910 and
29% of individuals in the 1910 Census to 1940, standard match rates for historical samples given
the presence of common names and various causes of non-matches (mortality, return migration,
under-enumeration, transcription error; see Abramitzky et al. 2019). After imposing the sample
restrictions, our baseline sample of linked men in the 1880­1910 cohort includes around 1.2
million men, of whom 28 percent are classified as second-generation immigrants. Germany,
Ireland, and England are the largest countries of origin for immigrant fathers in the sample. The
1910­1940 cohort has information on roughly 2.7 million individuals, 24 percent of whom are
sons of immigrants. 14 The largest countries of origin in this cohort are Germany, Russia, and
Canada. Appendix Table A2 shows the sample sizes for each of the cohorts, disaggregated by the
father's place of birth.
    An important concern with Census links based on the available information on names, age,
and place of birth is the potential for linking children to the wrong adults ("false positives"). As
our main focus is on differences between immigrants and the US-born, false positives are a concern
only if our linking algorithm is systematically less accurate for the children of immigrants than for
children of US-born individuals (or vice versa). Such a pattern might arise, for instance, if


11
   Most children in this age group were living with their father regardless of immigration status. 88 and 90 percent of
children with a US-born father lived with their father in the 1880 and 1910 Census, respectively, which is similar to
89 and 90 percent of children with a foreign-born father.
12
   The seventeen source countries we consider are: Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, England, Finland, France,
Germany, Ireland, Italy, Norway, Portugal, Russia, Scotland, Sweden, Switzerland, and Wales. These countries are
the largest source of immigrants in the 1850­1910 period, accounting for 93 and 88 percent of the foreign-born
population in the 1880 and 1910 Censuses, respectively. We restrict the analysis to the relatively large sending
countries so that we have enough observations to estimate our country-by-country results.
13
   We restrict our sample to men ages 30­50 in order to measure fathers and sons at the same moment in the earnings
lifecycle, and to avoid measuring income when children or parents are too young or old (Mazumder 2005).
14
   Even though roughly 14 percent of the population was foreign-born in 1880 and 1910, immigrants were over-
represented in the prime-age adult population. For example, among adult men ages 30­50 who have a child present in
the household, 31 and 27 percent of them are foreign-born in the 1880 and 1910 Censuses, respectively.

                                                                                                                     8
immigrants had names that were less culturally familiar and thus harder for Census enumerators
to transcribe. Linking a child to the wrong adult would lead to attenuation bias in the relationship
between childhood background and adult outcomes; these errors would tend to bias all adults to
the 50th percentile (the population average), thus overstating upward mobility for children whose
parents were at the bottom of the income distribution and overstating downward mobility for
children whose parents were at the top. In the robustness section of the paper, we show that our
results are robust to the use of more conservative linking algorithms designed to minimize the rate
of false positives (at the expense of trading off on sample size).
     A second concern with the linking procedure is the extent to which we are able to generate
representative samples. It is well-known that linked samples are not fully representative of the
population, as individuals with uncommon names and other attributes are more likely to match
between Census waves (Abramitzky et al. 2019). 15 Appendix Table A3 compares the sons in our
linked samples to the relevant population of US-born men in the 1910 and 1940 Censuses. 16 Our
1880­1910 sample of linked sons has roughly the same share of second-generation immigrants as
the full population (26 vs. 27 percent), and has an income score (as described in the next section)
that is roughly 3 percent higher than the population. Our 1910­1940 linked sample has fewer
second-generation immigrants than the full population (22 vs. 24 percent), and again has an income
score that is 5 percent higher than the population. We address the non-representativeness of our
linked data by running a weighted version of our main specification that matches the population
on observable attributes.

     ii. Assigning Income Measures in Historical Data

     Because the 1940 Census is the first US Census to include information on individual earnings,
we need to construct proxies of individual income for fathers and sons in our historical samples
(we sometimes refer to these proxies as "income scores"). Our preferred approach is to use a
statistical model to predict income from a rich set of covariates for white men ages 30­50 in non-
agricultural occupations in the 1940 Census and use this model to predict income for men in earlier
years. In particular, we regress log income in 1940 on a number of fixed effects and complete set


15
   Appendix Table A2 shows the algorithm's match rate by the father's country of origin. The match rate for second-
generation immigrant sons tends to be slightly lower than for sons of US-born fathers.
16
   That is, we focus on white men aged 30 to 50 whose fathers were either born in the US or in one of the source
countries of interest.

                                                                                                                 9
of interaction terms using 3-digit occupation, age, current state of residence, and country of origin
as our explanatory variables (in all interaction terms, we interact covariates with Census region,
instead of state). This method for assigning income is similar to the machine-learning approach
for calculating occupational scores proposed by Saavedra and Twinam (2018). 17
     The 1940 income variable excludes income from self-employment and hence it is missing or
zero for most farmers. We thus use a different approach to predict the earnings of farm owners,
managers, and laborers. Following Collins and Wanamaker (2017, hereafter CW), we multiply the
known income of farm laborers in 1940 by the ratio of earnings for farmers versus farm laborers
in the 1960 Census by region and immigration status to impute the income of farmers in 1940 (the
1950 Census only asked the income question to a small subset of the population and so it is not
useful for this exercise). 18 This measure places the average farmer father in the 40th and 36th
percentile of the income distribution in 1880 and 1910, respectively, although this placement varies
by immigrant status. 19
     We combine predicted income for non-agricultural occupations with these farming
adjustments to create our preferred "income score." One concern with this strategy is that there is
an asymmetry between the way we assign income for non-farmers (which is solely based on the
1940 Census data) and the way we assign income for farmers (which combines information from
the 1940 and 1960 Censuses). Hence, we also test the robustness of our results to using the IPUMS
variable occscore, which corresponds to median earnings in a given occupation in the 1950
Census. While this measure uses less information (ignoring, for instance, any immigrant penalty
within the first generation), it is computed in a symmetric way for farmers and non-farmers. In
addition, we check the robustness of our results to alternative measures of income (for both farmers
and non-farmers) in Section 5. Our main qualitative conclusions are unaffected by the specific
proxy for income that we use for the historical samples, although we tend to find larger
intergenerational gaps when using the more complete set of characteristics to predict income.

17
   The predicted earnings we estimate are very similar when we use the machine-learning approach (i.e., the lasso
algorithm) to choose the most important predictors of earnings in the initial regression; the correlation between the
predicted earnings and the lasso-estimated predicted earnings for fathers in the 1910­1940 cohort is 0.99.
18
   CW use a ratio of farmers to farm laborers by region; we add an additional adjustment by immigration status. We
further follow CW by scaling up the earnings of farm laborers and farm managers to account for non-cash (in kind)
earnings. Throughout these calculations, we restrict the sample to US-born whites and immigrants from the most
common sending countries during our historical time period. For more details, see Section 3 in the Online Appendix.
19
   US-born fathers who are farmers are on average around the 40th and 36st percentile of the income distribution in
1880 and 1910, respectively. Immigrant fathers who are farmers are on average around the 38th and 32th percentile of
the income distribution, respectively.

                                                                                                                 10
   For sons observed in 1940, we conduct our analysis using two income measures. First, we use
our predicted income for these sons so as to use a consistent income measure across all historical
samples and Census years. As an alternative approach, we use individual income data from the
1940 Census. Note that this measure includes only wage and salary income, and does not include
capital income or income from self-employment (including farm income). We therefore also use
the CW approach for adjusting the income of farmers and all other self-employed individuals
described above. In this case, we calculate the ratio of mean earnings for self-employed non-wage
workers in an occupation to the mean earnings of wage workers in the same occupation from the
1960 Census and then use this ratio to scale wage earnings of the self-employed in the 1940
Census.
   One limitation of using the 1940 Census to compute income scores for earlier Censuses is that
we rely on the relative rank between our income cells to be stable from 1880 to 1940. This is
especially a concern for our 1880­1910 cohort. To address this, we show the robustness of the
results to an alternative data source that measures earnings in an earlier period, namely the 1901
Cost of Living Survey. We also note that Saavedra and Twinam (2018) show that earnings ranks
across occupations are fairly stable for later cohorts covering the course of the 20th century.
B. Modern Datasets for Studying Economic Mobility
   Our linked Census data cannot be extended beyond 1940 because confidentiality restrictions
dictate that individuals' names are only released to the public 72 years after a Census is taken.
Instead, we rely on two sources of data to follow modern father-son pairs in the labor market. First,
we use publicly available aggregate data from the Opportunity Insights project, which was
originally constructed by linking US Census and American Community Survey data with federal
income tax returns and is based on large samples (Chetty et al. 2018a). 20 Second, to address the
discrepancies between historical and modern data in the use of occupation versus income
measures, we use the General Social Survey (GSS), a smaller, survey-based dataset that asks
respondents about their own occupation and the occupations of their parents.
   Our sample from the Opportunity Insights project is based on nearly 3 million male children
born between 1978 and 1983, out of which 160,000 have an immigrant father born in one the




                                                                                                  11
twenty-one largest sending countries to the US. 21 These data are built by the Opportunity Insights
team in two steps: In the first step, the 2000 US Census long form and the 2005-2015 American
Community Survey (ACS) are linked to federal income tax returns (using a unique person
identifier assigned by the Census Bureau staff). This step enables us to observe an individual's
income from the tax records as well as his or her race and place of birth from the Census or the
ACS. In the second step, we obtain information on family income during childhood. To do so, an
individual's parent is defined as the person who first claims him or her as a dependent in a federal
income tax return at some point between 1994 and 2015. Note that as a result of this procedure for
linking parents to children, we are not able to observe pairs for which either the child or the parents
lack a Social Security Number. As a result of this limitation, the sample is restricted to children
who are either US citizens or authorized immigrants who came to the US during childhood, and
whose parents are also US citizens or authorized immigrants.
     Adult income for our childhood cohort is measured as the average of annual income in 2014
and 2015, when these children were between the ages of 31 and 37, whereas parental income is
measured as the average household income from 1994 to 2000 (fifteen to twenty years before the
children are observed in the labor market). We used the publicly available version of the data,
which reports information collapsed by ventile bin in the national income distribution. Hence, for
each parental ranking, we observe the average income rank of children whose parents fall into that
ventile, by a father's country of origin. 22 We also show results when we instead use information
on children of foreign-born and US-born mothers. Using mothers instead of fathers allows us to
show results separately by race and by percentile rather than ventile bins (but in that case the data
do not allow us to show results by country of origin). 23
     These data have several attractive features for the study of the intergenerational mobility of
immigrants: It is very large relative to other panel datasets (no other longitudinal dataset would



21
   This sample is smaller than the baseline sample in Chetty et al. (2018a) because the question on parental place of
birth is only included in the ACS 2005­2015 and the Census 2000 long form (which covers a random sample of
approximately one-sixth of US households). For this modern cohort, the 21 source countries are Canada, China,
Colombia, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, India, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Mexico, the Philippines, South Korea, the United Kingdom, and Vietnam.
22
   These data correspond to the "Non-Parametric Estimates of Income Ranks for Second Generation Immigrant
Children by Parent Income, Country of Origin, and Gender" file available on the Opportunity Insights website at
https://opportunityinsights.org/data/.
23
   Specifically, we use the data in the "National Statistics by Parent Income Percentile, Gender, and Race" file available
on the Opportunity Insights website at https://opportunityinsights.org/data/.

                                                                                                                      12
enable us to look at mobility differences by country of origin in the modern period), 24 and includes
administrative data on income in both the parents' and the children's generation. 25 However, the
dataset has two limitations for our purposes. First, it does not include information on individual-
level occupations--the main labor market outcome we observe in the historical data--thus
complicating our past-present comparisons of intergenerational mobility. Second, because
unauthorized immigrants do not have a Social Security Number (SSN), these data exclude the
children of unauthorized immigrants, a sizable fraction of the immigrants in the modern period.
This limitation affects Hispanic immigrants more than other groups. Specifically, Chetty et al.
(2018a) compares these data to the American Community Survey and reports that it includes about
79% of Hispanics, whereas the coverage is close to 100% for other ethnic groups. We conduct
subsample analysis by ethnicity and race (Hispanic, Asian and White), as well as by country of
origin, and concerns about coverage of the undocumented would not affect results for many of
these country-of-origin groups. Furthermore, we add linked data from the General Social Surveys
and cross-sectional data from the Current Population Survey (both of which include unauthorized
immigrants) to partially address this concern.
     As we mentioned, we supplement the Opportunity Insights data with survey data from the
General Social Survey. Although the GSS has substantially smaller sample sizes, it includes
questions on occupation and covers unauthorized immigrants, both of which facilitate comparison
with the historical data. The survey includes information on a respondent's occupation, as well as
parents' place of birth (in the US or abroad) and retrospective questions on parents' occupations
when the respondent was 16 years old. To make this sample as comparable as possible to the
historical data, we focus on respondents who: (1) are males, (2) lived in the US by age 16, (3) were
30 to 50 years old at the time of the survey (which implies an average gap of approximately 24
years between parents' and sons' occupations), and (4) have available information on his and his
father's occupation. We attempt to maximize comparability with the Opportunity Insights sample
while retaining enough observations by restricting the analysis to survey years 2000 to 2018. After

24
   For instance, the PSID (which includes information on parental income) started in 1968 and thus does not have
much coverage of immigrant families who arrived to the US after the border reopened to immigration in 1965. The
sample has been updated in recent years and now includes about 500 immigrant families, although the survey
documentation warns that "it is important to note that the size of the immigrant refresher sample was driven by budget
constraints and is not designed for immigrant-focused subgroup analysis."
25
   Other panel datasets (for instance, the National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth used in Borjas 1993) include
retrospective questions (asked of the children) about the occupation and education in the parent's generation, but do
not contain information on parental income.

                                                                                                                  13
imposing these sample restrictions, our GSS sample includes about 3,100 observations, out of
which about 9% are second-generation immigrants.
    To assign income proxies in the GSS data, we implemented an analogous procedure to the
creation of the historical proxy, with minor adjustments to fit the available variables.26
Specifically, we used the 2006­2015 Current Population Surveys and regressed logged total earned
income on a number of fixed effects and complete set of interaction terms using occupation, age,
region, and immigrant status (and their interaction terms) as our explanatory variables. We then
used this regression to predict income scores for respondents and their fathers.

3. Preliminary Evidence: Earning Gaps between Immigrants and US-born since 1880

    We start by estimating earning gaps between US-born men and first- and second-generation
immigrants by country of origin. For this exercise, we use cross-sectional samples, rather than
father-son pairs. Our interest is in documenting the earnings disadvantage faced by first-generation
immigrants and to ask whether the children of immigrants are able to erase some or all of these
gaps by the next generation.
    We estimate the following equation, first for the father's generation and then for the son's:
                         (1)  =  + =1  Countryc +  +  .

where  is the logged income score of father or son  of age  from sending country  . 27 The 
coefficients on the country-of-origin fixed effects reveal the average income-score difference
between US-born individuals and immigrants from country  . All regressions include a quadratic
in father's or son's age  .
    Figure 1 plots the  coefficients for first-generation (in black) and second-generation (in gray)
immigrants in each cohort. 28 For most countries-of-origin and time periods, the gaps in income

26
   The GSS reports parental immigrant status but does not record country of origin. The most precise measure of
geography in the GSS is region. In addition, the GSS does not include information on parental age when the respondent
was 16 years old (when parental occupations are measured) or at any other time.
27
   We note that the results are very similar when use actual (rather than predicted) income for the 1940 sons as well
as for individuals in the modern cohort (See Appendix Figure A1).
28
   In particular, we use the 1980 Census for the fathers' generation and the Current Population Survey (CPS)'s Annual
Social and Economic Supplement for 2006­2015 for the sons (Flood et al. 2018, Ruggles et al. 2018). We restrict the
1980 Census sample (fathers) to men who are aged 30­50, who have a son present in the household, and who were
born in the US or in one of the top sending countries identified in the Opportunity Insights sample. We restrict the
CPS sample (sons) to US-born men who are aged 30­50 and whose fathers were either born in the US or in one of the
top sending countries. For both of these datasets, we construct occupation-based income scores using an analogous
procedure to the one that we use in both the GSS and the historical data, but we also show the results from using actual
income.


                                                                                                                    14
scores between first-generation immigrants and US-born men range between -20 log points and
+20 log points. In the modern cohorts, four countries faced larger gaps of nearly -60 log points
(the Dominican Republic Haiti, Mexico, and Vietnam). In the past, immigrants from Scandinavian
countries faced the largest earnings penalties, along with immigrants from Russia and Italy (1880)
and from Portugal and Italy (1910). In all cohorts, immigrants from a set of sending countries
outperform the US-born in the labor market. Today, these high-earning countries include
Germany, Canada, the United Kingdom, Japan, and India, whereas in the past the highest-earning
immigrants were from the England, Scotland, Germany, and France.
     In each of the three cohorts, second-generation immigrants from countries in which first-
generation immigrants earned less than the US-born close or even reverse the corresponding
earnings gap in the second generation (so that children of immigrants begin to out-earn children
of US-born individuals). There are only a few cases in which the gap remained above 5 log points
by the second generation (Norwegians in 1910 and 1940, Finish in 1940, and Jamaicans, Haitians,
and Mexicans in the modern data), but, for most sending countries, the earnings gap is close to
zero by the second generation. Appendix Figure A2 shows the same pattern when we consider the
daughters of immigrants. In this case, because historically many women were not in the labor
force, we assign to women the sum of their own incomes (if she was employed) and the incomes
of their husbands (if she was married); the earnings gaps are, again, either closed or reversed by
the second generation in each of the three cohorts.
     For countries whose first-generation immigrants already out-earned US-born individuals in the
labor market, the pattern is more mixed, with the corresponding earnings advantage becoming
smaller for some countries, remaining similar in size for others, or even growing by the second
generation in some cases. Although earnings gaps for countries that start below the US-born
diminish substantially across generations, it is still the case that the children of low-earning
immigrants tend to earn less than the children of high-earning immigrants, consistent with the
persistence results in Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson (2014) and Ward (Forthcoming). 29

29
   The cross-sectional samples in Figure 1 have three main advantages: they are constructed to be nationally
representative, they do not rely on linking and they are highly comparable over time. However, the drawback of cross-
sectional analysis is that it does not allow for a direct comparison of fathers with their sons. In addition, cross-sectional
data will include first-generation immigrants who might have returned to their home country before having children
or with their families (so that their sons would not be in the subsequent sample thirty years later). Because return
migrants tend to be negatively selected (Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson 2014, 2018; Lubotsky 2007), this figure
might over-state the degree of intergenerational improvement by the second generation. Appendix Figure A3 shows
that the same pattern holds in our linked father-son samples, namely the sons of immigrants are on average more

                                                                                                                         15
4. Main Results: Intergenerational Mobility of Immigrants since 1880
      We have so far considered average earnings gaps, without any regard for the parent's rank in
the income distribution. The earnings growth for the children of immigrants relative to the children
of US-born parents in Figure 1 could be driven by higher rates of upward mobility from the bottom
of the income distribution, lower rates of downward mobility from the top of the income
distribution, or both. The essence of the American Dream is that even immigrants at the bottom of
the income distribution can have children that succeed. Thus, we turn to the linked data, both
historical and modern, to study intergenerational mobility of immigrants and US-born individuals
whose parents had comparable labor market outcomes as measured by their rank in the national
income distribution (following Chetty et al. 2014 and Chetty et al. 2018a). We first rank each son
based on his income score (or actual income when using the Opportunity Insights data), relative
to other sons born in the same year. Similarly, we rank fathers based on their income score relative
to all other fathers with sons born in the same year. 30
      In particular, we regress a son's rank on his father's rank 31, allowing both the slope and
intercept to differ for sons of immigrants and US-born individuals:

(2)       =  + 0 2 . + 1   + 2 2 .×   +  .

In the terminology of Chetty et al. (2014), the constant term  measures absolute rank mobility for
the children of the US-born, that is, the expected rank of children of US-born individuals with
fathers at the very bottom of the income distribution. The parameter 0 captures the degree to
which this expected rank is different for the children of immigrants. The parameter 1 measures
the rate of relative mobility of children of US-born individuals, or the association between the




upwardly mobile than the sons of US-born individuals. We also re-run this specification but excluding individuals
living in the South in either generation in order to estimate more-comparable earnings gaps (since 95 percent of
foreign-born individuals lived outside of the South). Appendix Figure A4 displays the results, showing that the main
findings of this section are preserved.
30
   If there are individuals in the sample who have the same father, we assign the father the average rank across his
sons. Due to the GSS's much more limited sample size compared to the historical linked data and the Opportunity
Insights data, we pool all survey years (2000 to 2018) and include a survey year fixed effect in the regressions.
31
   In the Opportunity Insights data, we use family income rank because we do not have separate information on a
father's income rank.

                                                                                                                 16
ranks of children and those of their fathers. Finally, 2 measures the degree to which this
association is different for children of immigrants. 32
    We compare the economic mobility of the sons of immigrants to the sons of the US-born in
Figure 2, which plots these regression lines estimated in equation (2), as well as a binned scatterplot
showing the mean income rank of the children of immigrants and of the US-born by parental
income rank. Figure 2 contains four panels, two for the historical cohorts and two for the modern
cohort using the GSS and Opportunity Insights data, respectively. In each case, second-generation
immigrants were more upwardly mobile than the children of the US-born: conditional on the
father's rank (or family's rank when using the Opportunity Insights data), children of immigrants
achieve a higher expected rank than the children of the US-born. The mobility patterns of the
historical cohorts, shown in panels (a) and (b), suggest that, in the past, the sons of immigrants on
average out-earned comparable sons of US-born individuals throughout the income distribution,
and particularly in its bottom half. Second-generation immigrant children with fathers at the 25th
percentile in 1880 and 1910 reached an average income rank that was 3­4 percentiles above the
average rank reached by children of the US-born with similar fathers' incomes. 33
    Panels (c) and (d) of Figure 2 show the mobility patterns for the modern cohort when using the
GSS and Opportunity Insights data, respectively. Today, the children of immigrants remain more
upwardly mobile than their counterparts with US-born parents, but this pattern mainly holds in the
bottom half of the income distribution. The children of the US-born in the 25th percentile rank at
the 4th percentile. 34 Similar to the historical data, sons of immigrants in the 25th percentile rank
about 5 percentile points higher than children of US-born individuals, regardless of whether we
use the GSS or the Opportunity Insights data. 35 In Table 1, we report the estimated values of the

32
   A negative 0 implies a lower expected rank for children of immigrants relative to children of US-born individuals
with parents at the very bottom of the income distribution. Note, however, that even if 0 was negative, the cross-
sectional data could show convergence by the second generation for groups that started below the US-born (due to
mean reversion). By a similar logic, immigrant groups that started above the US-born might lose some of their
advantage by the second generation even if 0 was positive.
33
   Appendix Figure A5 shows that the mobility advantage of the children of immigrants continues into the next
generation. That is, the children of US-born individuals with foreign-born grandfathers are more mobile than the those
with US-born grandfathers.
34
   Our calculation is very similar but not identical to Chetty et al. (2018a, Figure 3), since we define immigrant status
using the father's place of birth and they define it using the mother's.
35
   Appendix Figure A6 shows the same rank-rank results but using actual (instead of predicted) income when it is
available (i.e., for the 1940 sons and for the sons in the GSS cohort). This figure shows that replacing predicted with
actual income does not alter the main findings for the 1910­1940 and GSS cohorts, and therefore suggests that our
finding of higher upward mobility of children of immigrants is not driven by the use of predicted rather than actual
income.

                                                                                                                     17
intercepts and slopes for each of the samples. For all three cohorts, we find a higher intercept for
the children of immigrants relative to the children of the US-born, indicating higher levels of
absolute mobility (these differences are statistically significant). The difference in intercept range
from 4 percentiles in the 1910­1940 cohort to 7 percentiles in the modern Opportunity Insights
data. The slopes for the children of immigrants range from 0.21 to 0.37 and are in most cases
smaller in magnitude than the slopes for US-born individuals, also suggesting a weaker association
between a father's rank and his son's rank for immigrant families.
     In Figure 3, we allow the intercept and the slope of the rank-rank relationship to differ by
country of origin, both in the historical and the modern data. We then use these estimates to
compute the expected income rank for children born at the 25th percentile for each country of
origin. 36 The figure shows that children from nearly all sending countries in the past and the present
(except Norway and Belgium in 1880, Norway and Germany in 1910, and Haiti and Jamaica in
the modern cohort) had a higher expected rank than the children of US-born individuals with
parents at the 25th percentile of the income distribution. 37
     Figure 4 shows that the children of immigrants and the US-born appear more similar when
looking at the 75th percentile of the income distribution. 38 In the past, children of immigrants had
slightly higher expected ranks, and today the two groups achieve the same expected rank. Children
of immigrants from some sending countries like Portugal and Belgium in the past and Jamaica, El
Salvador and Mexico today did worse than the children of US-born, and those from other countries
like Russia and Ireland in the past and India and China today did better.
     We next consider differences in mobility patterns by immigrant ethnicity or race (white,
Hispanic, and Asian) within the modern cohort, again using the Opportunity Insights data.
Consistent with our country-by-country results, Figure 5 shows that immigrants from all of these
groups are more upwardly mobile than US-born individuals (where the data for US-born
individuals pools all races), particularly in the bottom half of the income distribution. 39 White and

36
   In this exercise, we focus on the Opportunity Insights for the modern data because of its large sample size, which
facilitates an analysis of sub-samples, and because the GSS data does not record parent's country of origin or ethnicity.
37
   Appendix Figure A7 shows the same figure, but weighting observations in the historical cohorts to account for
selection into the linked sample using the individual's childhood characteristics (like father's birthplace and
occupation, state of residence, etc.). Appendix Table A4 shows the intercept and slope for each country of origin in
the two historical cohorts.
38
   The modern data do not include information on the children of families at the 50th percentile by country of origin.
39
   We note that in this case we cannot restrict the sample to the 21 largest sending countries since the data is only
disaggregated by race and not by country of origin. We also note that in this case second-generation status is defined
based on the birthplace of the mother.

                                                                                                                     18
Hispanic immigrants perform similarly to US-born individuals in the top half of the distribution
(panels (a) and (b)). By contrast, second-generation Asian immigrants can expect to reach higher
ranks than US-born individuals, even at the top of the income distribution. 40
    Overall, we conclude that second-generation immigrants are on average more upwardly mobile
than the sons of US-born individuals. This advantage is not driven by immigrants from countries
with higher mean earning than the US-born in the first generation: there is higher upward mobility
even among immigrants from countries that start significantly below the US-born in the first
generation. In both the past and present, sons of immigrants move out of the bottom of the income
distribution at higher rates than the sons of US-born parents, with differences in absolute mobility
ranging between 3 and 6 percentiles. The similarities are striking especially given that in the past,
immigrants hailed from more-comparable economies (i.e., European countries) and today they hail
from poorer regions (i.e., Latin America and Asia). 41
    Section 4 of the Online Appendix documents mobility patterns in more detail using
occupational transition matrices. Overall, the analysis suggests that the children of immigrants
were more likely than the children of the US born to use urban routes to upward mobility. The
sons of unskilled immigrant fathers moved into white-collar and skilled blue-collar jobs at higher
rates than the sons of unskilled US-born fathers, who were more likely to transition into farming.
In the modern period, children of immigrants whose fathers were employed as blue-collar or
service workers were more likely to become professionals than the children of the US-born.

5. Why are children of immigrants more upwardly mobile?

    This section explores why the children of immigrants were more upwardly mobile than the
children of the US-born. Whenever possible, we compare the historical and modern cohorts.
However, we often focus on the historical data for which we have a set of rich covariates because,
in the modern case, we only have access to aggregate cells in the Opportunity Insights data and a
limited sample size in the GSS. We consider two potential explanations: first, a "mismatch"
between an immigrant father's full potential and his earnings rank--due, for example, to a lack of



40
   This result echoes Chetty et al. (2018a)'s finding that exceptional outcomes of Asian children are driven by
immigrants (i.e., individuals whose parents were not born in the United States).
41
   US GDP per capita was more than 7 times higher than Mexico or China when migration flows from these countries
began in 1970, whereas the US had GDP per capita that was only 2­3 times higher than European sending countries
circa 1900.

                                                                                                             19
US-specific skills. Such "mismatch" allows immigrant children more scope for upward mobility.
Second, differences in parental investments, including education and location choices.

A. Father's income not reflecting earnings potential

    One possible explanation for the higher upward mobility of immigrants is that the earnings
rank of an immigrant father in the US income distribution might not fully reflect his ability or
earnings potential. In other words, if immigrant fathers are ranked lower in the distribution than
their skills or ability would suggest (e.g., due to a lack of US-specific human capital, language
ability or labor market networks), then the children of these immigrants are expected to perform
better than their fathers' outcomes would predict. We consider various aspects of the data to see
whether this underperformance in the US labor market might play a role in explaining immigrants'
higher levels of upward mobility.

    i.     Parental Age of Arrival in the United States

    We first consider the age at which immigrant fathers arrived in the United States. Immigrant
fathers who arrived as children to the US would likely assimilate into the labor market more easily
(for instance, by being exposed to US education since an early age), so that their observed income
would be closer to their potential earnings. Moreover, an earlier age of arrival to the US might
benefit immigrants coming from less developed countries if they are exposed to better schools,
health facilities, etc. in the US (which would then increase their earnings ability as adults). Indeed,
Ward and Alexander (2018) shows that age of arrival was a key driver of immigrant earnings
during the Age of Mass Migration, with immigrants arriving at younger ages out-earning those
arriving later in life. If lack of US-specific human capital is driving our results, then we should
observe higher levels of upward mobility for children of immigrants who arrived in the US as
adults and thus may have been placed too low in the income distribution relative to their underlying
ability.
    Figure 6 calculates the intergenerational gap at the 25th percentile of the income distribution
for three groups of immigrants: those whose fathers arrived to the US before age 7, those whose
fathers arrived between the ages of 8 and 16, those whose fathers arrived at age 17 or older. We
focus this analysis on the 1910­1940 cohort because the 1880 Census did not include information
on year of arrival to the US. Parental age of arrival to the US is also not available in the GSS. We
find that the intergenerational mobility gap between the children of immigrants and the US-born

                                                                                                    20
grows with fathers' age of arrival, so that the gap is more than twice as large for the children of
immigrants who arrived as adults than for the children of immigrants who arrived as children. 42
The children of immigrants who arrived before schooling age and thus likely received all of their
schooling in the US exhibit no mobility gap relative to the children of the US-born. This result
suggests that part of the difference in upward mobility is driven by immigrant fathers not earning
up to their potential in the labor market.

       ii. Parental English Ability

       One important aspect of US-specific human capital is English language ability. If immigrant
fathers end up lower in the income distribution than their potential would predict due to an
imperfect command of English, then we should expect to see high levels of upward mobility for
their children, most of whom would have been educated in schools that used English as the primary
language of instruction.
       To test this hypothesis, we compare the association between upward mobility and father's age
of arrival for fathers from English- versus non-English-speaking countries; this method is similar
in spirit to Bleakley and Chin (2010). All immigrants will have greater exposure to American
culture and networks if they arrive in the country at a younger age. Immigrants from non-English
speaking countries will additionally benefit from a greater command of the English language. If
English language ability can partially explain fathers' mismatch in the income distribution, we
should find a stronger relationship between father's age of arrival and upward mobility for the
children of immigrants from non-English speaking countries. Indeed, Figure 7 shows that, while
the intergenerational mobility gap grows with fathers' age of arrival for both groups, the age
gradient is steeper for individuals with fathers from non-English-speaking countries. This result
suggests that lack of English ability partially contributes to the misplacement of immigrant fathers
in the income distribution. We note, however, that individuals with English-speaking immigrant
fathers still have significant intergenerational gaps (of at least 5 percentage points), implying that
lack of English ability cannot fully explain immigrants' higher levels of upward mobility in the
past.

B. Did immigrants invest more in the upward mobility of their children?



42
     We also include the corresponding rank-rank figure (i.e., Appendix Figure A8).

                                                                                                   21
    i. Investment in Education

    We first study the possibility that children of immigrants achieved higher levels of educational
attainment, which then served as a vehicle toward achieving better labor market outcomes in
adulthood. Figure 8 considers the 1910­1940 cohort--which is the first cohort for which we have
data on completed years of schooling for the sons--and plots the average educational attainment
of the sons of immigrants and of US-born individuals relative to their fathers' income rank. Panels
(a) and (b) of this figure show that, if anything, sons of US-born fathers were more likely to
graduate high school and reach higher grades in school. In the same vein, panel (c) focuses on
linked sons aged 12­16 in 1910 to show that the sons of US-born fathers were indeed more likely
to be attending school in 1910 than the sons of immigrant fathers. 43 Hence, higher educational
investments among immigrant families are unlikely to be the explanation for their higher upward
mobility.

    The fact that educational differences do not explain the intergenerational mobility gap is not
entirely surprising because, as Goldin (1998) shows, the returns to schooling in 1940 were lower
than in recent years. The children of immigrants also enjoyed higher income mobility because they
earned a higher income at any given level of education (panel (d)). However, we also note that the
children of immigrants enjoyed a faster rate of educational mobility, even if they did not achieve
higher levels of educational attainment. That is, for a given level of father's education, the children
of immigrants in the bottom half of the distribution tended to achieve more years of schooling than
the children of the US-born, consistent with the finding by Card, Domnisoru, and Taylor 2018 (see
panel (e)). 44

    ii. Location Choices

    We next consider the role of location choices in explaining immigrants' higher levels of
upward mobility. Our analysis of location choices is motivated by two facts. First, rates of
intergenerational mobility both historically and today vary greatly by region (Chetty et al. 2017,
Tan 2018, Connor 2019). Second, previous research shows that first-generation immigrants are

43
   Similarly, using the 10% sample of the 1880 Census, we see that sons of immigrant fathers who are aged 12­16 in
the earlier cohort are 8 percentage points less likely to be attending school than sons of US-born fathers (57 versus 65
percent).
44
   Panel (e) is based on father-son pairs for whom we could link the father to the 1940 Census and thus have a measure
of father's education (22 percent of the sample).


                                                                                                                    22
more responsive than the US-born to wage differentials across regions (Borjas 2001, Cadena and
Kovak 2016), which raises the possibility that they might also be more likely to move to areas with
better prospects for their children.
     As motivation, Figure 9 presents maps that indicate the share of children who are second-
generation immigrants in 1880 and 1910 by State Economic Areas (SEAs). Immigrant families
typically settled in the Northeast, the upper Midwest, and some parts of the West, and were very
unlikely to settle in the South (see panels (a) and (c)). Panels (b) and (d) then depict the share of
each SEA's population that was upwardly mobile, focusing on the sons of US-born fathers (to
avoid a mechanical relationship between upward mobility and the fraction of immigrants). 45 Our
measure of upward mobility is similar in spirit to that of Chetty et al. (2018b): we calculate the
share of sons who reach the top third of the income distribution, conditional on having had a father
who was in the bottom third of the corresponding national distribution. The maps show that the
areas in which immigrants settled tended to have overall higher levels of upward economic
mobility.
     The final two panels of Figure 9 indicate the share of the population who is foreign-born in
1980 by county (using data from Manson et al. (2019)), and the share of each county's white non-
Hispanic male population that was upwardly mobile using data from Chetty et al. (2018b).46
Immigrants settled in the Northeast and the West, as well as in Florida, but were less likely to live
in the Midwest or the South. As for earlier cohorts, immigrants choose to settle in areas with high
levels of upward economic mobility.
     We summarize the information in these maps in Figure 10, in which we plot the share of each
SEA's population that is a second-generation immigrant, against the share of sons of the US-born
raised in that SEA who achieved upward mobility. This figure confirms that first-generation
immigrant parents were more likely to settle in areas with higher mobility prospects, both in the
historical and in the modern data. 47 These figures therefore suggest that immigrants might exhibit

45
   Appendix Figure A9 shows the share of each SEA's population that was upwardly mobile, separately for the sons
of US-born and foreign-born fathers.
46
   We are not able to compute the fraction of upwardly mobile sons separately for the children of US-born and foreign-
born parents at the commuting zone level in the modern data. Instead, we used publicly available data indicating the
fraction of non-Hispanic white males who reach the top 20 percent of the income distribution, conditional on having
parent income in the 25th percentile of the income distribution (Chetty et al. (2018b)).
47
   The first two panels of Appendix Figure A10 reproduce these figures at the state level for the historical cohorts. The
third panel reproduces this figure at the commuting zone level for the modern cohort. All of these graphs reinforce the
positive relationship between upward mobility and immigrant location choices. Appendix Figure A11 plots the share
of sons of the US-born who are upwardly mobile in a state or SEA against the corresponding share of second-

                                                                                                                     23
higher levels of intergenerational mobility because they tended to migrate to areas that had overall
higher degrees of upward mobility.
    We now explicitly test the hypothesis that differences in the geographic distribution of
immigrants and US-born individuals might explain mobility gaps between the two groups.
Specifically, we re-run our rank-based specification from equation (2), and sequentially add
region, state, state-by-urban status, and county fixed effects (based on an individual's childhood
location). These specifications allow us to compare immigrants and US-born individuals with
similar parental incomes and who grew up in the same location.
    Figure 11 plots the baseline intergenerational gap between the children of immigrants and the
US-born at the 25th percentile for each cohort and how the gap changes as we incorporate location
controls. The second bar of panels (a) and (b) shows that including childhood region fixed effects
diminishes the intergenerational gaps by roughly 70% in both historical cohorts. The
intergenerational gaps are further reduced when adding childhood state fixed effects (third bar of
each graph). Finally, when we further include either childhood state-by-urban status fixed effects
(fourth bar) or childhood county fixed effects (fifth bar) the gap between the children of
immigrants and the US-born fully closes. Hence, these results suggest that location choices are an
important source of difference in upward mobility for the children of immigrants versus children
of the US-born. 48
    The GSS data enable us to explore the role of location choices in the modern period. While the
survey does not include detailed childhood occupation as in the historical data, it includes a
question on a respondent's region of residence at age 16. Panel (c) of Figure 11 shows that the
intergenerational gap is unchanged once comparing children growing up in similar locations.
Relative to the historical data, the choice of region appears to be less important in this cohort, but




generation immigrant sons in that same state or SEA who achieved upward mobility in the historical cohorts. Because
many SEAs have small populations in the linked sample, the SEA estimates in these plots are much less precise.
Nevertheless, we notice that the same places that are typically associated with upward mobility for immigrants seem
to have comparable levels of mobility for US-born individuals (as evidenced by the clustering of the estimates around
the 45-degree line) and that the Northeast and West are areas with higher levels of upward mobility.
48
   Appendix Figure A12 plots the intergenerational gap between the children of immigrants and the US-born at the
50th and 75th percentile for each cohort and how the gap changes as we incorporate location controls. These results
highlight the importance of first-generation immigrants' location choices throughout the income distribution. Our
baseline income scores use state of residence to predict income, so we were concerned that adding state fixed effects
will mechanically have a strong predictive power. However, Appendix Figure A13 shows that the results are similar
when using income scores that do not use state to predict incomes.

                                                                                                                 24
it is possible that county or neighborhood choice (which we cannot capture) are still important
today.
   We also consider the potential role of enclaves in boosting or hindering mobility of the second
generation. To do so, we classify a second-generation immigrant as growing up in an enclave if at
least 10 percent of the adult population in his childhood enumeration district came from the same
country as his father (enumeration districts are the smallest level of Census geography in this
period and are roughly the same size as Census tracts today). We then calculate the
intergenerational gap separately for those who do and do not grow up in immigrant enclaves.
Appendix Figure A14 shows that in the historical cohorts, immigrant children who did not grow
up in an enclave had higher rates of upward mobility than children growing up in enclaves.
Because living in an enclave is likely correlated with other characteristics that might matter for
mobility, we emphasize that this evidence is only suggestive of the potential role of enclaves.
   A useful comparison group to shed light on the relative roles of geographic choices and human
capital is the children of US-born fathers who migrated internally within the US. On the one hand,
these families were less likely to suffer an "immigrant" penalty in the first generation (due to
discrimination or a lack of US-specific human capital). On the other hand, they were likely to sort
into areas with better prospects for their children. Indeed, Appendix Figure A15 shows that the
upward mobility of children of US-born fathers who migrated internally falls between children of
immigrants and children of the US-born fathers who remained in their state of birth, suggesting an
important role for geographic choice.
   Finally, we consider the location choices of the second generation to explore whether the sons
of immigrants are themselves more likely to move as adults. Appendix Figure A16 shows that sons
with immigrant fathers throughout the income distribution were less likely to move away from
their childhood county than sons with US-born fathers. This pattern is consistent with the idea that
second-generation immigrants were already living in areas with relatively better prospects, and
thus might have felt less compelled to move as adults.
6. Robustness

   This section assesses the robustness of our main rank-rank mobility estimates to the choice of
Census linking procedure, the method of assigning income by occupation and other attributes, and
the details of sample construction.

A. Sensitivity of Results to Linking Procedure
                                                                                                  25
    Our baseline Census linking strategy uses a standard algorithm based on Abramitzky, Boustan
and Eriksson (2012, 2014), which standardizes first and last names into phonetic equivalents to
account for transcription errors and allows ages to differ by up to two years to account for age
misreporting. We consider the robustness of our main finding to alternatives for processing name
and age data, and to choice of algorithm itself. Specifically, we re-run the rank-based specifications
using three matching strategies that are more conservative than our baseline strategy. First, we
restrict the sample to exact matches by full (non-standardized) name and age. Second, we restrict
the sample to individuals whose first and last names are unique within a five-year age band. Third,
we require matches to be both exact and unique within a five-year age band. Because each of these
linking procedures is more conservative than our baseline one, the samples from these approaches
will be smaller, but likely contain fewer matching errors.
    Appendix Figures A17 and A18 show the rank-based results using each of the three more-
restrictive matching strategies. Regardless of the linking procedure we use, the main result that
immigrants are more upwardly mobile than US-born individuals throughout the income
distribution remains unchanged. Moreover, the magnitude of the intergenerational gaps is also very
close to the magnitude in the baseline sample for both cohorts, at roughly 3­4 percentile points for
children with parents in the 25th percentile. Appendix Table A5 shows the estimated values of the
intercept and slope coefficients in these more conservatively linked samples for both cohorts. In
all cases, the values are close to those that we obtain in the baseline sample and confirm our
conclusion of higher upward mobility among children of immigrants.
    Finally, we consider the possibility that our result could be explained by selection into the
linked sample. Specifically, we re-estimate the rank-rank specification after reweighting the
matched data by characteristics such as age, state of residence, birthplace, and occupation, thereby
accounting for selection into the matched sample, at least with respect to observable
characteristics. 49 Appendix Figure A19 shows that the results are very similar when using the
reweighted data.



49
   In this exercise, weights represent the inverse probability that an individual can be linked across Censuses based on
his observable characteristics. For each individual, we can construct the weights using either observable characteristics
from childhood (which include his father's characteristics, like birthplace and occupation) or from adulthood (which
include his own occupation). We cannot combine the two sets of characteristics into a single weighting function
because we only know both sets of characteristics for individuals who are successfully linked. For more details on the
construction of these weights, see Section 3 in the Online Appendix.

                                                                                                                     26
     Overall, these exercises indicate that our main finding ­ namely, that children of immigrants
are more upwardly mobile than children of US-born individuals ­ is robust to various features of
the linking procedure.

B. Sensitivity of Results to Income Assignment

     In this section, we check the robustness of our historical results to various proxies of income.
First, we produce alternative measures of income for farmers, a large portion of the economy for
which historical income data is less accurate. Second, we drop fathers and sons who were farmers
from the sample. Third, we replace our income proxy, which is based on the 1940 Census, with
information collected closer to the years in which the fathers in our sample would have been in the
labor market. Finally, we create different income predictions from the 1940 Census that are based
on more and less information about individuals. These results are summarized in Appendix Tables
A6 and A7, which show--for our baseline measure and for our various robustness measures--the
slope and intercept from the rank-rank specification for the children of US-born individuals and
the children of immigrants from each country.
     We first consider how our estimates change when we use an alternative measure of farmer's
income using the 1900 Census of Agriculture. In particular, we assign all farmers a measure of
income based on revenues and expenditures from the 1900 Census of Agriculture at the county
level to account for the wide variation in crops and farm size by location. 50 This measure does not
allow farmers' income to differ by immigration status, which may overstate the income of first-
generation immigrant farmers and thus understate the mobility of their sons. The Census of
Agriculture adjustment, on average, places farmer fathers in the 48th percentile of the income
distribution in 1880 and 1910, which is higher than the average ranks using our preferred Collins
and Wanamaker (CW) method. The first panel of Appendix Figures A20 and A21 show the rank-
rank specifications using this adjustment for farmer income. Similar to our results above, the figure
indicates that in both cohorts, immigrants can on average expect to reach a higher rank in the
earnings distribution than US-born individuals growing up with comparable incomes.




50
  Specifically, we use the 1900 Census of Agriculture to calculate net earnings for farmers at the county level and
adjust these calculations to 1940 dollars. This calculation follows a similar approach to that in Goldenweiser (1916)
and Mitchell et al. (1922), and then later used in Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson (2012). For more details, see
Section 3 in the Online Appendix.

                                                                                                                  27
     Second, given the prominence of farming and the difficulty in assigning farmers income, we
consider how our main results change when we drop fathers and sons who are farmers from the
sample. Panel (b) of both figures display the results from re-running equation (2) with ranks from
the non-farming national income distribution. We see that the higher degree of upward mobility
that we find for sons of immigrants, especially in the bottom of the income distribution, is not
driven by individuals in farming occupations alone. Of course, moving into or out of farming was
by itself an avenue for mobility, which is why we prefer to include farmers in our baseline sample
despite the challenges in measuring farm income.
     Third, for individuals in the 1880 and 1910 Censuses, we replace our baseline income measure,
which is based on the 1940 Census, with information from the 1901 Cost of Living Survey (Preston
and Haines 1991). 51 Unlike our baseline measure--which varies by occupation, region, state, age,
and country of origin--the income measure from the 1901 survey varies only by occupation and
was collected exclusively in urban areas. The benefit of this survey is that it was conducted closer
to the years in which our sample was in the labor market (1880 and 1910). Panels (c) of Appendix
Figure A20 and A21, which combine data from the 1901 Cost of Living Survey for non-
agricultural occupations with the 1900 Census of Agriculture measures of farm income, also show
that the children of immigrants remain more upwardly mobile than the children of US-born
individuals.
     Fourth, we consider the sensitivity of the results to the variables included in the income
prediction in the 1940 Census. In our preferred approach, we use the relevant individual-level
information available in the Census to predict a person's income. We next show the sensitivity of
the results to progressively using less information in the prediction. Panels (d) of the same figures
re-run the specifications using a measure of income for the fathers that does not incorporate an
immigrant penalty. Analogously, panel (e) of the same figures incorporates the father's country of
origin into the son's income prediction. We see that in both cases, sons of immigrant fathers
continue to be more upwardly mobile than comparable children of US-born fathers, with the
exception of panel (e) in the 1880­1910 cohort where there is no immigrant advantage at the very
bottom.



51
  The 1901 Cost of Living Survey is closer in time to the earlier Censuses but less detailed than our baseline measure
(based on the 1940 Census): it includes roughly 150 non-agricultural occupations, whereas the 1950 occupational
classification in our linked sample has around 220 occupations.

                                                                                                                  28
     The final panels in these figures instead assign individuals the most widely-used income score
in the literature: the IPUMS variable occscore (which is solely based on an individual's
occupation). Relative to the other measures, this approach has the advantage that the income
assignment is symmetric for farmers and non-farmers. However, it is a very coarse measure as it
does not allow for an immigrant penalty in the first generation (which would tend to dampen
measured mobility). Yet, we still see that sons of immigrants can expect to reach a higher rank in
the earnings distribution than US-born individuals growing up with comparable income scores,
particularly in the 1880­1910 cohort. 52
     Overall, although the exact size of the intergenerational gaps varies as we consider different
proxies for individual-level income, in all cases we find higher levels of upward mobility among
children of immigrants.

C. Sensitivity of Results to Sample Construction

     As noted above, we define a son's immigrant status using his father's birthplace. In Section 5
of the Online Appendix, we replicate all the main figures and tables using mother's birthplace
instead and show that results remain unchanged. 53 Among individuals who had at least one
foreign-born parent, two thirds had both parents born abroad. Our main finding is unchanged in
Appendix Figure A27, which defines a son's immigrant status using both his mother's and his
father's birthplace (i.e., classifying sons as children of immigrants if both the mother and father
are born in one of the 17 countries of interest). Appendix Figure A28 separates the sample further
into sons with immigrant mothers only, immigrant fathers only, and two immigrant parents.
Although sample sizes get smaller, we find that the social mobility of all three groups of children
are above their counterparts with US-born parents.
     In the past, immigrants were overwhelmingly white, and so we compare immigrants to the
white US-born population in the historical data. Today, in contrast, immigrants are more ethnically
diverse. Thus, our main specification for the modern period compares immigrants to the entire US-
born population. We note, however, that results are similar when comparing white immigrants to
the white population in the modern period, as we do in the historical data (panel (a) of Appendix


52
   Appendix Figures A23 and A24 show that the cross-sectional results presented in Section 3 are robust to using the
alternative income scores discussed in this section.
53
   We show the main rank-rank correlations as well as the average ranks for children born to the 25th and 75th percentile
of the income distribution by father's country of origin in Appendix Figures A25 and A26, respectively.

                                                                                                                     29
Figure A.29), or all immigrants to the white population in the modern period (panel (b) of
Appendix Figure A.29). 54

       Finally, in Section 6 of the Online Appendix we explore how our past-present comparisons
differ when we construct the historical samples to match the characteristics of the Opportunity
Insights sample. More precisely, we restrict the analysis to sons ages 31­37, we loosen the
restriction on father's age, and we use a measure of family income (as opposed to father's) that
assigns predicted income to working mothers. Section 6 in the Online Appendix replicates the
main figures and tables using this alternative sample. The main findings of this exercise continue
to suggest that second-generation immigrants growing up at the 25th percentile of the income rank
end up 4­7 percentiles higher in the income rank than comparable children of US-born individuals.

7. Conclusions

       We use newly-constructed father-son linked datasets to study whether the children of
immigrants achieve earnings parity with the children of the US-born, and how the intergenerational
mobility of immigrants has changed over the last two centuries. We find that, both in the past and
today, children of immigrants had greater chances of moving up in the income distribution relative
to the children of US-born parents with comparable family income or occupation score. Second
generation immigrants growing up in the 25th percentile end up 5­8 percentiles higher in the
income rank than the children of the US born. The children of immigrants achieve similar rates of
upward mobility despite large changes in country of origin (immigrants hailed from Europe in the
past, and from Latin America and Asia today), initial income levels (immigrants today starting
from lower levels), and US immigration policy over the last century (the ending of open borders
for European immigrants and the imposition of additional regulations for immigrant entry).
       Our finding that children of immigrants have on average higher upward mobility is not driven
by immigrants from any particular ethnic origin. Rather, when estimating rates of intergenerational
mobility separately for each country of origin, we find that children of immigrants from nearly
every sending country have higher rates of upward mobility than the children of the US-born.
       Using the historical data to dig deeper into why children of immigrants were more upwardly
mobile, we find that immigrant families were more likely than the US born to move to areas that
offered better prospects for their children. Furthermore, immigrant parents were "under-placed" in

54
     As discussed above, we note that in this case we define second-generation status based on the mother's birthplace.

                                                                                                                    30
the income distribution, thus allowing their children who were native English speakers and
educated in the US more scope for upward mobility.
   The success of second-generation immigrants gives a more optimistic view of immigrant
assimilation than previous studies that have focused only on the first generation. Indeed, we find
that second generation immigrants overtake, rather than just catch up with the children of the US-
born with comparable family incomes. Although some politicians have a short-term perspective
on immigrant assimilation, our findings suggest that this view might underestimate the long-run
success of immigrants. Our findings are more consistent with the idea of the "American Dream,"
by which even immigrants who come to the United States with few resources and little skills have
a real chance at improving their children's prospects.




                                                                                               31
References
Abramitzky, Ran, and Leah Boustan. 2017. "Immigration in American Economic History."
Journal of Economic Literature 55(4): 1311­1345.

Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Boustan, Katherine Eriksson, James Feigenbaum, and Santiago Pérez.
2019. "Automated Linking of Historical Data." Working Paper.

Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. 2012. "Europe's Tired, Poor,
Huddled Masses: Self-Selection and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration."
American Economic Review 102(5): 1832­1856.

Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. 2014. "A Nation of Immigrants:
Assimilation and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration." Journal of Political
Economy 122(3): 467­506.

Aydemir, Abdurrahman, Wen-Hao Chen, and Miles Corak. 2009. "Intergenerational Earnings
Mobility Among the Children of Canadian Immigrants." The Review of Economics and Statistics
91(2): 377­397.

Bhattacharya, Debopam and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2011. "A Nonparametric Analysis of Black-
White Differences in Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States" Quantitative
Economics 2: 335­379.

Bleakley, Hoyt and Aimee Chin. 2010. "Age at Arrival, English Proficiency, and Social
Assimilation among US Immigrants." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(1):
165­92.

Bolotnyy, Valentin and Cristina Bratu. 2018. "The Intergenerational Mobility of Immigrants and
the Native-Born: Evidence from Sweden." Working Paper.

Borjas, George. 1992. "Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility." The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 107(1): 123­150.

Borjas, George. 1993. "The Intergenerational Mobility of Immigrants." Journal of Labor
Economics 11(1): 113­135.

Cadena, Brian C. and Brian K. Kovak. "Immigrants Equilibrate Local Labor Markets: Evidence
from the Great Recession." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8(1): 257­290.

Card, David, John DiNardo, and Eugenia Estes. 2000. "The More Things Change: Immigrants and
the Children of Immigrants in the 1940s, the 1970s, and the 1990s." in George J. Borjas (Ed.),
Issues in the Economics of Immigration. Chicago: University of Chicago Press

Card, David, Ciprian Domnisoru, and Lowell Taylor. 2018. "The Intergenerational Transmission
of Human Capital: Evidence from the Golden Age of Upward Mobility." Working Paper 25000,
National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                                                                            32
Chetty, Raj, David Grusky, Nathaniel Hendren, Maximilian Hell, Robert Manduca, and Jimmy
Narang. 2017. "The Fading American Dream: Trends in Absolute Income Mobility Since 1940."
Science.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Maggie R. Jones, and Sonya R. Porter. 2018a.
"Race and Economic Opportunity in the United States: An Intergenerational Perspective."
Working Paper 24441, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Maggie R. Jones, and Sonya R. Porter. 2018b.
"The Opportunity Atlas: Mapping the Childhood Roots of Social Mobility." Working Paper
25147, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014. "Where is the land of
Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States". Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1553­1623.

Collins, William J. and Marianne H. Wanamaker. 2017. "Up from Slavery? African American
Intergenerational Economic Mobility Since 1880." Working Paper 23395, National Bureau of
Economic Research.

Collins, William J. and Ariell Zimran. 2019. "The Economic Assimilation of Irish Famine
Migrants to the United States." Working Paper 25287, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Connor, Dylan Shane. 2019. "Class Background, Reception Context, and Intergenerational
Mobility: A Record Linkage and Surname Analysis of the Children of Irish Immigrants."
International Migration Review.

Derenoncourt, Ellora. 2019. "Can you move to opportunity? Evidence from the Great
Migration." Working Paper.

Davis, Jonathan and Bhash Mazumder. 2019. "The Decline in Intergenerational Mobility After
1980." Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper No. 2017-05.

Duncan, Brian, Jeffrey Grogger, Ana Sofia Leon and Stephen J. Trejo. 2017. "New Evidence of
Generational Progress for Mexican Americans." Working Paper 24067, National Bureau of
Economic Research.

Feigenbaum, James J. 2018. "Multiple Measures of Historical Intergenerational Mobility: Iowa
1915 to 1940." Economic Journal 128(612): F446­F481.

Feigenbaum, James J. 2015. "Intergenerational Mobility during the Great Depression." Working
Paper.

Ferrie, Joseph P. 1997. "The Entry Into The US Labor Market Of Antebellum European
Immigrants, 1840­1860." Explorations in Economic History 31(3): 295­330.



                                                                                           33
Ferrie, Joseph, Catherine Massey, and Jonathan Rothbaum. 2016. "Do Grandparents and Great-
Grandparents Matter? Multigenerational Mobility in the US, 1910­2013." Working Paper 22635,
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ferrie, Joseph and Jason Long. 2013. "Intergenerational Occupational Mobility in Great Britain
and the United States since 1850." American Economic Review 103(4): 1109­1137.

Flood, Sarah, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles, and J. Robert Warren. Integrated
Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 6.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN:
IPUMS, 2018. https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V6.0.

Gielen, Anne and Dinand Webbink. 2019. "Migration Selection and Assimilation: Evidence from
the Great Migration from Surinam to the Netherlands" Working Paper.

Goldin, Claudia. 1998. "America's Graduation from High School: The Evolution and Spread of
Secondary Schooling in the Twentieth Century." Journal of Economic History 58(2): 345­374.

Goldenweiser, E. A. 1916. "The Farmer's Income." American Economic Review 6(1): 42­48.
Hatton, Timothy. 1997. "The Immigrant Assimilation Puzzle in Late Nineteenth Century
America." Journal of Economic History 57(1): 34­62.

Hilger, Nathaniel. 2016. "The Great Escape: Intergenerational Mobility in the United States Since
1940." Working Paper 21217, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hilger, Nathaniel. 2017. "Upward Mobility and Discrimination: The Case of Asian Americans."
Working Paper 22748, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kasinitz, Philip, John H. Mollenkopf, Mary C. Waters and Jennifer Holdaway. 2009. Inheriting
the City: The Children of Immigrants Come of Age. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Kosack, Edward and Zachary Ward. 2018. "El sueño americano? The generational progress of
Mexican Americans prior to World War II." Working Paper.

Lee, Chul-In and Gary Solon. 2009. "Trends in Intergenerational Income Mobility." Review of
Economics and Statistics 91(4): 766­772.

Long, Jason and Joseph Ferrie. 2013. "Intergenerational Occupational Mobility in Great Britain
and the United States since 1850." American Economic Review 103(4): 1109­1137.

Lubotsky, Darren. 2007. "Chutes or Ladders? A Longitudinal Analysis of Immigrant Earnings."
Journal of Political Economy 115(5): 820­867.

Manson, Steven, Jonathan Schroeder, David Van Riper, and Steven Ruggles. 2019. IPUMS
National Historical Geographic Information System: Version 14.0 [Database]. Minneapolis, MN:
IPUMS. http://doi.org/10.18128/D050.V14.0



                                                                                              34
Mazumder, Bhashkar. 2005. "Fortunate Sons: New Estimates of Intergenerational Mobility in the
United States Using Social Security Earnings Data." The Review of Economics and Statistics
87(2): 235­255.

Mazumder, Bhashkar. 2015. "Estimating the Intergenerational Elasticity and Rank Association in
the US: Overcoming the Current Limitations of Tax Data." Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
Working Paper No. 2015-04.

Minns, Chris. 2000. "Income, Cohort Effects and Occupational Mobility: A New Look at
Immigration to the United States at the Turn of the 20th Century." Explorations Economic History
37(4): 326­50.

Mitchell, Wesley, Willford I. King, Frederick R. Macaulay, and Oswald W. Knauth. 1922.
"Income in the United States: Its Amount and Distribution, 1909­1919." New York: National
Bureau of Economic Research.

Mazumder, Bhashkar. 2005. "Fortunate Sons: New Estimates of Intergenerational Mobility in the
United States Using Social Security Earnings Data." The Review of Economics and Statistics
87(2): 235­255.

Olivetti, Claudia and M. Daniele Paserman. 2015. "In the Name of the Son (and the Daughter):
Intergenerational Mobility in the United States, 1850-1940." American Economic Review 105(8):
2695­2724.

Olivetti, Claudia, M. Daniele Paserman, and Laura Salisbury. 2018. "Three-generation mobility in
the United States, 1850­1940: The role of maternal and paternal grandparents." Explorations in
Economic History Vol. 70: 73­90.

Perlmann, Joel. 2005. Italians Then, Mexicans Now: Immigrant Origins and Second-Generation
Progress, 1890­2000. Russell Sage Foundation.

Perlmann, Joel and Roger Waldinger. 1997. "Second generation decline? Children of immigrants,
past and present--a reconsideration." The International Migration Review 31(4): 893­922.

Pérez, Santiago. 2019. "Intergenerational Occupational Mobility Across Three Continents." The
Journal of Economic History 79(2) 383­416.

Preston, Samuel H., and Michael R. Haines. 1991. Fatal Years: Child Mortality in Late Nineteenth
Century America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press

Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas, and
Matthew Sobek. IPUMS USA: Version 8.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2018.
https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V8.0

Saavedra, Martin and Tate Twinam. 2018. "A Machine Learning Approach to Improving
Occupational Income Scores." Working Paper.

                                                                                             35
Tan, Hui Ren. 2018. "A Different Land of Opportunity: The Geography of Intergenerational
Mobility in the Early 20th-Century US." Working Paper.

Ward, Zachary. Forthcoming. "The Not-So-Hot Melting Pot: The Persistence of Outcomes for
Descendants of the Age of Mass Migration." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. .

Ward, Zachary and Rohan Alexander. 2018. "Age at Arrival and Assimilation during the Age of
Mass Migration." The Journal of Economic History 78(3) 904­937.

Ward, Zachary. 2019. "The low return to English fluency during the Age of Mass Migration."
Working Paper.




                                                                                        36
Figures

Figure 1: Cross-Sectional Earning Gaps for First- and Second-Generation Immigrants relative to
US-Born, by Country of Origin

                              (a) 1880­1910 Cohort                                                      (b) 1910­1940 Cohort
                       .6




                                                                                                  .6
                       .4




                                                                                                  .4
 Logged income score




                                                                           Logged income score
                       .2




                                                                                                  .2
                       0




                                                                                                  0
                       -.2




                                                                                                  -.2
                       -.4




                                                                                                  -.4
                       -.6




                                                                                                  -.6
                            or -.8




                                                                                                       nl -.8
                           Fi ay
                          Sw nd

                            Ru n
                                    ia
                         D taly

                         Po ark
                         Be gal
                                   m

                           Ca es
                           A da
                         itz tria

                           Ire d
                         G and

                            Fr y
                          En ce
                         Sc and
                                   nd




                                                                                                              d
                                                                                                    N ly
                                                                                                   Po ay

                                                                                                     A al
                                                                                                   D stria

                                                                                                   Be ark

                                                                                                    Sw m
                                                                                                   G den

                                                                                                      W y
                                                                                                             es
                                                                                                   itz sia

                                                                                                     Ca nd

                                                                                                      Fr a
                                                                                                     Ire ce
                                                                                                    En nd
                                                                                                   Sc and
                                                                                                            nd
                                                                                                             d
                                   e




                                   n


                                 an




                                                                                                           an




                                                                                                           an
                                ss




                                                                                                            g
                                iu




                                                                                                         Ita




                                                                                                          iu
                                al




                                                                                                          al
                               an




                                                                                                         an
                               w


                              ed




                              na




                                                                                                          w




                                                                                                         na
                                 a




                               la




                               la




                                                                                                         la




                                                                                                         la


                                                                                                         la
                                                                                                 Sw Rus
                             rtu




                                                                                                       rtu
                              m




                                                                                                        m
                       Sw us
                             nl




                               l
                             m


                             gl




                                                                                                         e
                                                                                                        m




                                                                                                       gl
                               I




                             lg
                            W




                                                                                                       lg
                                                                                                      or
                            er




                            ot




                                                                                                        u




                                                                                                      er




                                                                                                      ot
                           en




                                                                                                     en
                           er




                                                                                                 Fi




                                                                                                     er
                       N




                                First-generation   Second-generation                                      First-generation   Second-generation


                              (c) 1980­2010 Cohort
                       .6
                       .4
 Logged income score

                       .2
                       0
                       -.2
                       -.4
                       -.6
                       -.8
                                        am
                                M .R.
                            El H co
                                  lv ti
                                   m r
                             G ua a
                              C em r
                           So olo ala
                                h ia

                                    Cu a
                                   Ch ba
                                 G ina
                            Ph I ce
                                  pp y
                                    Is s
                                 Ca rael
                                 er a

                                     In y
                                    Ja ia
                                     U n
                                            .
                                       .K
                                Ja ado

                               ua do




                                          e
                                Ec aic




                                          e




                              G nad
                               ili tal




                                       an

                                       pa
                               Sa ai




                             ut mb




                                        d
                                      in
                                      or



                                       e
                                        i
                                     D
                       tn

                                    ex




                                    re




                                    m
                                   K
                  ie




                                  t
                 V




                                First-generation   Second-generation

Note: The historical samples use the 1880, 1910, and 1940 Censuses. The historical samples of first-generation
immigrants and the US born are restricted to white men in the earlier Census who are aged 30­50, who have a child
in the household, and who were either born in the US or in one of the 17 source countries. The second-generation
samples are restricted to white men in the later Census who are aged 30­50 and whose fathers were either born in
the US or in one of the 17 source countries. For the most recent cohort, we use the 1980 Census and the 2006­2015
Current Population Survey (CPS)'s Annual Social and Economic Supplement. We restrict the CPS sample of
second-generation immigrants and their counterparts to men aged 30­50 whose fathers were either born in the US
or in one of the top sending countries. We restrict the 1980 sample of first-generation immigrants and their
counterparts to men aged 30­50, who have a child present in the household, and who were born in the US or in one
of the top sending countries identified in the Opportunity Insights sample. For all of these cohorts, we use predicted
income as the measure of income.




                                                                       1
 Figure 2: Intergenerational Mobility of Immigrants and the US born, Rank-Rank Correlations

                           (a) 1880­1910 Cohort                                                              (b) 1910­to 1940 Cohort
            70




                                                                                                    70
            60




                                                                                                    60
 Son rank




                                                                                         Son rank
            50




                                                                                                    50
            40




                                                                                                    40
            30




                                                                                                    30
                     0      20            40                 60           80   100                       0    20           40                 60           80   100

                                               Father rank                                                                      Father rank

                                  US-born father       Immigrant father                                            US-born father       Immigrant father


                         (c) GSS: 1984­2006 Cohort                                              (d) Opportunity Insights: 1997­2015 Cohort
        70




                                                                                                    70
        60




                                                                                                    60
                                                                                         Son rank
 Sons rank




                                                                                                    50
    50




                                                                                                    40
        40




                                                                                                    30
        30




                                                                                                         0    20           40                 60           80   100
                 0         20           40                   60           80   100
                                             Father rank                                                                    Household rank

                                 US-born father       Immigrant father                                             US-born father       Immigrant father


Note: Sons are assigned percentile ranks relative to all other respondents born in the same birth year. Fathers are
ranked relative to all fathers with children in the same birth year. The figures plot the mean income rank of
children by father's income rank, for sons with and without foreign-born fathers, as well as the corresponding
regression lines using equation (2). In the GSS sample, the outcomes for sons are measured between 2000 and 2018
(with the median year being 2006). The outcomes for parents are measured via a retrospective question about
parents' occupations when the respondent was 16 years old; the data therefore correspond to parental outcomes
between 1966 and 2004 (with the median year being 1984). The Opportunity Insights Data comes from Chetty et
al. (2018a); son's income is measured in 2014­2015 and parental income is measured in 1994­2000.




                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Average income rank
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N             25           45            65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Be way
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             lg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                iu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         G U.S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sw erm .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         itz any
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sw and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fr en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A ce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D stri
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           en a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          En ark
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sc land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               la
                                                                                                                                               Average income rank                                                                n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            W d
                                                                                                                            Ja                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                              m           25           45            65                                                    Ca les
                                                                                                                                  ai                                                                                          na
                                                                                                                                     c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (a) 1880­1910 Cohort




                                                                                                                                H a                                                                                         Ru da
                                                                                                                                   ai                                                                                           s
                                                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                                                 U i
                                                                                                                                    .S                                                                                     Ire sia
                                                                                                                          G U. .                                                                                               la
                                                                                                                             er K                                                                                          Fi nd
                                                                                                                               m .                                                                                           nl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 an
                                                                                                                            M any
                                                                                                                                ex                                                                                                  d
                                                                                                                                   ic                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Po taly
                                                                                                                                 D o
                                                                                                                                   .                                                                                         rtu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ga
                                                                                                                               Ja R.
                                                                                                                                  pa                                                                                                 l
                                                                                                                                Cu n
                                                                                                                             Ca ba
                                                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                                        El I ada




3
                                                                                                                           Sa sra
                                                                                                                        Ph lv el




    in 2014­2015 and parental income is measured in 1994­2000.
                                                                                                                           il ad
                                                                                                                         G ipp or
                                                                                                                           ua in
                                                                                                                              te es                                                                                                           Average income rank
                                                                                                                            Ec ma
                                                                                                                          Co uad la                                                                                       N           25              45            65
                                                                                                                       So lo o                                                                                              o
                                                                                                                         ut m r                                                                                          G rwa
                                                                                                                            h bi                                                                                           er y
                                                                                                                               K a                                                                                           m
                                                                                                                                 o                                                                                              an
                                                                                                                             G rea
                                                                                                                                re                                                                                     Sw U y
                                                                                                                                   ec
                                                                                                                                      e                                                                                  itz .S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            er .
                                                                                                                           V Ital
                                                                                                                              ie y                                                                                       D lan
                                                                                                                                tn                                                                                         en d
                                                                                                                                   am                                                                                         m
                                                                                                                                In
                                                                                                                                   d                                                                                      Sw ark
                                                                                                                               Ch ia                                                                                          ed
                                                                                                                                                                          (c) Opportunity Insights: 1997­2015 Cohort




                                                                                                                                   in                                                                                      Fi en
                                                                                                                                      a                                                                                      nl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Be and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             lg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                iu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             us
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ca ria
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              na
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fr da
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            W e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          En ales
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (b) 1910­1940 Cohort




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sc land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ru d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Po ssia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rtu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ire al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               la
    Note: This figure plots the average income rank for children born to the 25th percentile of the parent income


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ita
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Figure 3: Average Income Rank for Children Born to 25th Percentile, by Father's Birthplace




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ly
    distribution. Data for the Opportunity Insights cohort come from Chetty et al. (2018a); son's income is measured
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Average income rank
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              lg          35           55            75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N um
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sw orw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          itz ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Po and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              rtu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sw gal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             W n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D U.S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            en .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fr rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ca ce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          G nad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            er a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              m
                                                                                                                                                Average income rank                                                       Sc any
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                l
                                                                                                                                 H         35           55            75                                                   En and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              gl
                                                                                                                            Ja ait
                                                                                                                                m i                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (a) 1880­1910 Cohort




                                                                                                                                   ai                                                                                       Fi nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nl
                                                                                                                         G D ca                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                           u                                                                                                Ire nd
                                                                                                                        El ate .R.                                                                                              la
                                                                                                                           Sa ma
                                                                                                                               lv la                                                                                        A nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              us
                                                                                                                             M ado                                                                                                tri
                                                                                                                                ex r                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                    i                                                                                           Ita
                                                                                                                                Ja co                                                                                        Ru ly
                                                                                                                                   pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ss
                                                                                                                          G U. n                                                                                                     ia
                                                                                                                             er K
                                                                                                                                m .
                                                                                                                                   an
                                                                                                                                      y
                                                                                                                            Ec U.S
                                                                                                                        Ph u .




4
                                                                                                                           ili do a
                                                                                                                               pp r




    in 2014­2015 and parental income is measured in 1994­2000.
                                                                                                                             C ine
                                                                                                                          Co ana s
                                                                                                                              lo da                                                                                                            Average income rank
                                                                                                                                 m
                                                                                                                                    b
                                                                                                                                Cu ia
                                                                                                                       So            b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               nl 35                   55            75
                                                                                                                          ut Isr a                                                                                        Po and
                                                                                                                            h ae
                                                                                                                               K l                                                                                            rtu
                                                                                                                           V ore                                                                                          Be ga
                                                                                                                              ie a                                                                                            lg l
                                                                                                                                 tn                                                                                              iu
                                                                                                                             G am                                                                                                   m
                                                                                                                                re
                                                                                                                                    ec                                                                                          U
                                                                                                                                  Ita e                                                                                    N .S.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                w
                                                                                                                                Ch ly
                                                                                                                                    in                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sw Can y
                                                                                                                                 In a
                                                                                                                                                                           (c) Opportunity Insights: 1997­2015 Cohort




                                                                                                                                    di                                                                                    itz ada
                                                                                                                                       a                                                                                     er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D lan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            en d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          G ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            er k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             W y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sw es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           En taly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               gl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (b) 1910­1940 Cohort




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fr nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sc nce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ot
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ire nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               us
    Note: This figure plots the average income rank for children born to the 75th percentile of the parent income


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ru ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ss
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 4: Average Income Rank for Children Born to 75th Percentile, by Father's Birthplace




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ia
    distribution. Data for the Opportunity Insights cohort come from Chetty et al. (2018a); son's income is measured
Figure 5: Intergenerational Mobility of Immigrants and the US born, Rank-Rank Correlations by
Immigrant Group (Modern Cohort)

                             (a) White                                                                   (b) Hispanic
            70




                                                                                          70
            60




                                                                                          60
 Son rank




                                                                               Son rank
            50




                                                                                          50
            40




                                                                                          40
            30




                                                                                          30
                 0   20           40            60              80   100                       0   20           40            60              80   100

                                   Household rank                                                                Household rank

                          US-born mother     Immigrant mother                                           US-born mother     Immigrant mother


                             (c) Asian
            70
            60
 Son rank

            50
            40
            30




                 0   20           40            60              80   100

                                   Household rank

                          US-born mother     Immigrant mother


Note: Data come from Chetty et al. (2018b). Sons are assigned percentile ranks relative to all other respondents
born in the same birth year. Parents are also ranked relative to all fathers with children in the same birth year. The
figures plot the mean income rank of children by their household's income rank, for sons with and without
foreign-born mothers, as well as the corresponding regression lines. The figures include individuals of all races
among those with a US-born mother, and individuals of the specified race among those with a non-US-born mother.




                                                                           5
Figure 6: Intergenerational Gap at the 25th percentile for 1910­1940 Cohort, by Father's Age of
Arrival




                                                                        10
                                                                        8
                                              Gap at 25th percentile

                                                                        6



                                                                                                                                                                          5.28
                                                                        4




                                                                                                                   2.17
                                                                        2




                                                                                      0.51
                                                                        0




                                                                                  7 or younger                 Age 8-16                                                17 or older


Note: This graph plots the intergenerational gap between children of immigrants and children of US-born men, for
children born to the 25th percentile of the income distribution. Sons of immigrants are divided into groups based on
their father's age of arrival to the United States.




Figure 7: Intergenerational Gap at the 25th percentile for 1910­1940 Cohort, by Father's Age of
Arrival and Language in Sending Country

                               (a) Non-English-Speaking Countries                                                                                         (b) English-Speaking Countries
                          10




                                                                                                                                                   10




                                                                                                                                                                                                   8.67
                          8




                                                                                                                                                   8




                                                                                                                                                                                       6.87

                                                                                                                                                            5.91
 Gap at 25th percentile




                                                                                                                          Gap at 25th percentile
                          6




                                                                                                                                                   6




                                                                                                    4.68
                          4




                                                                                                                                                   4
                          2




                                                                                                                                                   2




                                                                         1.12
                          0




                                                                                                                                                   0




                                  -0.97
                          -2




                                                                                                                                                   -2




                               7 or younger                            Age 8-16                  17 or older                                            7 or younger                 Age 8-16   17 or older

Note: This graph plots the intergenerational gap between children of immigrants and children of US-born men, for
children born to the 25th percentile of the income distribution. The figures first separate sons based on the
language spoken in the father's sending country (where English-speaking countries are Canada, England, Ireland,
Scotland, and Wales). Then, sons of immigrants are divided into groups based on their father's age of arrival to the
United States.




                                                                                                               6
                                                               Figure 8: Educational Attainment, 1910­1940 cohort

                                          (a) Son graduated high school                                                                              (b) Son's highest grade in school




                                                                                                                                            12
                                 .6
                                 .5




                                                                                                                                            11
 Graduated high school




                                                                                                                   Highest grade attained
                                 .4




                                                                                                                                            10
                                 .3




                                                                                                                                            9
                                 .2




                                                                                                                                            8
                                 .1




                                      0          20           40                 60           80        100                                      0           20           40                 60           80        100

                                                                   Father rank                                                                                                 Father rank

                                                      US-born father       Immigrant father                                                                       US-born father       Immigrant father


                                      (c) Son's school attendance in 1910                                         (d) Son's income rank and educational attainment
                                 1




                                                                                                                                            80
 Attending school in childhood




                                                                                                                                            60
                                 .9




                                                                                                                   Son rank

                                                                                                                                            40
                                 .8




                                                                                                                                            20
                                 .7




                                                                                                                                            0




                                      0          20           40                 60           80        100                                      0       3           6             9              12           15   18

                                                                   Father rank                                                                                           Highest grade attained

                                                      US-born father       Immigrant father                                                                       US-born father       Immigrant father


                    (e) Son's and father's educational attainment
                                 14
 Son highest grade attained

                                 12
                                 10
                                 8
                                 6




                                      0      3           6             9              12           15   18

                                                         Father highest grade attained

                                                      US-born father       Immigrant father


Note: Fathers are ranked relative to all fathers with children in the same birth year. Panels (a) and (b) plot the
mean educational attainment of children by their father's income rank, for sons with and without foreign-born
fathers, as well as the corresponding regression lines. Panel (c) considers linked sons aged 12­16 in the earlier
Census and plots school attendance as a function of his father's income rank (after controlling for age fixed effects).
Panel (d) plots a son's mean income rank as a function of completed years of schooling. Panel (e) plots a son's
mean years of completed schooling as a function of father's years of schooling (for fathers who can be linked to the
1940 Census).
                                                                                                              7
   Figure 9: Share of Immigrants and Upward Mobility, by State Economic Area or Commuting Zone

(a) Share of        sons   that   are   second-generation          (b) Upward mobility of sons of US-born fathers
(1880­1910)                                                        (1880­1910)




(c) Share of       sons    that   are   second-generation          (d) Upward mobility of sons of US-born fathers
(1910­1940)                                                        (1910­1940)




  (e) Share of population that is foreign-born, 1980                    (f ) Upward mobility of Opp. Insights cohort




Note: Panels (a) and (c) show the share of the individuals in our linked sample that are second-generation immigrants in each
1880 or 1910 state economic area, respectively. In panels (b) and (d), upward mobility is measured as the share of sons in each
state economic area that reached the top third of the national income distribution, conditional on having had a father in the
bottom third of the national income distribution. Panel (e) shows the share each of each 1980 county's population that is
foreign-born. Panel (f) shows the share of white sons who are upwardly mobile using data from Chetty et al. (2018b); upward
mobility is measured as the share of sons in the top 20 percent of the income distribution, conditional on having had
household income in the 25th percentile of the income distribution.
                                                              8
                                                                        Figure 10: Share of Immigrants and Upward Mobility, by State Economic Area or County

                                                            (a) 1880­1910 Cohort                                                                                                  (b) 1910­1940 Cohort
                                              1




                                                                                                                                                                         1
     Share upwardly mobile, US-born fathers




                                                                                                                                Share upwardly mobile, US-born fathers
                                              .8




                                                                                                                                                                         .8
                                              .6




                                                                                                                                                                         .6
                                              .4




                                                                                                                                                                         .4
                                              .2




                                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                   0       .2             .4            .6             .8   1                                                                 0     .2               .4               .6      .8

                                                                 Share second-generation immigrants                                                                                  Share second-generation immigrants

                                                            Northeast      Midwest       West     South                                                                           Northeast    Midwest       West     South
9




                                                   (c) 1980 Census and Opp. Insights Cohort
                                              1
                                              .8
     Share upwardly mobile

                                              .6
                                              .4
                                              .2
                                              0




                                                   0            .1               .2               .3        .4

                                                                         Share foreign-born

                                                            Northeast      Midwest       West     South

    Note: The first two panels use the linked samples to plot the share of a childhood SEA population that is a second-generation immigrant against the
    corresponding share of children with US-born fathers who were upwardly mobile. Upward mobility is measured as the share of sons in each SEA that reached
    the top third of the national income distribution, conditional on having had a father in the bottom third of the corresponding national income distribution. The
    third panel plots the share of foreign-born individuals in each 1980 county against the share of sons that were upwardly mobile in that county. Data on upward
    mobility come from Chetty et al. (2018b); mobility is measured as the share of white sons in the top 20 percent of the income distribution, conditional on having
    had household income in the 25th percentile of the income distribution. Data on county-level foreign-born shares from the 1980 Census come from Manson et al.
    (2019). Each graph includes a line of best fit.
Figure 11: Intergenerational Gap at the 25th percentile, Comparing Children in Similar Childhood
Locations

                                                          (a) 1880­1910 Cohort                                                                                                                          (b) 1910­1940 Cohort
                              8




                                                                                                                                                                                 8
                              6




                                                                                                                                                                                 6
 Gap at the 25th percentile




                                                                                                                                                    Gap at the 25th percentile
                                                                                                                                                                                             3.99
                              4




                                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                          3.41
                              2




                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                    0.96                                                                                                                                         1.07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.58
                                                                                     0.09
                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                             -1.36                                                                                                                                       -1.32             -1.27
                                                                                                                                       -1.57
                              -2




                                                                                                                                                                                 -2
                              -4




                                                                                                                                                                                 -4
                                          e




                                                                FE




                                                                                    FE




                                                                                                             FE




                                                                                                                                       FE




                                                                                                                                                                                             e




                                                                                                                                                                                                             FE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FE
                                        om




                                                                                                                                                                                           om
                                                               on




                                                                                     e




                                                                                                           an




                                                                                                                                     y




                                                                                                                                                                                                            on




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        an




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         y
                                     nc




                                                                                                                                                                                        nc
                                                                                  at




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               at
                                                                                                                                       t




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t
                                                                                                                                    un




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        un
                                                                                                         rb




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      rb
                                                               gi




                                                                                                                                                                                                            gi
                                                                               St




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            St
                                   rI




                                                                                                                                                                                      rI
                                                           Re




                                                                                                        U




                                                                                                                                Co




                                                                                                                                                                                                        Re




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     U




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Co
                                   he




                                                                                                                                                                                      he
                                                                             ild




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ild
                                                                                                    e-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e-
                                 t




                                                                                                                                                                                    t
                                                         ild




                                                                                                                                                                                                      ild
                                                                                                                               ld




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ld
                                                                                                    at




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 at
                                                                           Ch




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ch
                              Fa




                                                                                                                                                                                 Fa
                                                                                                                            hi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   hi
                                                                                                   St




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                St
                                                       Ch




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ch
                                                                           +




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        +
                                                                                                                          +C




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 +C
                                                                                              ild




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ild
                                                      +




                                                                                                                                                                                                    +
                                                                                               h




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            h
                                                                                            +C




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         +C
                                                   (c) GSS: 1984­2006 Cohort
                              10
                              8
 Gap at 25th percentile

                              6




                                                   4.63                                                                 4.63
                              4
                              2
                              0




                                                       e




                                                                                                                         FE
                                                     m
                                                   co




                                                                                                                        on
                                                  In




                                                                                                                     gi
                                                                                                                   Re
                                                 er
                                              th




                                                                                                                   od
                                             Fa




                                                                                                                ho
                                                                                                             ild
                                                                                                          Ch
                                                                                                         +




Note: This graph plots the intergenerational gap between children of immigrants and children of US-born men, for
children born to the 25th percentile of the income distribution. The first bar for each cohort is estimated by
regressing son's income ranks on their fathers' ranks, an indicator for having a foreign-born father, and the
interaction of these two variables. The second bar for each cohort plots the gap after including childhood region
fixed effects. In the historical cohorts, the third bar plots the gap after including childhood state fixed effects and
the fourth bar plots the gap after including state × urban fixed effects. Finally, the fifth bar plots the gap after
including childhood county fixed effects.




                                                                                                                                               10
     Tables

                                                  Table 1: Intergenerational Mobility Estimates, by Cohort

                                                                Intercept                                                         Slope 

                                          US-born              Immigrant                                 US-born               Immigrant
                                           father                father             T-statistic           father                 father             T-statistic

      1880­1910 Cohort                    31.34                35.68                36.49                0.36                  0.32                 19.35

      1910­1940 Cohort                    31.00                34.67                43.57                0.36                  0.37                 9.16

      GSS Cohort                          35.42                42.18                2.52                 0.29                  0.21                 1.58

      Opp. Insights Cohort                36.64                44.05                12.46                0.33                  0.25                 8.13
11




     Note: This table reports the slope and intercept from regressions of son's rank on father's rank, by cohort. The third and sixth columns correspond to the test
     of the hypothesis that both estimates are equal to each other. Data for the Opportunity Insights cohort come from Chetty et al. (2018a).
Appendix Figures and Tables

Figure A1: Average Earnings Gaps Using Actual Income, by Sending Country and Generation

                              (a) 1910­1940 Cohort                                                                  (b) 1980­2010 Cohort
                        .6




                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                  .8
                        .4




                                                                                                  .6
 Logged income score




                                                                            Logged income score
                        .2




                                                                                                  .4
                        0




                                                                                                  .2
                                                                                                  0
                        -.2




                                                                                                  -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2
                        -.4
                        -.6  nl -.8
                                    d
                          N ly
                         Po ay

                           A al
                         D stria

                         Be ark

                          Sw m
                         G den

                            W y
                                   es
                         itz sia

                           Ca nd

                            Fr a
                           Ire ce
                          En nd
                         Sc and
                                  nd




                                                                                                                     am
                                                                                                             M .R.
                                                                                                         El H co
                                                                                                               lv ti
                                                                                                                m r
                                                                                                          G ua a
                                                                                                           C em r
                                                                                                        So olo ala
                                                                                                             h ia

                                                                                                                 Cu a
                                                                                                                Ch ba
                                                                                                              G ina
                                                                                                         Ph I ce
                                                                                                               pp y
                                                                                                                 Is s
                                                                                                              Ca rael
                                                                                                              er a

                                                                                                                  In y
                                                                                                                 Ja ia
                                                                                                                  U n
                                                                                                                         .
                                                                                                                    .K
                                                                                                             Ja ado

                                                                                                            ua do
                                   d




                                                                                                                       e
                                 an




                                 an




                                                                                                             Ec aic




                                                                                                                       e




                                                                                                           G nad
                                                                                                            ili tal




                                                                                                                    an

                                                                                                                    pa
                                                                                                            Sa ai
                                  g
                               Ita




                                iu




                                                                                                          ut mb




                                                                                                                     d
                                al




                               an




                                                                                                                   in
                                w




                               na




                                                                                                                   or



                                                                                                                    e
                               la




                               la


                               la




                                                                                                                     i
                       Sw Rus
                             rtu




                                                                                                                  D
                              m




                                                                                                  tn

                                                                                                                 ex




                                                                                                                 re
                               e
                              m




                             gl




                                                                                                                 m
                             lg
                            or


                              u




                            er




                            ot




                                                                                                                K
                           en




                                                                                             ie
                       Fi




                           er




                                                                                                               t
                                                                                            V
                                First-generation   Second-generation                                                  First-generation   Second-generation

Note: Similar to figure 1, the historical sample uses the 1910 and 1940 Censuses and the modern cohort uses the
1980 Census and the 2006­2015 Current Population Survey (CPS)'s Annual Social and Economic Supplement.
However, instead of using predicted income, we use income from wages (adjusted for self-employed and farmer
income) for the 1940 sons and total family income for the fathers and sons in the modern cohort.




                                                                       12
Figure A2: Cross-Sectional Earnings Gaps for First-Generation Fathers and Second-Generation
Daughters relative to US-Born, by Country of Origin

                              (a) 1880­1910 Cohort                                                       (b) 1910­1940 Cohort
                       .6




                                                                                                   .6
                       .4




                                                                                                   .4
 Logged income score




                                                                            Logged income score
                       .2




                                                                                                   .2
                       0




                                                                                                   0
                       -.2




                                                                                                   -.2
                       -.4




                                                                                                   -.4
                       -.6




                                                                                                   -.6
                            or -.8




                                                                                                        nl -.8
                           Fi ay
                          Sw nd

                            Ru n
                                    ia
                         D taly

                         Po ark
                         Be gal
                                   m

                           Ca es
                           A da
                         itz tria

                           Ire d
                         G and

                            Fr y
                          En ce
                         Sc and
                                   nd




                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                     N ly
                                                                                                    Po ay

                                                                                                      A al
                                                                                                    D stria

                                                                                                    Be ark

                                                                                                     Sw m
                                                                                                    G den

                                                                                                       W y
                                                                                                              es
                                                                                                    itz sia

                                                                                                      Ca nd

                                                                                                       Fr a
                                                                                                      Ire ce
                                                                                                     En nd
                                                                                                    Sc and
                                                                                                             nd
                                                                                                              d
                                   e




                                   n


                                 an




                                                                                                            an




                                                                                                            an
                                ss




                                                                                                             g
                                iu




                                                                                                          Ita




                                                                                                           iu
                                al




                                                                                                           al
                               an




                                                                                                          an
                               w


                              ed




                              na




                                                                                                           w




                                                                                                          na
                                 a




                               la




                               la




                                                                                                          la




                                                                                                          la


                                                                                                          la
                                                                                                  Sw Rus
                             rtu




                                                                                                        rtu
                              m




                                                                                                         m
                       Sw us
                             nl




                               l
                              m


                             gl




                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                         m




                                                                                                        gl
                               I




                             lg
                            W




                                                                                                        lg
                                                                                                       or
                            er




                            ot




                                                                                                         u




                                                                                                       er




                                                                                                       ot
                           en




                                                                                                      en
                           er




                                                                                                  Fi




                                                                                                      er
                       N




                                First-generation   Second-generation                                       First-generation   Second-generation


                              (c) 1980­2010 Cohort
                       .6
                       .4
 Logged income score

                       .2
                       0
                       -.2
                       -.4
                       -.6
                       -.8
                                        am
                                M .R.
                            El H co
                                  lv ti
                                   m r
                             G ua a
                              C em r
                           So olo ala
                                h ia

                                    Cu a
                                   Ch ba
                                 G ina
                            Ph I ce
                                  pp y
                                    Is s
                                 Ca rael
                                 er a

                                     In y
                                    Ja ia
                                     U n
                                            .
                                       .K
                                Ja ado

                               ua do




                                          e
                                Ec aic




                                          e




                              G nad
                               ili tal




                                       an

                                       pa
                               Sa ai




                             ut mb




                                        d
                                      in
                                      or



                                       e
                                        i
                                     D
                       tn

                                    ex




                                    re




                                    m
                                   K
                  ie




                                  t
                 V




                                First-generation   Second-generation

Note: The historical samples use the 1880, 1910, and 1940 Censuses. The historical samples of first-generation
immigrants and their US-born counterparts are white men in the earlier Census who are aged 30­50, who have a
child in the household, and who were either born in the US or in one of the 17 source countries. The historical
samples of second-generation immigrants and their counterparts are US-born white women in the later Census who
are aged 30­50 and whose fathers were either born in the US or in one of the 17 source countries. For the most
recent cohort, we use the 1980 Census and the 2006­2015 Current Population Survey (CPS)'s Annual Social and
Economic Supplement. We restrict the CPS sample of second-generation immigrants and their counterparts to
US-born women who are aged 30­50 and whose fathers were either born in the US or in one of the top sending
countries. We restrict the 1980 sample of first-generation immigrants and their counterparts to men who are aged
30­50, who have a child present in the household, and who were born in the US or in one of the top sending
countries identified in the CPS sample. For all of these cohorts, we use predicted income as the measure of income;
for the second generation, we calculate predicted income for a woman as the sum of her income (if she is employed)
and her spouse's income (if she is married).




                                                                       13
                   Figure A3: Average Earnings Gaps in Linked Sample, by Sending Country and Generation

                               (a) 1880­1910 Cohort                                         (b) 1910­1940 Cohort
                       .6




                                                                                      .6
                       .4




                                                                                      .4
 Logged income score




                                                                Logged income score
                       .2




                                                                                      .2
                       0




                                                                                      0
                       -.2




                                                                                      -.2
                       -.4




                                                                                      -.4
                       -.6




                                                                                      -.6
                            or -.8




                                                                                            or -.8
                          Sw ay
                           Fi en
                         Be and
                         D ium

                                    k
                                   ly

                            Ru s
                           Ca ia
                         P ada
                         itz gal

                           A nd
                           Ire ia
                            Fr d
                          En nce
                         G land

                         Sc any
                                  nd




                                                                                          Fi ay
                                                                                                    d
                                                                                        D taly

                                                                                        Po ark
                                                                                        Be gal

                                                                                          A m
                                                                                         Sw ria
                                                                                        G den

                                                                                        itz ny

                                                                                            W d
                                                                                           Ru s
                                                                                          Ca ia

                                                                                           Fr a
                                                                                          Ire ce
                                                                                         En nd
                                                                                        Sc and
                                                                                                   nd
                                   e




                                                                                                   e


                                                                                                   d
                                 ar




                                  n




                                                                                                an




                                                                                                   n
                                ss




                                 tr




                                                                                                ss
                               Ita




                                                                                                iu
                                al




                                                                                                al




                                                                                              an
                               w
                               ed




                                                                                               w




                                                                                              na
                               la


                               la




                               la




                                                                                      Sw rma

                                                                                               la




                                                                                              la


                                                                                              la
                                                                                                 t
                       Sw ortu




                                                                                            rtu
                              m




                                                                                             m
                              us




                                                                                             us
                               n




                               a
                             nl




                              m




                                                                                             nl




                                                                                              e




                                                                                             gl
                                                                                              I
                             lg




                            W




                                                                                            lg
                            er




                             g


                            ot




                                                                                            er




                                                                                            ot
                           en




                                                                                          en
                           er
                       N




                                                                                      N




                                                                                          e
                                       Fathers   Sons                                               Fathers   Sons

Note: Both of these figures use our baseline linked samples, classifying immigrant sons using the father's birthplace.
For all individuals, we use our measure of predicted income in conjunction with CW adjustments for farmer income.




Figure A4: Average Earnings Gaps Excluding US South in Linked Sample, by Sending Country
and Generation

                               (a) 1880­1910 Cohort                                         (b) 1910­1940 Cohort
                       .6




                                                                                      .6
                       .4




                                                                                      .4
 Logged income score




                                                                Logged income score
                       .2




                                                                                      .2
                       0




                                                                                      0
                       -.2




                                                                                      -.2
                       -.4




                                                                                      -.4
                       -.6




                                                                                      -.6
                       w -.8




                                                                                            or -.8
                              Sw ay
                               Fi en
                             Be and
                             D ium

                                Ru k
                                W a
                                       es

                               Ca ly
                             P da
                             itz gal

                               A nd

                                Fr ia
                               Ire ce
                              En nd
                             G land

                             Sc any
                                      nd




                                                                                          Fi ay
                                                                                                    d
                                                                                        D taly

                                                                                        Po ark
                                                                                        Be gal

                                                                                          A m
                                                                                         Sw ria
                                                                                        G den

                                                                                        itz ny

                                                                                            W d
                                                                                           Ru s
                                                                                          Ca ia

                                                                                           Fr a
                                                                                          Ire ce
                                                                                         En nd
                                                                                        Sc and
                                                                                                   nd
                                                                                                   e
                                       i




                                                                                                   d
                                     ar




                                                                                                an




                                                                                                   n
                                    ss




                                     tr




                                                                                                ss
                                   Ita




                                                                                                iu
                                    al




                                                                                                al
                                   an




                                                                                              an
                                   ed




                                   na




                                                                                               w




                                                                                              na
                                   la




                                   la




                                   la




                                                                                      Sw rma

                                                                                               la




                                                                                              la


                                                                                               la
                                                                                                 t
                           Sw ortu




                                                                                            rtu
                                  m




                                                                                             m
                                  us




                                                                                             us
                                 nl




                                  m




                                                                                             nl




                                                                                              e




                                                                                             gl
                                                                                              I
                                 lg




                                                                                            lg
                       or




                                er




                                 g


                                ot




                                                                                            er




                                                                                            ot
                               en




                                                                                          en
                               er
                       N




                                                                                      N




                                                                                          e




                                       Fathers   Sons                                               Fathers   Sons

Note: Both of these figures use our baseline linked samples, classifying immigrant sons using the father's
birthplace. We exclude father-son pairs who lived in the South in either the earlier or later Census. For all
individuals, we use our measure of predicted income in conjunction with CW adjustments for farmer income.




                                                           14
                                    Figure A5: Rank-rank Correlations, by Grandfather's Birthplace

                     (a) 1880­1910 Cohort: Rank-rank                                                                                      (b) 1910­1940 Cohort: Rank-rank
            70




                                                                                                                             70
            60




                                                                                                                             60
 Son rank




                                                                                                                  Son rank
            50




                                                                                                                             50
            40




                                                                                                                             40
            30




                                                                                                                             30
                 0            20                 40                  60                 80             100                            0            20                 40                  60                 80             100

                                                      Father rank                                                                                                          Father rank
                        US-born father, US-born grandfather         US-born father, imm. grandfather                                         US-born father, US-born grandfather         US-born father, imm. grandfather
                        Immigrant father & grandfather                                                                                       Immigrant father & grandfather



Note: This figure divides sons with US-born fathers into two groups based on their grandfather's place of birth:
those whose father's father was born in the US and those whose father's father was born abroad. Sons are assigned
percentile ranks relative to all other respondents born in the same birth year. Fathers are also ranked relative to all
fathers with children in the same birth year. The figures plot the mean income rank of children by father's income
rank for each group as well as the corresponding regression lines.




                                             Figure A6: Rank-rank Correlations Using Actual Income

                            (a) 1910­1940 Cohort                                                                                                        (b) GSS Cohort
            70




                                                                                                                         90
                                                                                                                         80
            60




                                                                                                                            70
 Son rank




                                                                                                                  Sons rank
            50




                                                                                                                     60  50
            40




                                                                                                                         40
            30




                                                                                                                         30




                 0            20                 40                  60                 80             100
                                                                                                                                  0             20                  40                   60                 80              100
                                                      Father rank                                                                                                        Father rank

                                      US-born father          Immigrant father                                                                            US-born father           Immigrant father


Note: This figure uses actual income for the 1940 sons (adjusted for self-employed and farm income) and for sons
in the GSS cohort. Sons are assigned percentile ranks relative to all other respondents born in the same birth year.
Fathers are also ranked relative to all fathers with children in the same birth year. The figures plot the mean
income rank of children by father's income rank, for sons with and without foreign-born fathers, as well as the
corresponding regression lines.




                                                                                                             15
Figure A7: Weighted Average Income Rank for Children Born to 25th Percentile, by Cohort and
Father's Birthplace

                            (a) 1880­1910 Cohort                                         (b) 1910­1940 Cohort
                       65




                                                                                    65
 Average income rank




                                                              Average income rank
                       45




                                                                                    45
                       25




                                                                                                   25
                          Be way
                                    m

                        Sw erm .
                          itz any
                           Sw and

                             Fr en
                            en e
                            A rk
                           En tria
                          Sc land

                             W d
                            Ca les
                            Fi da
                            Ire nd
                             Ru d
                                     ia
                          Po taly

                                      l




                                                                                        er y
                                                                                        Fi ny

                                                                                    Sw U d
                                                                                         er .
                                                                                      Be land

                                                                                        A m
                                                                                       Sw tria
                                                                                        en n
                                                                                         Fr rk
                                                                                        Ca ce

                                                                                         W a
                                                                                       En ales

                                                                                         Ru d
                                                                                      Sc ssia
                                                                                      Po and

                                                                                        Ire al
                                                                                               nd
                                                                                                ly
                          G U.S




                                                                                      itz .S
                                   ga
                          D anc




                                                                                                d
                                    n




                                   n




                                                                                      G rwa


                                                                                             an




                                                                                      D ede




                                                                                              an
                                 ss




                                                                                               g
                                 iu




                                                                                             iu




                                                                                            Ita
                                  a




                                                                                              a
                                                                                            an
                               ed




                               na




                                                                                           na
                                la




                                  a
                                la




                                                                                              a




                                                                                            la
                                 a




                              rtu




                                                                                          rtu
                               m




                                                                                           m
                              us




                                                                                          us
                                l




                              nl




                                                                                          m
                                                                                          nl




                                                                                          gl


                                                                                            l
                                I
                              lg




                                                                                          lg
                       or




                             er




                              g
                             ot




                                                                                         ot
                                                                                         o
                       N




                                                                                       N




Note: This figure plots the average income rank for children born to the 25th percentile of the parent income
distribution. Each observation is weighted by the inverse probability of being a linked individual using the
individual's childhood characteristics.




                                                       16
Mechanisms: Additional Results

                        Figure A8: Rank-rank Correlations for 1910­1940 cohort, by Father's Age at Arrival

                                    (a) 7 or younger                                                                         (b) Ages 8­16
                   70




                                                                                                               70
                   60




                                                                                                               60
 Son income rank




                                                                                             Son income rank
                   50




                                                                                                               50
                   40




                                                                                                               40
                   30




                                                                                                               30
                        0      20            40                 60           80   100                               0   20           40                 60           80   100

                                                  Father rank                                                                             Father rank

                                     US-born father       Immigrant father                                                   US-born father       Immigrant father


                                    (c) 17 or older
                   70
                   60
 Son income rank

                   50
                   40
                   30




                        0      20            40                 60           80   100

                                                  Father rank

                                     US-born father       Immigrant father


Note: Sons are assigned percentile ranks relative to all other respondents born in the same birth year. Fathers are
ranked relative to all fathers with children in the same birth year. The figures plot the mean income rank of children
by father's income rank, for sons with and without foreign-born fathers, as well as the corresponding regression
lines. Sons of immigrants are divided into groups based on their father's age of arrival to the United States.




                                                                                        17
                       Figure A9: Upward Mobility for Historical Cohorts, by State Economic Area and Father's Birthplace

                 (a) Sons of US-born fathers (1880­1910)                                                 (b) Sons of immigrant fathers (1880­1910)
18




                 (c) Sons of US-born fathers (1910­1940)                                                 (d) Sons of immigrant fathers (1910­1940)




     Note: Upward mobility is measured by the share of sons in each state that reached the top third of the national income distribution, conditional on having had
     a father in the bottom third of the corresponding national income distribution.
                                                                                          Figure A10: Share of Immigrants and Upward Mobility, by Locality

                                                        (a) 1880­1910 Cohort, State                                                                                                         (b) 1910­1940 Cohort, State
                                               1




                                                                                                                                                                                   1
      Share upwardly mobile, US-born fathers




                                                                                                                                          Share upwardly mobile, US-born fathers
                                               .8




                                                                                                                                                                                   .8
                                               .6




                                                                                                                                                                                   .6
                                               .4




                                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                               .2




                                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                    0        .2                  .4                   .6      .8                                                                        0              .2                    .4            .6

                                                              Share second-generation immigrants                                                                                                  Share second-generation immigrants

                                                           Northeast        Midwest       West        South                                                                                    Northeast    Midwest       West     South
19




     (c) 1980 Census and Opp. Insights Cohort, Commuting
     Zone
                                               1
                                               .8
      Share upwardly mobile

                                               .6
                                               .4
                                               .2
                                               0




                                                    0                10                      20               30

                                                                  Share first-generation immigrants

                                                           Northeast        Midwest       West        South

     Note: The first two panels of this graph use the linked samples to plot the share of a childhood state's population that is a second-generation immigrant
     against the corresponding share of children with US-born fathers who are upwardly mobile. Upward mobility is measured by the share of sons in each state that
     reached the top third of the national income distribution, conditional on having had a father in the bottom third of the national income distribution. Mobility
     data in the modern cohort come from Chetty et al. (2018b); upward mobility is measured as the share of white sons in the top 20 percent of the income
     distribution, conditional on having had household income in the 25th percentile of the income distribution. Data on immigrant shares comes from the 1980
     Census and is calculated as the share of men ages 30­50 who are foreign-born. Each graph includes a line of best fit.
                                            Figure A11: Upward Mobility of Sons of Immigrant and US-born Men, by SEA or State

                                                         (a) 1880­1910 Cohort, SEA                                                                                                  (b) 1880­1910 Cohort, State
                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                        1
 Share upwardly mobile, immigrant fathers




                                                                                                                             Share upwardly mobile, immigrant fathers
                                                     Immmigrant Share of Region                                                                                                  Immmigrant Share of Region
                                                     NE = 33.44 MW = 33.32                                                                                                       NE = 33.44 MW = 33.32
                                                       S = 8.91 W = 40.56                                                                                                          S = 8.90 W = 40.56
                                            .8




                                                                                                                                                                        .8
                                            .6




                                                                                                                                                                        .6
                                            .4




                                                                                                                                                                        .4
                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                        .2
                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                 0               .2               .4           .6              .8   1                                                        0               .2               .4           .6              .8   1

                                                                      Share upwardly mobile, US-born fathers                                                                                      Share upwardly mobile, US-born fathers

                                                                  Northeast        Midwest      West      South                                                                               Northeast        Midwest      West      South


                                                         (c) 1910­1940 Cohort, SEA                                                                                                  (d) 1910­1940 Cohort, State
                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                        1
 Share upwardly mobile, immigrant fathers




                                                     Immmigrant Share of Region                                              Share upwardly mobile, immigrant fathers            Immmigrant Share of Region
                                                     NE = 39.97 MW = 25.64                                                                                                       NE = 39.97 MW = 25.64
                                                       S = 4.70 W = 28.73                                                                                                          S = 4.70 W = 28.73
                                            .8




                                                                                                                                                                        .8
                                            .6




                                                                                                                                                                        .6
                                            .4




                                                                                                                                                                        .4
                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                        .2
                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                 0               .2               .4           .6              .8   1                                                        0               .2               .4           .6              .8   1

                                                                      Share upwardly mobile, US-born fathers                                                                                      Share upwardly mobile, US-born fathers

                                                                  Northeast        Midwest      West      South                                                                               Northeast        Midwest      West      South

Note: Upward mobility is measured by the share of sons in each state that reached the top third of the national
income distribution, conditional on having had a father in the bottom third of the corresponding national income
distribution. Each graph includes the 45 degree line.




                                                                                                                        20
                                                                Figure A12: Intergenerational Gap, with Location Fixed Effects

                                   (a) 1880­1910: Gap at 50th percentile                                                                                                         (b) 1880­1910: Gap at 75th percentile
                              8




                                                                                                                                                                            8
                              6




                                                                                                                                                                            6
 Gap at the 50th percentile




                                                                                                                                               Gap at the 75th percentile
                              4




                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                          2.47
                                                                                                                                                                                        1.54
                              2




                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                1.02                                                                                                                                          1.08
                                                                                      0.14                                                                                                                                          0.19
                              0




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                -1.60
                              -2




                                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                                                                                                                  -1.64                                                                                                                       -1.85             -1.71
                              -4




                                                                                                                                                                            -4
                                          e




                                                            FE




                                                                                  FE




                                                                                                                FE




                                                                                                                                  FE




                                                                                                                                                                                        e




                                                                                                                                                                                                          FE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FE
                                        om




                                                                                                                                                                                      om
                                                           on




                                                                                  e




                                                                                                             an




                                                                                                                                  y




                                                                                                                                                                                                         on




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           an




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                y
                                     nc




                                                                                                                                                                                   nc
                                                                               at




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             at
                                                                                                                                  t




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t
                                                                                                                               un




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             un
                                                                                                           rb




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rb
                                                           gi




                                                                                                                                                                                                         gi
                                                                            St




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          St
                                   rI




                                                                                                                                                                                 rI
                                                      Re




                                                                                                         U




                                                                                                                             Co




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Re




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       U




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Co
                                   he




                                                                                                                                                                                 he
                                                                         ild




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ild
                                                                                                      e-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e-
                                 t




                                                                                                                                                                               t
                                                   ild




                                                                                                                                                                                                 ild
                                                                                                                          ld




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ld
                                                                                                      at




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    at
                                                                       Ch




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ch
                              Fa




                                                                                                                                                                            Fa
                                                                                                                          hi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        hi
                                                                                                    St




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  St
                                                 Ch




                                                                                                                                                                                               Ch
                                                                       +




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     +
                                                                                                                        +C




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +C
                                                                                               ild




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ild
                                                 +




                                                                                                                                                                                               +
                                                                                                h




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              h
                                                                                             +C




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           +C
                                   (c) 1910­1940: Gap at 50th percentile                                                                                                         (d) 1910­1940: Gap at 75th percentile
                              8




                                                                                                                                                                            8
                              6




                                                                                                                                                                            6




                                                                                                                                                                                        4.63
 Gap at the 50th percentile




                                                                                                                                               Gap at the 75th percentile




                                          4.31
                              4




                                                                                                                                                                            4




                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.53
                                                                1.80
                              2




                                                                                                                                                                            2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.18
                                                                                      0.88
                              0




                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.74
                                                                                                                -1.03             -1.13                                                                                                                                         -0.99
                              -2




                                                                                                                                                                            -2
                              -4




                                                                                                                                                                            -4
                                          e




                                                            FE




                                                                                  E




                                                                                                                FE




                                                                                                                                  FE




                                                                                                                                                                                        e




                                                                                                                                                                                                          FE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FE
                                        m




                                                                                                                                                                                      m
                                                                                 eF




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               eF
                                        co




                                                                                                                                                                                      co
                                                           on




                                                                                                            an




                                                                                                                                 ty




                                                                                                                                                                                                         on




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          an




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ty
                                                                                 at




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               at
                                     In




                                                                                                                                                                                   In
                                                                                                                               un




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             un
                                                                                                           rb




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rb
                                                           gi




                                                                                                                                                                                                         gi
                                                                            St




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          St
                                                      Re




                                                                                                         U




                                                                                                                             Co




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Re




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       U




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Co
                                   er




                                                                                                                                                                                 er
                                                                           ild




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ild
                                                                                                      e-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e-
                               th




                                                                                                                                                                             th
                                                     ild




                                                                                                                                                                                                   ild
                                                                                                                          ld




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ld
                                                                                                      at




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    at
                                                                       Ch




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ch
                              Fa




                                                                                                                                                                            Fa
                                                                                                                         hi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       hi
                                                                                                    St




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  St
                                                 Ch




                                                                                                                                                                                               Ch
                                                                       +




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     +
                                                                                                                        +C




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +C
                                                                                                 ld




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ld
                                                 +




                                                                                                                                                                                               +
                                                                                              hi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            hi
                                                                                             +C




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           +C




Note: This graph plots the intergenerational gap between children of immigrants and children of US-born men, for
children born to the 50th and 75th percentile of the income distribution. The first bar for each cohort is estimated
by regressing son's income ranks on their fathers' ranks, an indicator for having a foreign-born father, and the
interaction of these two variables. The second bar for each cohort plots the gap after including childhood region
fixed effects. The third bar plots the gap after including childhood state fixed effects and the fourth bar plots the
gap after including state × urban fixed effects. Finally, the fifth bar plots the gap after including childhood county
fixed effects.




                                                                                                                                          21
Figure A13: Intergenerational Gap Including County Fixed Effects, with Alternative Income
Measures for 1910­1940 Cohort




                                                                                     8
                                                                                     6
                                                             Intergenerational gap
                                                                                               3.99


                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                           2.90
                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.45
                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                    -1.27                                                         -1.14
                                                                                     -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -1.54
                                                                                     -4

                                                                                               e




                                                                                                                FE




                                                                                                                                           e




                                                                                                                                                                                  FE




                                                                                                                                                                                                           e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FE
                                                                                             m




                                                                                                                                           m




                                                                                                                                                                                                        m
                                                                                          co




                                                                                                                                       co




                                                                                                                                                                                                      co
                                                                                                               ty




                                                                                                                                                                     ty




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            nt
                                                                                          In




                                                                                                                                      In




                                                                                                                                                                                                      In
                                                                                                               un




                                                                                                                                                         un




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          u
                                                                                                           Co




                                                                                                                                                       Co




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Co
                                                                                        er




                                                                                                                                      er




                                                                                                                                                                                                   er
                                                                                      th




                                                                                                                                    th




                                                                                                                                                                                               th
                                                                                                          ld




                                                                                                                                                    ld




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ld
                                                                                     Fa




                                                                                                                               Fa




                                                                                                                                                                                               Fa
                                                                                                          hi




                                                                                                                                                    hi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   hi
                                                                                                        +C




                                                                                                                                                  +C




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  +C
                                                                                                                             Predicted income                                                  Actual Income
                                                                                                                             Occscore




Note: This graph plots the intergenerational gap between children of immigrants and children of US-born men, for
children born to the 25th percentile of the income distribution. For each income measure, the first bar in each
group shows the intergenerational gap (estimated by regressing sons' income ranks on their fathers' ranks, an
indicator for having a foreign-born father, and the interaction of these two variables). The second bar plots the gap
after including childhood county fixed effects. "Predicted income" refers to our baseline measure of income for 1940
sons. "Actual income" refers to using the 1940 variable for income from wages for the sons. "Occscore" refers to
using the IPUMS occupational score for the sons.


                                                             Figure A14: Intergenerational Gap, by Enclave Status

                                            (a) 1880­1910 Cohort                                                                                                                                            (b) 1910­1940 Cohort
                          10




                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                          8




                                                                                                                                                                                  8
 Gap at 25th percentile




                                                                                                                                                         Gap at 25th percentile
                          6




                                                                                                                                                                                  6




                                                                                                                                                                                               5.12

                                     4.05
                          4




                                                                                                                                                                                  4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3.14
                                                                                                 2.87
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2.07
                          2




                                                                                                                                                                                  2




                                                      1.17
                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                            -0.83                                                                                                                         -0.60
                          -2




                                                                                                                                                                                  -2
                                     e




                                                  FE




                                                                                                 e




                                                                                                                        FE




                                                                                                                                                                                               e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FE
                                     av




                                                                                               av




                                                                                                                                                                                              av




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        av
                                   cl




                                                                                             cl




                                                                                                                                                                                            cl




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        cl
                                                 te




                                                                                                                       te




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       te




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     te
                               En




                                                                                          En




                                                                                                                                                                                          En




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       En
                                                 ta




                                                                                                                      ta




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ta




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ta
                                               +S




                                                                                                                    +S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  +S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   +S
                              in




                                                                                                                                                                                       in
                          ot




                                                                                                                                                                                   ot
                          N




                                                                                                                                                                                  N




Note: This graph plots the intergenerational gap between children of immigrants and children of US-born men, for
children born to the 25th percentile of the income distribution. Sons of immigrants are divided into two groups
based on whether they grew up an immigrant enclave. An individual is classified as growing up in an enclave if at
least 10 percent of his childhood enumeration district's adult population was from his father's same country of
origin (calculated using the 1880 and 1910 cross-sectional Censuses, respectively). For each group, we show the
intergenerational gap before and after controlling for childhood state FE.



                                                                                                                                               22
                               Figure A15: Rank-rank Correlations, by US-born Father's Migrant Status

                            (a) 1880­1910 Cohort: Rank-rank                                                                          (b) 1910­1940 Cohort: Rank-rank
                   70




                                                                                                                            70
                   60




                                                                                                                            60
 Son rank




                                                                                                          Son rank
                   50




                                                                                                                            50
                   40




                                                                                                                            40
                   30




                                                                                                                            30
                        0         20              40                 60             80         100                               0         20              40                 60             80         100

                                                       Father rank                                                                                              Father rank

                                US-born father, non-migrant          US-born father, migrant                                             US-born father, non-migrant          US-born father, migrant
                                Immigrant father                                                                                         Immigrant father


Note: This figure divides sons with US-born men into two groups based on the father's migrant status: those
whose fathers internally migrated (i.e., their state of residence differs from their state of birth) and those who did
not internally migrate. Sons are assigned percentile ranks relative to all other respondents born in the same birth
year. Fathers are also ranked relative to all fathers with children in the same birth year. The figures plot the mean
income rank of children by father's income rank for each group as well as the corresponding regression lines.


                                             Figure A16: Likelihood of Moving from Childhood County

                                 (a) 1880­1910 Cohort                                                                                     (b) 1910­1940 Cohort
                   .8




                                                                                                                            .8
                   .7




                                                                                                                            .7
 Migrated county




                                                                                                          Migrated county
                   .6




                                                                                                                            .6
                   .5




                                                                                                                            .5
                   .4




                                                                                                                            .4




                        0         20              40                 60             80         100                               0         20              40                 60             80         100

                                                       Father rank                                                                                              Father rank

                                         US-born father        Immigrant father                                                                   US-born father        Immigrant father


Note: Sons are classified as having moved if the county that they reside in in the later Census is different from the
county where they lived in the earlier Census. Fathers are ranked relative to all fathers with children in the same
birth year. The figures plot the likelihood of moving by father's income rank, for children with and without a
foreign-born father, as well as the corresponding regression lines.




                                                                                                     23
Robustness to Linking Procedure

Figure A17: Rank-rank Correlations for 1880­1910 Cohort with Alternative Linking Strategies

                               (a) Exact names                                                                   (b) 5-year band
            70




                                                                                                   70
            60




                                                                                                   60
 Son rank




                                                                                        Son rank
            50




                                                                                                   50
            40




                                                                                                   40
            30




                                                                                                   30
                 0        20            40                 60           80   100                        0   20            40                 60           80   100

                                             Father rank                                                                       Father rank

                                US-born father       Immigrant father                                             US-born father       Immigrant father


                     (c) Exact names and 5-year band
            70
            60
 Son rank

            50
            40
            30




                 0        20            40                 60           80   100

                                             Father rank

                                US-born father       Immigrant father


Note: Sons are assigned percentile ranks relative to all other respondents born in the same birth year. Fathers are
also ranked relative to all fathers with children in the same birth year. The figures plot the mean income rank of
children by father's income rank, for sons with and without foreign-born fathers, as well as the corresponding
regression lines. Each panel shows the results for the rank-based specification using alternative strategies for linking
fathers and sons across the 1880 and 1910 Censuses.




                                                                                   24
Figure A18: Rank-rank Correlations for 1910­1940 Cohort with Alternative Linking Strategies

                               (a) Exact names                                                                   (b) 5-year band
            70




                                                                                                   70
            60




                                                                                                   60
 Son rank




                                                                                        Son rank
            50




                                                                                                   50
            40




                                                                                                   40
            30




                                                                                                   30
                 0        20            40                 60           80   100                        0   20            40                 60           80   100

                                             Father rank                                                                       Father rank

                                US-born father       Immigrant father                                             US-born father       Immigrant father


                     (c) Exact names and 5-year band
            70
            60
 Son rank

            50
            40
            30




                 0        20            40                 60           80   100

                                             Father rank

                                US-born father       Immigrant father


Note: Sons are assigned percentile ranks relative to all other respondents born in the same birth year. Fathers are
also ranked relative to all fathers with children in the same birth year. The figures plot the mean income rank of
children by father's income rank, for sons with and without foreign-born fathers, as well as the corresponding
regression lines. Each panel shows the results for the rank-based specification using alternative strategies for linking
fathers and sons across the 1910 and 1940 Censuses.




                                                                                   25
                                         Figure A19: Rank-rank Correlations, Weighted Data

                     (a) 1880­1910 Cohort, 1880 weight                                                      (b) 1880­1910 Cohort, 1910 weight
            70




                                                                                                   70
            60




                                                                                                   60
 Son rank




                                                                                        Son rank
            50




                                                                                                   50
            40




                                                                                                   40
            30




                                                                                                   30
                 0         20           40                 60           80   100                        0         20           40                 60           80   100

                                             Father rank                                                                            Father rank

                                US-born father       Immigrant father                                                  US-born father       Immigrant father


                     (c) 1910­1940 Cohort, 1910 weight                                                      (d) 1910­1940 Cohort, 1940 weight
                                                                                                   70
            70




                                                                                                   60
            60
 Son rank




                                                                                        Son rank

                                                                                                   50
            50




                                                                                                   40
            40
            30




                                                                                                   30




                 0         20           40                 60           80   100                        0         20           40                 60           80   100

                                             Father rank                                                                            Father rank

                                US-born father       Immigrant father                                                  US-born father       Immigrant father


Note: This figure weights observations by the inverse probability of being a linked individual. Each cohort has two
possible weights: one that uses childhood characteristics and the earlier cross-sectional Census, and one that uses
adult characteristics and the later cross-sectional Census. Sons are assigned percentile ranks relative to all other
respondents born in the same birth year. Fathers are also ranked relative to all fathers with children in the same
birth year. The figures plot the mean income rank of children by father's income rank, for sons with and without
foreign-born fathers, as well as the corresponding regression lines. For more details on the construction of the
weights, see Section 3 in the Online Appendix.




                                                                                   26
Robustness to Alternative Income Measures

                     Figure A20: Rank-rank Correlations for 1880­1910 Cohort Using Alternative Income Measures

                       (a) 1900 Census of Agriculture                                                                   (b) No farmer fathers or sons
            70




                                                                                                         70
            60




                                                                                                         60
 Son rank




                                                                                              Son rank
            50




                                                                                                         50
            40




                                                                                                         40
            30




                                                                                                         30
                 0         20           40                 60           80   100                              0            20           40                 60            80   100

                                             Father rank                                                                                     Father rank

                                US-born father       Immigrant father                                                           US-born father       Immigrant father


             (c) 1901 Cost of Living, 1900 Census of Ag.                                                          (d) Fathers, No Immigrant Penalty
            70




                                                                                                         70
                                                                                                         60
            60
 Son rank




                                                                                              Son rank

                                                                                                         50
            50




                                                                                                         40
            40




                                                                                                         30
            30




                 0         20           40                 60           80   100                              0            20           40                 60            80   100

                                             Father rank                                                                                     Father rank

                                US-born father       Immigrant father                                                           US-born father       Immigrant father


                        (e) Sons, Immigrant Penalty                                                                      (f ) IPUMS 1950 Occscore
            70




                                                                                                         70
            60




                                                                                                         60
 Son rank




                                                                                              Son rank
            50




                                                                                                         50
            40




                                                                                                         40
            30




                                                                                                         30




                 0         20           40                 60           80   100                                   20            40                 60                  80    100

                                             Father rank                                                                                     Father rank

                                US-born father       Immigrant father                                                           US-born father       Immigrant father

Note: The figures plot the mean income rank of children by father's income rank, for sons with and without foreign-born fathers, as well as the corresponding
regression lines. Panel (a) keeps predicted income for non-farming occupations, but adjust farmers' income using county-level measures derived from the 1900 Census of
Agriculture. Panel (b) drops fathers and sons who are farmers from the sample and re-runs the specification using ranks from the non-farming income distribution.
Panel (c) keeps the farmer adjustments from panel (a), and also adjusts non-farmer income using the average earnings in a person's occupation from the 1901 Cost of
Living Survey. Panel (d) adjusts father's predicted income to not incorporate their country of origin in the prediction. Panel (e) adjusts son's predicted income to
incorporate the father's country of origin into the prediction (or father's immigrant status for farmers). Panel (f) uses the 1950 IPUMS occscore measure.
                      Figure A21: Rank-rank Correlations for 1910­1940 Cohort Using Alternative Income Measures

                         (a) 1900 Census of Agriculture                                                         (b) No farmer fathers or sons
             70




                                                                                                     70
             60




                                                                                                     60
  Son rank




                                                                                          Son rank
             50




                                                                                                     50
             40




                                                                                                     40
             30




                                                                                                     30
                  0         20           40                 60           80   100                         0        20           40                 60           80   100

                                              Father rank                                                                            Father rank

                                 US-born father       Immigrant father                                                  US-born father       Immigrant father


                  (c) 1901 Cost of Living, 1900 Census of Ag.                                                 (d) Fathers, No Immigrant Penalty
             70




                                                                                                     70
             60




                                                                                                     60
  Son rank




                                                                                          Son rank
             50




                                                                                                     50
             40




                                                                                                     40
             30




                                                                                                     30




                  0         20           40                 60           80   100                         0        20           40                 60           80   100

                                              Father rank                                                                            Father rank

                                 US-born father       Immigrant father                                                  US-born father       Immigrant father


                          (e) Sons, Immigrant Penalty                                                             (f ) IPUMS 1950 Occscore
                                                                                                     70
             70




                                                                                                     60
             60
  Son rank




                                                                                          Son rank

                                                                                                     50
             50
             40




                                                                                                     40
             30




                                                                                                     30




                  0         20           40                 60           80   100                         0        20           40                 60           80   100

                                              Father rank                                                                            Father rank

                                 US-born father       Immigrant father                                                  US-born father       Immigrant father

Note: The figures plot the mean income rank of children by father's income rank, for sons with and without foreign-born fathers, as well as the corresponding
regression lines. Panel (a) keeps predicted income for non-farming occupations, but adjust farmers' income using county-level measures derived from the 1900 Census of
Agriculture. Panel (b) drops fathers and sons who are farmers from the sample and re-runs the specification using ranks from the non-farming income distribution.
Panel (c) keeps the farmer adjustments from panel (a), and also adjusts non-farmer income for fathers using the average earnings in a person's occupation from the
1901 Cost of Living Survey. Panel (d) adjusts father's predicted income to not incorporate their country of origin in the prediction. Panel (e) adjusts son's predicted
income to incorporate the father's country of origin into the prediction (or father's immigrant status for farmers). Panel (f) uses the 1950 IPUMS occscore measure.
                          Figure A22: Rank-rank Correlations Including Missing Income

                     (a) 1880­1910 Cohort                                                        (b) 1910­1940 Cohort
            70




                                                                                        70
            60




                                                                                        60
 Son rank




                                                                             Son rank
            50




                                                                                        50
            40




                                                                                        40
            30




                                                                                        30
                 0   20           40                 60           80   100                   0   20           40                 60           80   100

                                       Father rank                                                                 Father rank

                          US-born father       Immigrant father                                       US-born father       Immigrant father


Note: This figure assigns zero income to fathers and sons with missing occupation or income. Sons are assigned
percentile ranks relative to all other respondents born in the same birth year. Fathers are also ranked relative to all
fathers with children in the same birth year. The figures plot the mean income rank of children by father's income
rank, for sons with and without foreign-born fathers, as well as the corresponding regression lines.
Figure A23: Country-by-Country Estimates for 1880­1910 Cohort Using Alternative Income
Measures

                                (a) 1900 Census of Agriculture                                      (b) No farmer fathers or sons
                        .6




                                                                                            .6
                        .4




                                                                                            .4
 Logged income score




                                                                     Logged income score
                        .2




                                                                                            .2
                        0




                                                                                            0
                        -.2




                                                                                            -.2
                        -.4




                                                                                            -.4
                        -.6




                                                                                            -.6
                              nl -.8




                                                                                                  nl -.8
                                     d
                         Be taly

                           Ca m
                         Po ada

                           Ire al

                             W d
                           A es

                            Fr ia
                         D nce
                         G ark

                         itz ny
                          En nd
                          Sw nd
                         Sc en

                          N nd

                            Ru y
                                    ia




                                                                                             Po and

                                                                                                         l

                                                                                                W y
                                                                                               Ire es
                                                                                               Ca nd
                                                                                              N da
                                                                                             Be ay

                                                                                              Sw m
                                                                                             D den

                                                                                               A rk

                                                                                                Fr a
                                                                                             G nce

                                                                                             itz ny
                                                                                              En nd

                                                                                                Ru d
                                                                                             Sc ssia
                                                                                                      nd
                                                                                                     ga




                                                                                                     tri
                                 an




                                   n




                                   a




                                                                                                       l




                                                                                                    an
                                  g




                                  tr




                                 ss
                                 iu




                                                                                                   Ita




                                                                                                    iu
                                 al




                                                                                                    al




                                                                                                     a
                               ed


                                w




                                                                                                   na

                                                                                                   w
                               la




                       Sw rma

                                la

                                 a


                               la




                                                                                                   la




                                                                                           Sw ma

                                                                                                   la




                                                                                                   la
                             rtu




                                                                                                 rtu
                              m




                                                                                                  m
                              us




                                                                                                  us
                               n




                               a




                                                                                                   a
                              gl




                                                                                                   e




                                                                                                 gl
                               I
                             lg




                                                                                                 lg
                             or




                                                                                                or
                             er




                             ot




                                                                                                er




                                                                                                ot
                           en




                                                                                               en
                       Fi




                                                                                           Fi




                                                                                               er
                           e




                                             Fathers   Sons                                                     Fathers   Sons


                       (c) 1901 Cost of Living, 1900 Census of Ag.                          (d) 1st generation, no Immigrant Penalty
                        .6




                                                                                            .6
                        .4




                                                                                            .4
 Logged income score




                                                                     Logged income score
                        .2




                                                                                            .2
                        0




                                                                                            0
                        -.2




                                                                                            -.2
                        -.4




                                                                                            -.4
                        -.6




                                                                                            -.6
                              nl -.8




                                                                                            w -.8
                           Ire d
                         Be and

                           Ca m

                            W a
                         Po les
                          En gal

                                     d
                         G taly

                         Sc any
                         itz nd
                         D land

                            Fr k
                          Sw ce

                           A en
                          N ria

                            Ru y
                                    ia




                                                                                                  Sw ay
                                                                                                 Be den

                                                                                                   Fi m

                                                                                                   Ire d

                                                                                                    W d
                                                                                                 D ales

                                                                                                 itz ark

                                                                                                   Ca nd

                                                                                                    Fr a
                                                                                                  En nce
                                                                                                 G land

                                                                                                    Ru y
                                                                                                 Sc sia

                                                                                                   A nd
                                                                                                 Po tria

                                                                                                             l
                                                                                                           ly
                                                                                                          ga
                                   d




                                                                                                           d
                                 an




                                 an




                                 ar




                                   a




                                                                                                        an

                                                                                                          n




                                                                                                         an
                                ss
                                iu




                                                                                                        iu




                                                                                                       Ita
                               an
                               na




                               ed


                               w




                                                                                                       na
                       Sw otla




                                                                                                       la




                                                                                                       la




                                                                                                       la
                                 t
                                a




                                                                                                        s
                             rtu




                                                                                                     rtu
                              m




                                                                                               Sw m
                              us




                                                                                                      us
                                                                                                       a
                               l




                             gl


                              m




                                                                                                       e


                                                                                                     nl




                                                                                                      m
                               I
                             lg




                                                                                                     lg
                            or




                                                                                           or
                            er




                                                                                                    er




                                                                                                     g




                                                                                                    ot
                           en




                                                                                                   en
                       Fi




                           er




                                                                                                   er
                                                                                           N




                                             Fathers   Sons                                                     Fathers   Sons


                            (e) 2nd generation, Immigrant Penalty                                    (f ) IPUMS 1950 Occscore
                        .6




                                                                                            .6
                        .4




                                                                                            .4
 Logged income score




                                                                     Logged income score
                        .2




                                                                                            .2
                        0




                                                                                            0
                        -.2




                                                                                            -.2
                        -.4




                                                                                            -.4
                        -.6




                                                                                            -.6
                        w -.8




                                                                                            w -.8
                              Sw ay
                               Fi en
                             Be and
                             D ium

                                        k
                                       ly

                                Ru s
                               Ca ia
                             P ada
                             itz gal

                               A nd
                               Ire ia
                                Fr d
                              En nce
                             G land

                             Sc any
                                      nd




                                                                                                 Be ay

                                                                                                  Sw m
                                                                                                   Fi en
                                                                                                 D land

                                                                                                 P ark
                                                                                                 itz gal

                                                                                                   Ca nd

                                                                                                    Fr a
                                                                                                  En ce

                                                                                                   Ire d

                                                                                                    W d
                                                                                                    Ru s
                                                                                                 Sc ssia
                                                                                                 G land

                                                                                                   A ny
                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                            ly
                                       e




                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                           d




                                                                                                          tri
                                     ar




                                      n




                                                                                                         an

                                                                                                           n
                                    ss




                                     tr
                                   Ita




                                                                                                         iu




                                                                                                       Ita
                                    al




                                                                                                         al
                                                                                                       an
                                   ed




                                                                                                       ed




                                                                                                       na
                                   la


                                   la




                                   la




                                                                                                        la




                                                                                                       la




                                                                                                         a
                           Sw ortu




                                                                                               Sw ortu
                                  m




                                                                                                      m
                                  us




                                                                                                      us
                                   n




                                   a
                                 nl




                                  m




                                                                                                     gl




                                                                                                      m
                                 lg




                                W




                                                                                                     lg
                       or




                                                                                           or
                                er




                                 g


                                ot




                                                                                                      n




                                                                                                    er




                                                                                                    ot
                               en




                                                                                                   en
                               er




                                                                                                   er
                       N




                                                                                           N




                                             Fathers   Sons                                                     Fathers   Sons

Note: All of these figures use our baseline linked samples, classifying immigrant families using the father's
birthplace. Each panel plots the country-of-origin coefficients from equation (1), using alternative income measures
for the fathers and sons. Panel (a) keeps predicted income for non-farming occupations, but adjust farmers' income
using county-level measures derived from the 1900 Census of Agriculture. Panel (b) drops fathers and sons who are
farmers from the sample. Panel (c) keeps the farmer adjustments from panel (a), and also adjusts non-farmer
income using the average earnings in a person's occupation from the 1901 Cost of Living Survey. Panel (d) adjusts
son's predicted income to incorporate their father's country of origin into the prediction. Panel (e) adjusts father's
predicted income to not incorporate their country of origin in the prediction. Panel (f) uses the 1950 IPUMS
occscore measure.
Figure A24: Country-by-Country Estimates for 1910­1940 Cohort Using Alternative Income
Measures

                               (a) 1900 Census of Agriculture                                    (b) No farmer fathers or sons
                        .6




                                                                                           .6
                        .4




                                                                                           .4
 Logged income score




                                                                     Logged income score
                        .2




                                                                                           .2
                        0




                                                                                           0
                        -.2




                                                                                           -.2
                        -.4




                                                                                           -.4
                        -.6




                                                                                           -.6
                              nl -.8




                                                                                           -.8
                                     d
                         Po ly

                           A al
                         Be tria

                           Ca m

                             W a
                           Ire es
                            Fr d
                            Ru e
                          Sw ia
                          N en
                         G way

                         itz ny
                          En nd
                         Sc and
                         D land

                                     k




                                                                                                   Fi al
                                                                                                             d
                                                                                                   A ly
                                                                                                 Be tria

                                                                                                  N um

                                                                                                    W y
                                                                                                   Ca es

                                                                                                    Fr a
                                                                                                   Ire ce
                                                                                                    Ru d
                                                                                                 D ssia
                                                                                                 G ark

                                                                                                  S ny
                                                                                                 itz en
                                                                                                  En nd
                                                                                                 Sc and
                                                                                                          nd
                                   d




                                   c




                                                                                                           d
                                 an




                                   n




                                  ar




                                                                                                        an




                                                                                                           a




                                                                                                          n
                                  g




                                 ss




                                                                                                          g
                               Ita




                                 iu




                                                                                                       Ita
                                 al




                                                                                                        al
                               an




                                                                                                       an
                               na




                               ed




                                                                                                       w


                                                                                                       na




                                                                                               Sw wed
                                la




                       Sw rma

                                la




                                                                                                       la




                                                                                                        a


                                                                                                       la


                                                                                                       la
                             rtu




                                                                                           rtu
                              m




                                                                                                        i




                                                                                                      m
                              us




                                                                                                      us
                              gl




                                                                                                     nl




                                                                                                      m




                                                                                                     gl
                             lg




                                                                                                     lg
                             or




                                                                                                    or
                             er


                             ot




                                                                                                    er


                                                                                                    ot
                           en




                                                                                                   en
                       Fi




                                                                                                   er
                                                                                      Po
                           e




                                            Fathers   Sons                                                   Fathers   Sons


                       (c) 1901 Cost of Living, 1900 Census of Ag.                         (d) 1st generation, no Immigrant Penalty
                        .6




                                                                                           .6
                        .4




                                                                                           .4
 Logged income score




                                                                     Logged income score
                        .2




                                                                                           .2
                        0




                                                                                           0
                        -.2




                                                                                           -.2
                        -.4




                                                                                           -.4
                        -.6




                                                                                           -.6
                              nl -.8




                                                                                                or -.8
                                     d
                         Be taly

                           Ire m
                         Po and

                           A al

                             W a
                           Ca es
                          En da

                            Fr d
                          Sw ce
                         Sc den
                         G land

                         itz ny

                            Ru d
                          N sia
                         D way

                                     k




                                                                                               Fi ay
                                                                                             Be and
                                                                                             D ium

                                                                                              Sw rk
                                                                                             G den

                                                                                               A ny

                                                                                                W a
                                                                                                       es
                                                                                             itz aly

                                                                                               Ca nd
                                                                                               Ire a
                                                                                                      nd

                                                                                             Po nce
                                                                                             Sc gal
                                                                                              En nd

                                                                                                Ru d
                                                                                                       ia
                                  tri




                                                                                                     tri




                                                                                                       d
                                 an




                                 an




                                   n




                                  ar




                                                                                                     an
                                  g




                                                                                                    ss
                                 iu




                                 al




                                                                                                     a




                                                                                                    al
                               an
                               na




                                                                                                   w




                                                                                                   na
                       Sw rma

                                la




                                                                                                     a




                                                                                                   la


                                                                                                   la




                                                                                                   la
                                 s
                             rtu




                                                                                           Sw It




                                                                                                 rtu
                              m




                                                                                                  m
                              us




                                                                                                  us




                                                                                                   a
                               l




                              gl


                               e




                                                                                                 nl




                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                 m




                                                                                                  gl
                               I
                             lg




                                                                                                 lg
                             or
                             ot


                             er




                                                                                                er




                                                                                                ot
                                                                                                Fr
                           en




                                                                                               en
                       Fi




                                                                                               er
                                                                                           N
                           e




                                            Fathers   Sons                                                   Fathers   Sons


                            (e) 2nd generation, Immigrant Penalty                                 (f ) IPUMS 1950 Occscore
                        .6




                                                                                           .6
                        .4




                                                                                           .4
 Logged income score




                                                                     Logged income score
                        .2




                                                                                           .2
                        0




                                                                                           0
                        -.2




                                                                                           -.2
                        -.4




                                                                                           -.4
                        -.6




                                                                                           -.6
                             or -.8




                                                                                           -.8
                           Fi ay
                                     d
                         D taly

                         Po ark
                         Be gal

                           A m
                          Sw ria
                         G den

                         itz ny

                             W d
                            Ru s
                           Ca ia

                            Fr a
                           Ire ce
                          En nd
                         Sc and
                                    nd




                                                                                                  N gal
                                                                                                 D way

                                                                                                 itz ark

                                                                                                   Fi nd
                                                                                                 Be and

                                                                                                  Sw m
                                                                                                 G den

                                                                                                   Ca ny

                                                                                                    Fr a
                                                                                                   A ce
                                                                                                              a

                                                                                                     W y
                                                                                                   Ire es
                                                                                                  En nd

                                                                                                    Ru d
                                                                                                 Sc ssia
                                                                                                           nd
                                    e


                                    d




                                                                                                           d


                                                                                                          tri
                                 an




                                    n




                                                                                                            l




                                                                                                         an
                                 ss
                                 iu




                                                                                                         iu




                                                                                                       Ita
                                 al




                                                                                                         al
                               an




                                                                                                       an
                                w




                               na




                                                                                                       na
                       Sw rma

                                la




                               la


                                la




                                                                                                        la




                                                                                                         a




                                                                                                       la




                                                                                                        la
                                  t
                             rtu




                                                                                           rtu
                              m




                                                                                               Sw nm
                              us




                                                                                                      us
                              nl




                               e




                              gl




                                                                                                      nl


                                                                                                       e
                                                                                                      m




                                                                                                      gl
                               I




                             lg




                                                                                                     lg
                                                                                                     or
                             er




                             ot




                                                                                                     er




                                                                                                     ot
                           en




                                                                                                   er
                                                                                      Po
                       N




                           e




                                                                                                   e




                                            Fathers   Sons                                                   Fathers   Sons

Note: All of these figures use our baseline linked samples, classifying immigrant families using the father's
birthplace. Each panel plots the country-of-origin coefficients from equation (1), using alternative income measures
for the fathers and sons. Panel (a) keeps predicted income for non-farming occupations, but adjust farmers' income
using county-level measures derived from the 1900 Census of Agriculture. Panel (b) drops fathers and sons who are
farmers from the sample. Panel (c) keeps the farmer adjustments from panel (a), and also adjusts non-farmer
income using the average earnings in a person's occupation from the 1901 Cost of Living Survey. Panel (d) adjusts
son's predicted income to incorporate their father's country of origin into the prediction. Panel (e) adjusts father's
predicted income to not incorporate their country of origin in the prediction. Panel (f) uses the 1950 IPUMS
occscore measure.
Robustness to Sample Construction

                          Figure A25: Rank-rank Correlations Using Mother's Birthplace

                     (a) 1880­1910 Cohort                                                        (b) 1910­1940 Cohort
            70




                                                                                        70
            60




                                                                                        60
 Son rank




                                                                             Son rank
            50




                                                                                        50
            40




                                                                                        40
            30




                                                                                        30
                 0   20           40                 60           80   100                   0   20           40                 60           80   100

                                       Father rank                                                                 Father rank

                          US-born mother       Immigrant mother                                       US-born mother       Immigrant mother


Note: This figure uses mother's birthplace to classify men as sons of immigrants. Sons are assigned percentile
ranks relative to all other respondents born in the same birth year. Fathers are also ranked relative to all fathers
with children in the same birth year. The figures plot the mean income rank of children by father's income rank, for
sons with and without foreign-born mothers, as well as the corresponding regression lines.
                                                                                                                                         Average income rank                                                                      Average income rank
                                                                                                                      Be                                                                                      Be
                                                                                                                        lg          35           55            75                                                 lg 25                   45            65
                                                                                                                           i                                                                                         i
                                                                                                                     N um                                                                                      N um
                                                                                                                  Sw orw                                                                                         or
                                                                                                                    itz ay                                                                                          w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ay
                                                                                                                       er
                                                                                                                          la
                                                                                                                              n                                                                               G U.S
                                                                                                                       W d                                                                                  Sw erm .
                                                                                                                    Po ales                                                                                   itz any
                                                                                                                        rtu                                                                                      er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    la
                                                                                                                     Sw gal                                                                                     A nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  us
                                                                                                                    D ede                                                                                      Sw tria
                                                                                                                      en n
                                                                                                                         m                                                                                         ed
                                                                                                                             ar




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mother's Birthplace
                                                                                                                                k                                                                                Fr en
                                                                                                                    G U.S                                                                                     D anc
                                                                                                                      er .                                                                                      en e
                                                                                                                        m                                                                                          m
                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                                                      Ca ny                                                                                     Fi ark
                                                                                                                         na                                                                                       nl
                                                                                                                       Fr da                                                                                   En and
                                                                                                                          an                                                                                      gl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      an
                                                                                                                      A ce                                                                                       W d
                                                                                                                        us
                                                                                                                    Sc tria                                                                                   Sc ales
                                                                                                                       ot                                                                                        ot
                                                                                                                          l                                                                                         la
                                                                                                                     En and                                                                                     Ca nd
                                                                                                                        gl
                                                                                                                            a                                                                                      na
                                                                                                                      Ire nd                                                                                     Ru da
                                                                                                                          la
                                                                                                                              nd                                                                                     s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ire sia
                                                                                                                          It                                                                                        la
                                                                                                                      Fi aly                                                                                           nd




                                                                                                                                                                    (c) 1880­1910 Cohort: 75th Percentile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (a) 1880­1910 Cohort: 25th Percentile



                                                                                                                        nl
                                                                                                                           an                                                                                       I
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Po taly
                                                                                                                       Ru d                                                                                       rtu
                                                                                                                           ss                                                                                          ga
                                                                                                                               ia                                                                                         l




                                                                                                                                         Average income rank                                                                      Average income rank
                                                                                                                      Po
                                                                                                                                    35           55            75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                N            25           45            65
                                                                                                                        rtu                                                                                       or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     w
                                                                                                                      Fi gal                                                                                            ay
                                                                                                                        n
                                                                                                                                                                                                              G U.S
                                                                                                                    Be land
                                                                                                                        lg                                                                                      e
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sw rm .
                                                                                                                           iu
                                                                                                                              m                                                                               itz any
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  er
                                                                                                                          U                                                                                   D lan
                                                                                                                     N .S.                                                                                      en d
                                                                                                                       or
                                                                                                                          w                                                                                        m
                                                                                                                             a                                                                                  Fi ark
                                                                                                                  Sw Can y                                                                                         nl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                                    itz ada
                                                                                                                       er                                                                                       A nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   us
                                                                                                                    G lan                                                                                      Sw tria
                                                                                                                      er d
                                                                                                                        m                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                    D an                                                                                      Be den
                                                                                                                      en y
                                                                                                                         m                                                                                        lg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      i
                                                                                                                            ar
                                                                                                                       W k                                                                                      Ca um
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    na
                                                                                                                           al
                                                                                                                              es                                                                                 Fr da
                                                                                                                          It                                                                                        an
                                                                                                                     Sw aly                                                                                             c
                                                                                                                         ed                                                                                       W e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      al
                                                                                                                       Fr en                                                                                     Ru es
                                                                                                                          a




income distribution. Individuals are classified as sons of immigrants using their mother's birthplace.
                                                                                                                     En nce                                                                                   Po ssia
                                                                                                                        g                                                                                         rtu
                                                                                                                    Sc land                                                                                    En gal
                                                                                                                       ot
                                                                                                                          la                                                                                       g
                                                                                                                      Ire nd                                                                                  Sc land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ot
                                                                                                                          la                                                                                         la
                                                                                                                      A nd                                                                                              nd
                                                                                                                                                                    (d) 1910­1940 Cohort: 75th Percentile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (b) 1910­1940 Cohort: 25th Percentile




                                                                                                                        us                                                                                          Ita
                                                                                                                            tr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ire ly




Note: This figure plots the average income rank for children born to the 25th and 75th percentile of the parent
                                                                                                                       Ru ia
                                                                                                                           ss                                                                                       la
                                                                                                                              ia                                                                                        nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Figure A26: Average Income Rank for Children Born to 25th and 75th Percentile, by Cohort and
                            Figure A27: Rank-rank Correlations for Sons with Immigrant Parents

                           (a) 1880­1910 Cohort                                                                         (b) 1910­1940 Cohort
            70




                                                                                                         70
            60




                                                                                                         60
 Son rank




                                                                                              Son rank
            50




                                                                                                         50
            40




                                                                                                         40
            30




                                                                                                         30
                 0          20             40                 60           80           100                   0          20             40                 60           80           100

                                                Father rank                                                                                  Father rank

                        US-born mother or father        Immigrant mother and father                                  US-born mother or father        Immigrant mother and father


Note: This figure classifies individuals as immigrants if both their mother and father were not born in the United
States. Sons are assigned percentile ranks relative to all other respondents born in the same birth year. Fathers are
also ranked relative to all fathers with children in the same birth year. The figures plot the mean income rank of
children by father's income rank, for sons with and without foreign-born parents, as well as the corresponding
regression lines.




                     Figure A28: Rank-rank Correlations, Using Mother's and Father's Birthplace

                           (a) 1880­1910 Cohort                                                                         (b) 1910­1940 Cohort
            70




                                                                                                         70
            60




                                                                                                         60
 Son rank




                                                                                              Son rank
            50




                                                                                                         50
            40




                                                                                                         40
            30




                                                                                                         30




                 0          20             40                 60           80           100                   0          20             40                 60           80           100

                                                Father rank                                                                                  Father rank

                     Immigrant mother only, 3.12          Immigrant father only, 7.11                             Immigrant mother only, 4.23          Immigrant father only, 6.71
                     Immigrant parents, 20.95             US-born parents, 68.83                                  Immigrant parents, 17.47             US-born parents, 71.58


Note: This figure uses mother's and father's birthplace to classify sons into groups. The numbers in the legend
represent the share of the sample that falls into that group. Sons are assigned percentile ranks relative to all other
respondents born in the same birth year. Fathers are also ranked relative to all fathers with children in the same
birth year. The figures plot the mean income rank of children by father's income rank as well as the corresponding
regression lines.
Figure A29: Intergenerational Mobility of Immigrants and the US born, Rank-Rank Correlations
by Race

                 (a) White immigrants, white natives                                         (b) All immigrants, white natives
            70




                                                                                    70
            60




                                                                                    60
 Son rank




                                                                         Son rank
            50




                                                                                    50
            40




                                                                                    40
            30




                                                                                    30
                 0      20            40          60          80   100                   0         20           40            60              80   100

                                      Household rank                                                             Household rank

                             US-born mother    Immigrant mother                                         US-born mother     Immigrant mother


Note: Data come from Chetty et al. (2018b). Sons are assigned percentile ranks relative to all other respondents
born in the same birth year. Parents are also ranked relative to all fathers with children in the same birth year. The
figures plot the mean income rank of children by their household's income rank, for sons with and without
foreign-born mothers, as well as the corresponding regression lines.
Construction of Linked Samples: Additional Tables

                                    Table A1: Sample Size, by Cohort

                                                                   1880­1910                   1910­1940

 White men, age 0­16                                               8,999,129                   14,572,217

 Linked men                                                        2,035,587                   4,292,642
    living with father                                             1,831,450                   3,897,409
    white father, age 30­50                                        1,346,687                   2,915,989
    US-born or immigrant father                                    1,329,068                   2,871,182
    non-missing labor market outcomes                              1,241,588                   2,710,918

 Share of white men age 0­16 in final sample                       13.80                       18.60

Note: The first row refers to the number of white men ages 0­16 in the earlier Census. Rows 2 through 6 show the
sample size as we restrict the sample based on the fathers' and sons' characteristics. "Immigrant father" refers to
sons whose fathers were born in one of the 17 source countries in our sample.
               Table A2: Sample Size and Match Rate, by Father's Country of Origin

                                            1880­1910 cohort                           1910­1940 cohort

                                    Sample            Match Rate               Sample             Match Rate

 US-born father                     891,461              24.6                  2,053,821            31.9

 Immigrant father                   350,127              22.6                  657,097              27.1

    Canada                          25,647               27.7                  65,912               29.9
    Denmark                         2,820                21.8                  11,961               27.0
    Finland                         67                   17.2                  5,976                21.9
    Norway                          7,959                19.4                  27,164               31.1
    Sweden                          6,917                20.8                  41,113               28.8
    England                         37,383               24.5                  47,018               32.3
    Scotland                        8,634                21.8                  13,301               30.9
    Wales                           3,443                15.9                  3,703                23.9
    Ireland                         86,761               18.1                  49,457               23.9
    Belgium                         1,059                22.1                  2,387                24.4
    France                          5,918                23.6                  4,207                28.7
    Switzerland                     6,010                26.0                  8,764                34.4
    Italy                           1,112                19.1                  57,798               21.4
    Portugal                        320                  21.4                  3,437                23.5
    Austria                         1,970                24.3                  56,951               23.4
    Germany                         153,084              25.3                  178,880              32.3
    Russia                          1,023                26.1                  79,068               21.2

Note: This table shows the sample size of the linked samples as well as the share of white men ages 0­16 in the
earlier Census who can be linked to the later Census using our baseline linking procedure, calculated separately by
the father's country of origin.
                    Table A3: Comparison of Cross-Sectional and Linked Sample of Sons

                                              (a) Sons of US-born Fathers

                                                       1880-1910 cohort                            1910-1940 cohort

                                          Non-Linked            Linked               Non-Linked             Linked

 Age                                        37.11                 37.27                 36.28                 37.44

 Farmer                                     0.24                  0.25                  0.30                  0.33

 White-collar                               0.32                  0.33                  0.14                  0.14

 Skilled                                    0.25                  0.25                  0.32                  0.34

 Unskilled                                  0.19                  0.17                  0.24                  0.19

 Income                                     1,048.19              1,079.86              1,066.10              1,142.46

 South                                      0.35                  0.29                  0.33                  0.31



                                             (b) Sons of Immigrant Fathers

                                                       1880-1910 cohort                            1910-1940 cohort

                                          Non-Linked            Linked               Non-Linked             Linked

 Immigrant (full sample)                    0.26                  0.27                  0.22                  0.24

 Age                                        37.28                 37.44                 36.10                 38.09

 Farmer                                     0.27                  0.28                  0.36                  0.37

 White-collar                               0.19                  0.22                  0.08                  0.10

 Skilled                                    0.34                  0.32                  0.35                  0.36

 Unskilled                                  0.20                  0.18                  0.21                  0.17

 Income                                     1,165.81              1,170.74              1,206.34              1,261.74

 South                                      0.08                  0.08                  0.05                  0.06

Note: In this table, the linked sample has not yet been restricted based on the fathers' characteristics (i.e., whether the
father is white, aged 30­50, living with the child in the early Census, and without missing labor market outcomes).
Additional Results

              Table A4: Intergenerational Mobility Estimates, by Cohort and Country of Origin

                                                1880­1910 Cohort                            1910­1940 Cohort

                                    Intercept             Slope                 Intercept             Slope

 US-born father                     31.34                 0.36                  31.00                 0.36

 Immigrant father                   35.68                 0.32                  34.67                 0.37

   Canada                           41.52                 0.23                  38.97                 0.27

   Denmark                          37.12                 0.28                  33.75                 0.34

   Finland                          43.55                 0.24                  37.24                 0.24

   Norway                           31.16                 0.28                  27.42                 0.41

   Sweden                           33.91                 0.32                  34.33                 0.35

   England                          36.82                 0.32                  41.08                 0.28

   Scotland                         38.66                 0.29                  41.42                 0.28

   Wales                            40.21                 0.24                  40.69                 0.26

   Ireland                          42.63                 0.25                  45.47                 0.24

   Belgium                          32.83                 0.24                  36.98                 0.27

   France                           34.55                 0.32                  38.24                 0.31

   Switzerland                      33.79                 0.31                  32.14                 0.36

   Italy                            53.41                 0.14                  48.57                 0.17

   Portugal                         57.83                 0.00                  47.49                 0.11

   Austria                          34.38                 0.39                  33.25                 0.42

   Germany                          31.56                 0.37                  28.09                 0.43

   Russia                           37.95                 0.43                  38.15                 0.44


Note: This table reports the slope and intercept from regressions of son's rank regressed on father's rank, by cohort and
father's country of origin.
Robustness to Linking Procedure

                                  Table A5: Comparison of Rank-Rank Slopes and Intercepts, by Linking Algorithm

                                                                         (a) 1880­1910 Cohort

                                                                            US-born father                                           Immigrant father

                                                             Intercept                    Slope                        Intercept                    Slope

 Baseline                                                    31.34                        0.36                         35.68                        0.32

 Exact names                                                 30.97                        0.37                         35.89                        0.33

 5-year band                                                 30.29                        0.38                         33.90                        0.35

 Exact names, 5-year band                                    30.23                        0.38                         33.99                        0.36


                                                                        (b) 1910­1940 Cohort

                                                                            US-born father                                           Immigrant father

                                                             Intercept                    Slope                        Intercept                    Slope

 Baseline                                                    31.00                        0.36                         34.67                        0.37

 Exact names                                                 31.02                        0.36                         34.17                        0.38

 5-year band                                                 30.40                        0.37                         33.75                        0.39

 Exact names, 5-year band                                    30.59                        0.37                         33.04                        0.40

Note: This table reports the slope and intercept from regressions of son's rank on father's rank, using samples derived using alternative linking algorithms.
Robustness to Alternative Income Measures

                    Table A6: 1880­1910 Cohort: Rank-Rank Slopes and Intercept, by Income Measure and Immigrant Status

                                                                                  US-born father                                              Immigrant father

                                                                Intercept                      Slope                          Intercept                     Slope

 Baseline                                                       31.34                          0.36                           35.68                         0.32

 1900 Census of Ag.                                             32.94                          0.32                           39.74                         0.26

 1901 Survey, 1900 Census of Ag.                                33.81                          0.30                           41.94                         0.22

 No farmers                                                     36.34                          0.27                           39.32                         0.22

 No immigrant penalty                                           31.01                          0.36                           38.96                         0.28

 2nd generation penalty                                         30.21                          0.33                           28.62                         0.38

 IPUMS occscore                                                 33.44                          0.32                           33.73                         0.35

Note: This table shows the slope and intercept of the rank-rank regressions using alternative income measures. The first measure adjusts farmers' income using the 1900 Census of
Agriculture. The second adjusts non-farmer income using the average earnings in a person's occupation from the 1901 Cost of Living Survey. The third drops farmer fathers and sons
from the sample and re-runs the specification using ranks from the non-farming income distribution. The fourth adjusts father's predicted income to not incorporate the country of
origin into the prediction. The fifth adjusts son's income to incorporate the father's country of origin into the prediction. The sixth uses the 1950 IPUMS occscore measure.
                  Table A7: 1910­1940 Cohort: Rank-Rank Slopes and Intercept, by Income Measure and and Immigrant Status

                                                                                  US-born father                                              Immigrant father

                                                                Intercept                      Slope                          Intercept                     Slope

 Baseline                                                       31.00                          0.36                           34.67                         0.37

 1900 Census of Ag.                                             33.85                          0.30                           42.92                         0.23

 1901 Survey, 1900 Census of Ag.                                39.02                          0.19                           54.49                         0.02

 No farmers                                                     35.41                          0.27                           40.05                         0.24

 No immigrant penalty                                           30.91                          0.36                           37.67                         0.32

 2nd generation penalty                                         30.86                          0.36                           31.84                         0.43

 IPUMS occscore                                                 35.15                          0.29                           35.38                         0.30

Note: This table shows the slope and intercept of the rank-rank regressions using alternative income measures. The first measure adjusts farmers' income using the 1900 Census of
Agriculture. The second adjusts non-farmer income using the average earnings in a person's occupation from the 1901 Cost of Living Survey. The third drops farmer fathers and sons
from the sample and re-runs the specification using ranks from the non-farming income distribution. The fourth adjusts father's predicted income to not incorporate the country of
origin into the prediction. The fifth adjusts son's income to incorporate the father's country of origin into the prediction. The sixth uses the 1950 IPUMS occscore measure.
