                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  HOUSEHOLD HETEROGENEITY AND THE TRANSMISSION OF FOREIGN SHOCKS

                                           Sergio de Ferra
                                            Kurt Mitman
                                           Federica Romei

                                        Working Paper 26402
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26402


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2019




We thank Adrien Auclert, Luigi Bocola, Charles Engel, Kristin Forbes, Jeffrey Frankel, Jordi Gali,
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Emil Verner, our discussants, Morten Ravn and Ludwig Straub, and participants
at the NBER International Seminar on Macro and the Society of Economic Dynamics Annual Meeting
for valuable discussions. Support from the Ragnar Soderbergs stiftelse, and the European Research
Council grant No. 759482 under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Sergio de Ferra, Kurt Mitman, and Federica Romei. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Household Heterogeneity and the Transmission of Foreign Shocks
Sergio de Ferra, Kurt Mitman, and Federica Romei
NBER Working Paper No. 26402
October 2019
JEL No. E21,F32,F41

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the role of heterogeneity in the transmission of foreign shocks. We build a
Heterogeneous-Agent New-Keynesian Small Open Model Economy (HANKSOME) that
experiences a current account reversal. Households' portfolio composition and the extent of
foreign currency borrowing are key determinants of the magnitude of the contraction in
consumption associated with a sudden stop in capital inflows. The contraction is more severe
when households are leveraged and owe debt in foreign currency. In this setting, the revaluation
of foreign debt causes a larger contraction in aggregate consumption when debt and leverage are
concentrated among poorer households. Closing the output gap via an exchange-rate devaluation
may therefore be detrimental to household welfare due to the heterogeneous impact of the foreign
debt revaluation. Our HANKSOME framework can rationalize the observed "fear of floating" in
emerging market economies, even in the absence of contractionary devaluations

Sergio de Ferra                                Federica Romei
Department of Economics                        Stockholm School of Economics
Stockholm University                           Department of Economics
sergio.deferra@ne.su.se                        Sveavagen 65, 11383
                                               Stockholm
Kurt Mitman                                    Federica.Romei@hhs.se
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
106 91 Stockholm
SWEDEN
kurt.mitman@iies.su.se
1         Introduction
In the aftermath of the East Asian financial crisis, a debate emerged about the desirability of
floating exchange rate regimes. Contrary to the view that floating exchange rate regimes were
beneficial and that the severe economic costs of the crisis were due to a lack of exchange rate
adjustment, Calvo and Reinhart (2002) documented a phenomenon since then known as "Fear
of floating". This phenomenon refers to the observation that policymakers in many countries
are unwilling to let nominal exchange rates experience large fluctuations, preferring to make
use of official reserves to absorb external pressures.
        Interest in the topic of optimal exchange rate adjustment in response to a contraction
in capital inflows has received renewed attention after the Global Financial Crisis. In Eu-
rope, various countries experienced sudden stops and current account reversals, which were
associated with severe recessions. Importantly, while many have focused on the experience of
countries in the euro area, such as Greece, countries outside the monetary union like Hungary
and Latvia also witnessed sharp current account reversals, which were accompanied by large
depreciations of the exchange rate.
        Verner and Gyongyosi (2018) document that a crucial channel of transmission of the crisis
in Hungary was the one of households' foreign-currency debt, whose real value rose substan-
tially upon the exchange rate depreciation, giving rise to large contractions in consumption
for the affected households. Motivated by the evidence of the Hungarian experience, we study
a model of a small open economy subject to a capital flow reversal, where the exchange rate is
flexible and where households hold debt in foreign currency. While our focus in this paper is
inspired by the Hungarian experience, the study applies more broadly to countries in Europe
that experienced large increases in foreign currency borrowing by households (particularly to
finance home purchases).1
        To study the role of household heterogeneity in the transmission of foreign shocks, we de-
velop a quantitative Heterogenous-Agent New-Keynesian Small Open Model Economy (HAN-
KSOME) that embeds domestically incomplete markets (at the heart of workhorse closed-
    1
    Austria, Iceland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary, Poland, Slovenia, Croatia, Serbia, Bulgaria, Roma-
nia, and Ukraine each had more than 20% of household debt denominated in foreign currency in the 2000s
(private communication from Emil Verner based on hand collected data).




                                                     1
economy macroeconomics2 ) into the leading frameworks for open-economy macroeconomics.3
The household side follows the standard Bewley-Imrohoroglu-Huggett-Aiyagari model that can
capture the rich heterogeneity in household income, consumption and wealth. The production
side features New Keynesian elements: nominal rigidities in prices and capital adjustment
costs. Finally, the household and domestic production blocks are integrated into the standard
open-economy macro framework (Obstfeld and Rogoff, 2000; Svensson, 2000; Chari et al.,
2002; Gali and Monacelli, 2005).4
       We calibrate the model to match salient features of the Hungarian economy in the 2000s. In
particular we are interested in matching the expansion of the current account, the distribution
of household leverage and the extent of foreign currency borrowing that prevailed before the
sudden stop in 2009. We use aggregate data as well as household level data from the Household
Finance and Consumption Survey administered by the European Central Bank to discipline
the model.
       We then use our calibrated HANKSOME framework to study the effect of a sustained
expansion in the current account and then an unexpected reversal. We find that in this setting
a large exchange rate devaluation that achieves full employment is detrimental from a welfare
perspective due to the foreign debt revaluation it entails. Our framework can therefore provide
a rationalization for "fear of floating" even in the absence of contractionary devaluations.
In addition, we find that the households' portfolio composition is a key determinant of the
magnitude of the contraction associated with sudden stop in capital inflows. The contraction
is more severe when households are more leveraged and owe more debt in foreign currency.


1.1       Related Literature

We contribute to the strand of the literature on international macroeconomics that investigates
why exchange rate devaluations may be an ineffective, or detrimental, policy response to an
external shock suffered by a small open economy.
   2
      We refer the reader to Kaplan and Violante (2018) who provide a review of this frontier closed-economy
literature combining incomplete-markets models with nominal rigidities. Early contributions include, among
others, Oh and Reis (2012), Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2017), Gornemann et al. (2012), Kaplan et al. (2018),
Auclert (2016), L¨   utticke (2015), McKay et al. (2016), Bayer et al. (2019), Ravn and Sterk (2017), Den Haan
et al. (2017), Auclert and Rognlie (2017), Hagedorn et al. (2019a) and Hagedorn et al. (2018)
    3
      We thank Thomas Drechsel for suggesting the HANKSOME acronym.
    4
      In an earlier version of the paper we considered an alternative form of nominal rigidities, namely downward
nominal wage rigidity in the style of Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2016a).


                                                       2
      As mentioned, Calvo and Reinhart (2002) is a seminal paper in this literature, documenting
empirically the "fear of floating" in nominal exchange rates. The authors suggest that policy-
makers may be reluctant to let large devaluations take place, as these would damage the
credibility of monetary policy. In turn, the loss of credibility could lead to dollarization of
liabilities, and thus to the inability by the central bank to act as a lender of last resort. We
share the focus of Calvo and Reinhart (2002) on investigating the rationale for why a large
devaluation may be undesirable from the point of view of a small open economy. Foreign-
currency denomination of liabilities also plays a crucial role in our model, but it is a cause
rather than an averted consequence of the central bank's reluctance to devaluate the exchange
rate. The reluctance of policy makers to let nominal exchange rates float freely appears to
remain pervasive in more recent times. In fact, Ilzetzki et al. (2019) document that, almost
two decades after Calvo and Reinhart (2002), fear of floating is still present, and many open
economies continue to peg or manage their nominal exchange rate to the US Dollar.
      Frankel (2005) documents empirically that currency devaluations can have detrimental
effects on countries that experience them, as manifested by the frequent loss of office of political
leaders in power when currency crashes take place. The author points to adverse balance-sheet
effects of currency devaluations as the key driver of their deleterious implications. C´
                                                                                       espedes
et al. (2004) show using a structural framework how adverse balance sheet effects can lead to
an output contraction following a currency devaluation.5 Our model differs substantially from
theirs, in that we focus on household debt denominated in foreign currency, rather than on
corporate balance sheets. In addition, we do not impose the assumption that a weaker balance
sheet has direct effects on the cost of borrowing in the economy. Instead, the implications of the
currency devaluation on aggregate variables in our economy crucially depend on the marginal
propensity to consume of agents whose debt rises in value upon the currency crash. Finally,
we find fixed exchange rates to be desirable from a welfare perspective during a sudden stop--
in an economy calibrated to Hungary--when poor households owe a substantial amount of
foreign-currency debt.
      The question of whether, in a world characterized by tight financial integration, fluctuations
in nominal exchange rates can insulate small open economies from shocks originating abroad
  5
   Other seminal contributions on the contractionary effects of devaluations and balance sheets include
(Aghion et al., 2004; Krugman and Taylor, 1978)



                                                  3
has received considerable attention following Rey (2015). Her seminal work has highlighted
how, differently from the traditional view, when gross financial positions are large and capital
markets are open, floating exchange rates are ineffective at stabilizing a small open economy
from fluctuations in the global financial cycle. The presence of this new channel would imply
that open economies face a dilemma between independent monetary policy and integration in
international capital markets, even when they allow their nominal exchange rate to float.
   Gourinchas (2018) builds on the intuition in Rey (2015) to analyze what the optimal re-
sponse of a small open economy's central bank should be to monetary policy shocks originating
in countries at the core of the international financial system. He highlights the fact that for
monetary policy to have "perverse" effects--i.e. for an exchange rate devaluation to be con-
tractionary, the effects of the exchange rate on residents' balance sheets have to be sufficiently
large in magnitude. We build on this insight, showing that the distribution of leverage among
borrowing constrained and wealthy households is an important determinant of the strength
of this effect.
   Some recent papers have also analyzed the effects of sudden stops on capital inflows in
models with limited household heterogeneity. In Cugat (2019), households face sector-specific
income risk, motivated by evidence that in the Mexican crisis of 1995 households that suffered
the most where those who received income from firms in the non-tradable sector. In this pa-
per, we focus on a different margin of heterogeneity, namely the extent of the revaluation of
foreign-currency debt that households experience, following the evidence on the importance
of this channel for Hungary in 2008-09 presented by Verner and Gyongyosi (2018). Differently
than in the paper by Cugat (2019), we find that a fixed exchange rate may be beneficial for
the vast majority of households, as in our model a peg can prevent a large foreign-currency
debt revaluation from taking place. Also in a model with limited household heterogeneity, Iyer
(2015) studies the optimal monetary policy in response to cost-push shocks in a small open
economy. She finds that with a high share of hand-to-mouth agents, a currency peg is prefer-
able relative to domestic or CPI inflation targeting. This result is reminiscent of our findings,
however, her results are driven purely from the wage and CPI effects on the hand-to-mouth
agents' consumption baskets and abstract from any effects of foreign debt and revaluation.
Sunel (2018) studies the welfare effects of a gradual disinflation using a heterogeneous-agent
open-economy model with a cash-in-advance friction. Unlike our framework, he does not con-

                                                4
sider foreign shocks, nor debt revaluation effects or nominal rigidities. Finally, Diaz-Alejandro
(1963) is a classic paper introducing a setting where an exchange rate devaluation has re-
distributive effects across the households that inhabit the open economy. Precisely due to its
redistributive effects, a devaluation can simultaneously lead in that setting to an improvement
in the country's trade balance and to a contraction in the demand-determined level of output.
   A recent strand of the literature has studied the role of exchange rate policies in mitigat-
ing external crises, in settings where the exchange rate itself determines the severity of the
borrowing constraint that the small open economy faces. As in Fornaro (2015) we find that
a monetary policy rule that delivers strict inflation targeting is not optimal when external
crises can occur. However, his framework calls for a more volatile exchange rate that magni-
fies the price of collateral, and thus reduces the detrimental effects of an external crisis. In our
framework, the results go in the opposite direction, in that a fixed exchange rate regime is
preferable to the inflation targeting rule. Here, we focus on the adverse effects of the exchange
rate devaluation on the magnitude of the country's external liabilities, in a setting where these
are denominated in foreign currency and where the supply of external credit does not depend
on endogenous market prices. Ottonello (2013) addresses a related question in a setting where
an exchange rate devaluation reduces a country's ability to borrow. Again, our key results
differ from those in that paper, in that we find that a fixed exchange rate policy can deliver
higher welfare than flexible exchange rate policies, due to its beneficial effect on the small open
economy's terms of trade, a channel that is absent in that framework. Finally, Benigno et al.
(2016) study optimal real exchange rate policies in a framework with occasionally binding
collateral constraints, whose tightness depends on the endogenous level of the real exchange
rate. As in our paper, they find that it is optimal for policy to support the real exchange
rate during a crisis, although because of a different channel than the one at play here. In
that setting, policies that support the real exchange rate relax the severity of the borrowing
constraint that the small open economy faces. Here, fluctuations in the real exchange rate
determine the magnitude of foreign-currency denominated external debt.
   Finally, a different strand of the literature has focused on the importance of downward
nominal wage ridigity in driving fluctuations in small open economies. Schmitt-Grohe and
Uribe (2016b) is a recent important contribution that highlights the costs of exchange rate
pegs in the presence of downward nominal wage rigidity. We contribute to this literature by

                                                 5
introducing a model where nominal rigidities and foreign-currency denominated debt coexist.
We abstract from wage rigidities in our framework as the consensus is that Hungary displays
relatively low wage rigidities relative to other advanced economies (see, e.g. (Horv´
                                                                                    ath and
Szalai, 2008; Boeri and Garibaldi, 2006)).
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our small open economy incomplete
markets model with nominal rigidities. In section 3 we discuss how we bring the model to
the data. We outline our main experiments in section 4 and describe our results in section 5.
Finally, section 7 concludes.


2     Model
The model is a small open economy with nominal price rigidities as in Gali and Monacelli
(2005), augmented with capital and domestically incomplete markets for households as in
                
Huggett (1993); Imrohoroglu (1989, 1992); Aiyagari (1994, 1995). As our focus here is on the
behavior of the small open economy, we model the rest of the world as reduced-form asset
supply and goods demand functions described below. Variables with a star superscript refer
to the rest of the world economy.


2.1        Households

The economy consists of a continuum of agents normalized to measure 1 who are ex-ante
homogeneous, and have CRRA preferences over consumption of home and foreign goods and
leisure:
                                          
                                U = E0           t [u(ct ) - g (lt )] ,
                                          t=0

where                                     
                                           c1- -1
                                          
                                                         if  = 1
                                                1-
                                 u(c) =
                                          log(c)
                                          
                                                         if  = 1,
                                                       1+1/
                                                       lt
                                      g (lt ) =              ,
                                                      1 + 1/




                                                  6
  (0, 1) is the households' subjective discount factor,  is the Frisch elasticity of labor
supply, and c is a CES aggregate of home and foreign goods with elasticity of substitution :
                                                                                              
                                      1       -1                         1          -1        -1
                             c = ()  (cH )               + (1 - )  (cF )                           ,

 is the weight of home good in consumption.
   Households' labor productivity {st }t=0 is stochastic and is characterized by an N -state

Markov chain that can take on values st  S = {s1 , · · · , sN } with transition probability given
by  (st+1 |st ) and    s = 1. Households rent their labor services, lt st , to firms for a real wage
wt per effective hour.
   Following Erceg et al. (2000), we assume that each household i produces a differentiated
variety of labor services with productivity sit . There exists a technology to convert the house-
hold differentiated labor services into aggregate effective labor, Lt :

                                                                                L
                                                 1                             L -1
                                                                  L -1
                                   Lt =              sit (lit )    L     di              ,             (1)
                                             0

where   L   is the elasticity of substitution across differentiated labor.
   A recruiting firm operates the technology to generate the aggregate effective labor. That
firm purchases individual households labor services sit hit from a union representing the house-
holds at the wage wit . The recruiting firm minimizes costs, given aggregate labor demand Lt
by the intermediate goods sector:
                                                     1
                                                         Wit sit lit di,                               (2)
                                              0

implying a demand for the labor services of household i:
                                                                               -     L
                                                                        Wit
                                lit = l(Wit ; Wt , Lt ) =                                 Lt ,         (3)
                                                                        Wt

where Wt is the (equilibrium) nominal wage which can be expressed as
                                                                                1
                                                     1                        1- L
                                                               1-
                                    Wt =                 sit Wit    L
                                                                        di            .
                                                 0

                                 ^ t for an effective unit of labor (so that Wit = W
   The union sets a nominal wage W                                                 ^ t)

to maximize profits. Absent a unique objective function for the union in the presence of
heterogeneous households, we follow the assumptions of Hagedorn et al. (2019a,b) on how to

                                                             7
aggregate household preferences. The union's wage setting problem is assumed to maximize
the aggregate real revenue of supplying labor net of the aggregate utility cost
                                      1       ^t
                                          sit W                            ^
                          max                       ^ t ; Wt , Lt ) - g (l(Wt ; Wt , Lt )) di
                                                 l (W                                                          (4)
                           ^t
                           W      0         Pt                             u (Ct )

                                                                 ^ t = Wt , the first order
where Ct is aggregate consumption.6 Using symmetry, lit = Lt and W
condition from the union's problem implies

                                                       L
                                                              ^ t ; Wt , Lt ))
                                                         g (l(W
                                          Wt = P t                                                             (5)
                                                     L-1      u (Ct )

       Agents rent their nominal asset portfolio at to the asset market for a nominal rent ia
                                                                                            t.

Households' portfolio may potentially include several asset classes, including capital, real
bonds, and nominal bonds denominated in domestic and foreign currencies. We describe the
household portfolio and the arbitrage conditions across the multiple asset classes in more
detail below.
       At time t an agent faces the following nominal budget constraint, in units of domestic
currency:
                                Pt ct + at+1 = (1 + ia
                                                     t )at + Wt lt st + dt + Tt ,


where Pt is the consumer price index (CPI), and dt are dividends distributed by firms. Total
consumption expenditure satisfies:

                                             Pt ct = PH,t cH,t + PF,t cF,t ,

where PH,t and PF,t are the nominal prices of home and foreign goods, respectively. In addition,
households are subject to a borrowing constraint:

                                                       at+1  a
                                                             ¯

implying that assets carried into the following period cannot be lower than the threshold a
                                                                                          ¯.
       Households take prices as and wages as given. Thus, we can rewrite the agent's problem
   6
    Note that in the limit as idiosyncratic risk goes to zero, this would converge to the standard labor-leisure in
the representative agent framework. The assumption implies that the union does not keep track of individual
marginal utilities, but instead uses the marginal utility of the "as-if" representative household.




                                                            8
recursively as follows:

                      V (a, s; ) = max u(c) - g (l) +                (s |s)V (a , s ;  )                    (6)
                                     c0,a a
                                          ¯
                                                               sS

                                    subj. to P c + a = (1 + ia )a + W ls +  + T

                                                 = (),

where (a, s) is the distribution on the space X = A × S of agents' asset holdings a  A,
and labor productivity s  S , across the population, which will, together with the policy
variables, determine the equilibrium prices. Let B(X ) = P (A) × P (S ) be the  -algebra over
X , defined as the cartesian product over the Borel  -algebra on A and the power sets of S .
Define our space M = (X, B(X )), and let M be the set of probability measures over M .  is
an equilibrium object that specifies the evolution of the distribution .

2.1.1      Households' Portfolio

There are two broad classes of assets, bonds and capital. In turn, bonds may be denominated
in domestic currency, in foreign currency, or in real terms. In general, nominal assets carried
by the household into the following period are equal to:

                           at+1 = bH,t+1 + et bF,t+1 + PH,t qt kt+1 + ~
                                                                      bH,t+1 ,                              (7)

where bH,t+1 and bF,t+1 denote nominal bonds denominated in domestic and foreign currency,
respectively, et is the nominal exchange rate, expressed as the price of a unit of foreign currency
in terms of domestic currency, qt denotes the real price of capital in units of home good, and
~
bH,t+1 are real bonds in units of home good.7
       In equilibrium, and in the absence of aggregate uncertainty, returns are equalized across as-
set classes. The arbitrage condition between nominal bonds denominated in domestic currency
and real bonds yields a familiar Fisher equation:

                                                                  PH,t+1
                                    1 + iH,t+1 = (1 + rH,t+1 )           ,                                  (8)
                                                                   PH,t

where iH,t+1 = ia
                t+1 is the return on domestic nominal bonds and rH,t+1 is the return on real,
   7
     Real bonds in units of foreign good are redundant as long as the price of foreign goods in foreign currency
is constant, being determined in the rest of the world.

                                                       9
home-good bonds. Arbitrage between nominal bonds denominated in different currencies gives
rise to a covered-interest parity condition:

                                                                          et+1
                                     1 + iH,t+1 = (1 + iF,t+1 )                .                         (9)
                                                                           et

Finally, the return on capital net of depreciation equals the return on real bonds:
                                     k
                                    rt +1 + (1 -  ) qt+1
                                                         = 1 + rH,t+1 ,                                 (10)
                                             qt
       k
where rt denotes the real rental rate of capital, in units of home good, in period t and  is
the depreciation rate of capital.8


2.2     Production
2.2.1     Final-Good Producing Firms

There exists a representative final-goods producing domestic firm that operates a CES pro-
duction technology that aggregates domestic intermediate goods Yjt indexed by j  [0, 1]:

                                                       1        -1       -1

                                         Yt =              Yjt dj
                                                   0


, where    is the elasticity of substitution across goods. Given a level of aggregate demand Yt ,
cost minimization for the final goods producer implies that the demand for the intermediate
good j is given by
                                                                                   -
                                                                        pjt
                                 Yjt = Y (pjt ; PH,t , Yt ) =                          Yt ,             (11)
                                                                        PH,t
where pjt is the price of intermediate good j and PH,t is the (equilibrium) price of the final
good which can be expressed as
                                                                          1
                                                           1             1-
                                                                  -
                                        PH,t =                 p1
                                                                jt dj          .
                                                       0
   8
     As we are modeling the rest of the world in a reduced-form manner, these no-arbitrage conditions techni-
cally are only guaranteed to hold for households in the small open economy.




                                                           10
2.2.2     Intermediate-Goods Firms

A typical domestic intermediate-goods producing firm operates a Cobb-Douglas technology
represented by the production function:

                                                                1-
                                                        Yjt = Kjt Ljt                                              (12)

where   (0, 1), Kjt are capital services rented and Ljt are labor services rented. Factor
markets for intermediate-goods firms are perfectly competitive. The market for intermediate
goods is monopolistically competitive. Defining the real wage in terms of domestic goods as
         Wt
wt =    PH,t
               yields the following firm objective function:

                                            k
                           St (Yjt ) = min rt Kjt + wt Hjt , and Yjt is given by (12).                             (13)
                                        Kjt ,Ljt


where real marginal cost is mcjt = St (Yjt )/Yjt ,
                                                                   1-
                                                   1        1
                                      mct =                               k 
                                                                        (rt ) (wt )1-                              (14)
                                                           1-

and
                                                       Kjt      wt
                                                           =        k
                                                                      .                                            (15)
                                                       Ljt   (1 - )rt
   Domestic intermediate-goods producers set prices subject to adjustment costs as in Rotem-
berg (1982). The relevant state variables for the firm are last period's individual price pjt-1
and the contemporaneous aggregate state (PH,t , Yt , wt , rt ). The firm sets this period's price pjt
to maximize the present discounted value of profits. This yields the following pricing problem,
                                                                                               2
                             pjt                                                      pjt                   1
VtIGF (pjt-1 )  max               Y (pjt ; PH,t , Yt )-S (Y (pjt ; PH,t , Yt ))-           -       Yt +         V IGF (pjt ) .
                     pjt     PH,t                                                2   pjt-1                1 + rt t+1

   The solution to this problem yields the standard New Keynesian Phillips Curve

                                                                    1                    Yt+1
                 (1 - ) + mct -  H,t -  H,t +                             H,t+1 -  H,t+1      = 0.
                                                                  1 + rt                  Yt

where H,t           PH,t/P
                             H,t-1   is domestic inflation (recall, the CPI in our economy is Pt ). The
equilibrium real profit of each intermediate goods firm, rebated to the households as dividends,




                                                             11
is
                                             dt = Yt - S (Yt ).

2.2.3        Investment-Goods Producing Firms

There exists a unit-mass continuum of competitive firms who produce investment goods.
They have access to a technology to convert home good into the investment good, subject to
a convex adjustment cost. The problem of the representative investment-good producing firm
is as follows:
                                   I,t = max qt It - [It +  (It , Kt )] ,                              (16)
                                            It

where qt denotes the relative price of investment good to home good, which is taken as given
by the firms, and It denotes investment. Firms also take as given the aggregate amount of
capital installed in the economy Kt , which affects the severity of adjustment costs.
         The first order condition associated with this problem is:

                                                       (It , Kt )
                                          qt = 1 +                .                                    (17)
                                                       It

Finall, the law of motion for the aggregate capital stock in the economy is given by:

                                         Kt+1 = (1 -  ) Kt + It .                                      (18)


2.3         Rest of the World
2.3.1        Foreign Credit Supply

Residents of the rest of the world issue credit to the small open economy. In each period t,
                                                                                ¯t+1 units of
rest-of-the-world residents inelastically purchase a quantity of bonds equal to B
home good.

2.3.2        International Good Markets

The law of one price holds.9 This implies that the prices of home and foreign goods in the
small open economy are equal to prices in the rest of the world once converted in units of
     9
    We abstract from trade in intermediate inputs. This saves us from having to fully specify the production
function for the rest of the world. This is without loss of generality if the CES technology for producing
the foreign final good is the same as the domestic final good. Then, the law of one price would hold at the
intermediate good level, which by implication would make the law of one price hold at the final good level.


                                                     12
domestic currency:
                                                                       
                                      PHt = et PH t
                                                    ,        PFt = et PFt
                                                                          .                 (19)

                                                    
For simplicity, it will be convenient to normalize PFt
                                                       to unity and thus set PFt = et . We define
the terms of trade as the relative price of exports to imports:

                                                         PH,t
                                                xt =          .                             (20)
                                                          et
                                                                  
   Demand for consumption of home good in the rest of the world, CH,t , is a decreasing
function of the terms of trade:
                                                               
                                              CH,t = x-
                                                      t
                                                        
                                                         D                                  (21)

where  is the elasticity of demand of residents of the rest of the world, and D is a demand
shifter that captures the magnitude of the rest of the world market.
   Total resources produced in the domestic economy are equal to the sum of domestic ab-
sorption for consumption, investment and investment adjustment costs and the foreigners'
consumption of the domestically produced good. Thus, the aggregate resource constraint for
the domestic economy is given by:

                                      -           
                           Yt = Kt L1
                                    t   = CH,t + CH,t + It + (It , Kt )                     (22)

where CH,t =    cH,t (at , st )dt .


2.4    Monetary Policy

We consider two different regimes for the conduct of monetary policy. First, in the fixed
exchange rate regime the central bank of the small open economy is committed to a strict
nominal exchange rate peg:
                                             et = e for all t.                              (23)

   Second, we consider a flexible exchange rate regime. In this setting, the central bank adjusts
the exchange rate to achieve the flexible price allocation in the domestic economy. This is done
by ensuring that the nominal price of the home good PH,t is constant in equilibrium, so that
nominal rigidities do not have real effects.



                                                        13
2.5     Equilibrium
                                                                      ¯t+1 , an equilibrium of the
Given a sequence of foreign assets supplied by the rest of the world, B
small open economy is characterized by a sequence of prices {wt , qt , PH,t , PF,t } and allocations
                          ~H,t+1 , Lt , CH,t , C  } such that:
{Kt+1 , BH,t+1 , BF,t+1 , B                     H,t


    1. Labor demanded by intermediate firms equal labor supplied by households.

    2. Assets supplied by residents of domestic households and the rest of the world equals the
       total capital demanded by intermediate goods firms.

    3. The union sets the nominal wage optimally.

    4. Firms optimize given factor prices and the price level.

    5. Households optimize given prices.

    6. The resource constraint is satisfied.

    7. The law of one price holds.

    8. No arbitrage across assets.


3      Calibration
We calibrate the framework described above to the economy of Hungary -- an example of
a small open economy with high concentration of foreign denominated debt going in to the
Global Financial Crisis. The main contribution is to study the effect of the sudden outflow of
credit from the Hungarian economy and subsequent devaluation of the Hungarian Forynt on
aggregate as well as household-level outcomes. A key object of our analysis is whether Hun-
garian households would have been better off, had it been possible to maintain the Hungarian
Forynt pegged to a basket of foreign currencies. To elucidate the forces at play, we also con-
sider various counterfactuals to highlight the effects of the particular choice of monetary policy
on the part of Hungary, and make clear the implications of borrowing in foreign vs domestic
debt. We solve the model in discrete time, and solve the model at a quarterly frequency.




                                                    14
3.1       Households

Preferences Households have constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) preferences over a
constant-elasticity of substitution aggregator of home and foreign consumption goods. As is
standard in the macroeconomics literature, we set the elasticity of intertemporal substitution
1/ ,   equal to 1 and the household Frisch elasticty of labor supply to 1. We set the elasticity of
substitution between home and foreign goods,  equal to 1. We set the share of home goods
in consumption,  equal to 0.6, implying a ratio of exported value added to GDP of 33%.10
We choose the subjective discount factor  = 0.983 to match a ratio of aggregate net wealth
to quarterly GDP of 8.26. We choose the tightness of the household borrowing constraint a
                                                                                        ¯
to match the median debt to income ratio in Hungary from the second wave of the Household
Finance and Consumption Survey (HFCS) run by the European Central Bank (ECB)11


Productivity process The HFCS only features on cross-sectional observation for the Hun-
garian economy. The lack of panel data on individuals or households makes direct estimation
of the household labor productivity process impossible. As such, as is standard in the incom-
plete markets literature (see e.g. (Krueger et al., 2016)), we assume that labor productivity
follows an AR(1) process with persistence 0.97 and normal innovations with standard devia-
tion 0.2, calibrated to match the cross-sectional dispersion in income in the HFCS and 10% of
households in Hungary that are at the borrowing constraint. We discretize the income process
into a seven point Markov chain via the Rouwenhorst method.


Technology We set the capital share  = 0.33. The quarterly depreciation rate is set to
0.02 so that the return on capital net of depreciation is equal to the real return on bonds when
the economy matches the observed capital to output ratio of 9.70 in the data. We assume a
standard quadratic adjustment cost on capital:

                                                                2
                                                      I - K
                                    (I, K ) =                       K.
                                                 2      K
  10
     On average, this ratio was equal to 38% in Hungary between 2000 and 2007, according to data from the
OECD Trade in Value Added Dataset.
  11
     The HFCS provides harmonized household level data on household balance sheets and consumption across
the Euro Area and additional European Union members.




                                                     15
We set the value of  equal to 17 to match an elasticity of investment to Tobin's Q from the
data (Eberly et al., 2008).


Foreign Sector We choose the foreign demand shifter D to normalize the steady state value
of the terms of trade to unity, and the foreign demand elasticity  to 3. This value is well
within the wide range considered by the international trade and macro literature. Foreign
households have a higher elasticity of demand for home goods than domestic households do.
Arguably, from the point of view of foreigners, goods produced by the small open economy
are closer substitutes to goods produced by other countries than from the point of view of
domestic residents.
                                        ¯ to match a net-foreign-asset-to-quarterly-GDP ratio
    We set the supply of foreign credit B
for Hungary of -2.


Nominal Rigidities We set the elasticity of substitution between domestic varieties = 10
such that the steady state markup is 10% of output. We pick the Rotemburg adjustment cost
parameter to be  = 100, implying a slope of the New-Keynesian Phillips curve of / = 0.1
in the middle range of empirical estimates.


4     Experiments
To study the implications of a reversal in capital flows on the model economy, we run two
separate experiments. For our first experiment, we consider an experiment inspired by the
Hungarian current account expansion and reversal of the early and late 2000s. We model
the expansion and subsequent contraction of the current account as two separate unexpected
shocks. Starting from an initial steady state with low external liabilities, the economy ex-
periences a sustained expansion in the current account that then stabilizes. We model that
expansion as an unexpected "MIT shock", where at time zero the future path for the current
account is revealed and we compute the perfect-foresight transition to the new steady state
with no future shocks. The contraction in the current account is modeled as an unexpected
interruption along the perfect foresight transition. Thus, agents in the economy experience a
second "MIT shock" where their ability to borrow internationally contracts when they were



                                              16
expecting it to continue to expand. The economy then follows a new perfect foresight tran-
sition path toward a permanently lower level of foreign liabilities. Modeling an unexpected
current account contraction while the economy was expecting continued expansion of the cur-
rent account captures the expected growth prospects and subsequent reversal of Hungary in
the 2000s.
       In the baseline experiment we assume that the model economy follows a floating exchange
rate regime, consistent with the Hungarian experience. To investigate the contribution of this
exchange rate policy to the severity of the recession we consider a counterfactual scenario
where instead the exchange rate is held fixed.
       Our second experiment is focused on elucidating the conditions under which flexible or
floating exchange rates are desirable for economy in response to foreign shocks, and how the
answer to that question is shaped by household heterogeneity and the amount of foreign de-
nominated debt in the economy. To investigate the complicated interactions between exchange
rate policy and household heterogeneity, we consider a simpler experiment that isolates the
effect of the contraction in the current account. We consider a series of economies that start
off in steady state that experience unexpected, mean-reverting contractions in the current
account. We again compute the perfect-foresight impulse response to the "MIT Shock".12 The
economies studied vary in the distributions of households leverage, the share of debt that is
denominated in foreign currency and the exchange rate regime.


5        Sudden Stop
The main experiment of interest is studying the reversal of foreign credit supply under the
baseline scenario of a flexible exchange rate and foreign denominated debt -- the empirically
relevant case for Hungary during the Global Financial Crisis. We initialize the economy at a
steady state with no foreign debt. At time 0 the agents in the economy learn that the current
account will expand by 7.4% of quarterly GDP in the initial period, and continue to do so,
but at a declining rate, given by B . The evolution of the net foreign asset position (NFA) is
the accumulation of the current accounts and summarized by
  12
    The impulse response function obtained from this experiment could be used to linearize the model and
solve for the economy with recurrent shocks as shown in Boppart et al. (2018).




                                                  17
                                             1

                                            0.9

                                            0.8

                                            0.7




                          % of annual GDP
                                            0.6

                                            0.5

                                            0.4

                                            0.3

                                            0.2

                                            0.1

                                             0
                                                  0        50         100              150   200
                                                                    Quarters

                                                  Figure 1: Foreign credit supply shocks.



                                                           ¯t = B
                                                           B    ¯t-1 + t       B,t .
                                                                       B


    Note, that no revaluation effects are associated with this expansion in the current account
as we assume that the economy begins with a zero net and gross foreign asset position.13 Debt
revaluation effects instead play a crucial role subsequently at the time of the sudden stop. We
pick the level of the initial increase in the current account to match the average increase in
Hungary from 2000-2009. The path for the NFA is the light blue dashed line in figure 1.
    In response to the expansion in the current account the economy experiences a sustained
investment boom as it transits toward a new steady state with a permanently higher level
of capital. Aggregate consumption also jumps on impact of the shock as the home economy
now has access to borrowing, and then gradually declines to the new steady state level. While
demand for the home good is high, due to the investment boom, households substitute away
from consumption of the home good to the foreign good. Then they slowly reverse this pattern
as the home economy grows and the supply of home good becomes more abundant.
    Domestic output declines on impact, because of a domestic wealth effect on labor supply
that leads to a contraction in labor early in the transition. The contraction in output coupled
with the increased demand for investment causes a jump in the terms of trade that leads to a
   13
      We have experimented with different starting debt levels, but found they have virtually no impact on the
effects of the contraction that occurs a decade later.



                                                                    18
                                 10                                                          15



        % dev. from initial ss




                                                                    % dev. from initial ss
                                  8
                                                                                             10
                                  6
                                                                                              5
                                  4
                                                                                              0
                                  2

                                  0                                                          -5
                                      0   20   40     60   80                                     0   20   40     60   80
                                               Quarters                                                    Quarters

                                 10                                                          20
        % dev. from initial ss




                                                                    % dev. from initial ss
                                                                                             15
                                  5

                                                                                             10

                                  0
                                                                                              5


                                 -5                                                           0
                                      0   20   40     60   80                                     0   20   40     60   80
                                               Quarters                                                    Quarters

                                 Figure 2: Impulse response of quantities to current account expansion.


contraction in demand by foreigners and hence a drop in exports. The full impulse responses
for the economy are plotted in figures 2 and 3.
   Ten years after the initial shock, while the economy is undergoing a transition to the
higher NFA position, the current account suddenly and unexpectedly reverses, yielding a new
path for the NFA given by the solid dark blue line in figure 1. The timing of the shock is
highlighted by the vertical dotted red line and is chosen to match the reversal in Hungary's
current account that began in 2009. At that point on the original transition path the economy
was experiencing a strong boom in consumption, investment and real wages, similar to the
position of Hungary in the late 2000s. How did the reversal in the current account affect the
evolution of the economy?
   Along the perfect foresight transition path, because of certainty equivalence, the house-
hold portfolio is indeterminate. When the unexpected contraction occurs, foreign debt will be
revalued when the exchange rate adjusts. The implied wealth redistribution from the portfolio
revaluation is a crucial object of interest, and as such we try to replicate the observed lever-
age distribution in Hungary when the current account reversed. For simplicity, we assume a
parametric leverage distribution characterized by a slope and an intercept term. The intercept


                                                                  19
                                           10                                                              5




                  % dev. from initial ss




                                                                                  % dev. from initial ss
                                                                                                           4
                                            5
                                                                                                           3

                                                                                                           2
                                            0
                                                                                                           1

                                           -5                                                              0
                                                0   20   40     60   80                                        0   20   40     60   80
                                                         Quarters                                                       Quarters

                                           10                                                              4
           % dev. from initial ss




                                                                                                           2
                                            5




                                                                                % Level
                                                                                                           0
                                            0
                                                                                                    -2
                                           -5
                                                                                                    -4

                                    -10                                                             -6
                                                0   20   40     60   80                                        0   20   40     60   80
                                                         Quarters                                                       Quarters

                                            Figure 3: Impulse response of prices to current account expansion.


term is disciplined by the level of gross debt relative to net worth held by the bottom quin-
tile of the wealth distribution in Hungary. The slope term is set to match the total leverage
position of the economy (defined as the the domestic capital stock divided by domestic net
worth). Specifically, the bottom quintile of wealth distribution had zero net wealth, but held
a gross asset position equal to approximately 6% of the aggregate gross assets of the econ-
omy (Boldizs´
            ar et al., 2016). The leverage distribution is plotted as the dashed line in figure
9. In section 6.3, we explore the implications of alternative distributions of leverage for the
aggregate and welfare results.
    The impulse responses for prices and quantities in response to the sudden stop are plotted
as the blue solid lines in figures 4 and 5. Under a flexible exchange rate policy, consumption of
home and foreign goods by domestic consumers contract sharply because of the unexpected
tightening of the borrowing constraint and the fall in wealth due to the debt revaluation. Out-
put, however, increases sharply as labor supply expands in response to the fall in consumption
induced by the revaluation and tightening of the borrowing constraint.14 The sharp deteri-
   14
      The fact that a sudden stop leads to a domestic boom is a well known feature of neoclassical models with
flexible exchange rates. See, e.g. Chari et al. (2005).




                                                                           20
                                                    5                                                                         5



         % dev. from transition path




                                                                                               % dev. from transition path
                                                                                                                              0
                                                    0                                                                         -5
                                                                                                                             -10
                                                    -5                                                                       -15
                                                                                                                             -20
                                       -10                                                                                   -25
                                                         0      5   10      15      20   25                                        0   5   10      15      20   25
                                                                         Quarters                                                               Quarters

                                                    5                                                                        10
                      % dev. from transition path




                                                                                               % dev. from transition path
                                                                                                                              0

                                                    0

                                                                                                                             -10



                                                    -5                                                                       -20
                                                         0      5   10      15      20   25                                        0   5   10      15      20   25
                                                                         Quarters                                                               Quarters

                                                             Figure 4: Impulse response of prices to current account reversal.


oration in the terms of trade generate a surge in foreign demand for the home good, which
rationalizes the simultaneous output boom and fall in consumption and investment. Note
that the decline in the terms of trade is larger than the increase in output, so denominated in
foreign currency the value of domestic output still falls.
   Now we consider the same shock, but under the counterfactual scenario where the monetary
authority had kept a fixed exchange rate vis-a-vis the rest of the world. The impulse responses
under the fixed exchange rate regime are plotted as the red dashed lines in figures 4 and 5.
   Under the fixed exchange rate the HANKSOME economy still experiences a tightening of
the borrowing constraint, however, the debt revaluation channel is absent. Domestic output
contracts because nominal rigidities become binding when the exchange rate is fixed. Lower
domestic output implies a smaller contraction of the terms of trade relative to the flexible
benchmark. In turn, the stronger terms of trade imply a milder real revaluation of households'
foreign currency debt.15 The milder debt revaluation implies a more muted decline in con-
sumption relative to the flexible exchange rate regime, further reinforcing the stronger terms
  15
     In nominal terms with the fixed exchange rate there is no revaluation of the debt in units of domestic
currency. The value of debt rises nontheless in real terms because of domestic deflation.




                                                                                              21
                                                                                                                            2




          % dev. from transition path




                                                                                              % dev. from transition path
                                                  0

                                                                                                                            0
                                                 -5


                                         -10                                                                                -2


                                         -15                                                                                -4
                                                      0   5    10      15      20   25                                           0   5   10      15      20   25
                                                                    Quarters                                                                  Quarters

                                                 10                                                                         3
                   % dev. from transition path




                                                  8
                                                                                                                            2
                                                  6




                                                                                              % Level
                                                  4                                                                         1

                                                  2
                                                                                                                            0
                                                  0

                                                 -2                                                                         -1
                                                      0   5    10      15      20   25                                           0   5   10      15      20   25
                                                                    Quarters                                                                  Quarters

                                                      Figure 5: Impulse response of prices to current account reversal.


of trade. Further, labor supply contracts despite the negative wealth effect from the tightening
of the borrowing constraint because of a substitution effect due to the large drop in the real
wage.
   Finally, investment contracts under both exchange rate regimes due to the scarcer supply
of credit as a result of the sudden stop. In the flexible exchange rate regime the contraction
is associated with a simultaneous rise in the real interest rate that depresses the demand for
capital. Under the fixed regime the real interest rate falls slightly on impact because of the
simultaneous contraction in labor supply, which depresses the return on capital.
   We compute the welfare of households in the period of the sudden stop under the two
exchange rate regimes. We find, using a utilitarian metric, that the fixed-exchange rate regime
would have increased welfare by 0.47% in consumption equivalent variation (CEV) terms. More
than 92% of households would have benefited from the fixed-exchange rate policy. Despite
the fact that the fixed exchange rate generates a domestic recession -- due to the presence
of nominal rigidities -- the fixed exchange rate policy is preferred by the vast majority of
households. This result holds even when abstracting from the utility that households receive




                                                                                         22
from having additional leisure in the recession.16 Our framework therefore generates a rationale
for "fear of floating" even in the absence of a contractionary devaluation. In the subsequent
section we explore the importance of household heterogeneity and the level of foreign debt for
delivering this finding.


6        Inspecting the Mechanism: Household Leverage and
         the Level of Foreign Debt
The foregoing experiment was designed to mimic the experience of Hungary and other Euro-
pean countries that borrowed heavily in foreign currency and then experienced sudden stops
during the Global Financial Crisis. In this section we perform a series of simpler experiments
that we think are instructive in understanding the forces that underlie our positive and welfare
results for the sudden stop.
       To isolate the effect of the contraction (as opposed to a reversal following an expected
expansion) we model the reduction in foreign credit supply as a mean reverting "MIT shock",
such that the HANKSOME economy returns to the initial steady state. We assume that the
economy starts in its long-run steady state, then foreign supply of credit falls by 22% on
impact, then reverts back to the original steady state level with a half-life of 5 quarters as
illustrated in figure 6. We study below the dynamics of the model economy in response to this
shock.
       The main experiment of interest is the credit supply shock under the baseline scenario
of a flexible exchange rate and foreign denominated debt -- the empirically relevant case for
Hungary during the Global Financial Crisis (and the one studied in the previous section).
In order to build intuition and understand those results, we consider this shock under three
different scenarios, which we describe below in more detail. The three scenarios differ in terms
of the exchange rate policy conducted by the central bank, and in terms of the denomination
of households' debt. In addition, we consider the implications for aggregate variables of the
distribution of leverage across the heterogeneous households in the economy.
  16
     Our model abstracts from involuntary unemployment, which may not carry the same welfare benefits
as pure leisure. When considering only consumption in the welfare calculation, the utilitarian welfare gain
is 0.21% CEV and 74% of households prefer the fixed to the floating regime. Therefore, even if leisure were
unvalued the majority of households would prefer the fixed regime.



                                                    23
                                                       0




                             % dev. from initial ss
                                                       -5

                                                      -10

                                                      -15

                                                      -20

                                                      -25
                                                            0   5        10    15   20
                                                                    Quarters
  Figure 6: Foreign credit supply shock considered in the simpler experiments in Section 6.


       First, we consider a real benchmark. This is a setting where households owe foreigners
real debt, denominated in units of home good, and where nominal rigidities are absent. In
the presence of nominal rigidities, the central bank can replicate the equilibrium allocation of
this benchmark economy by letting the nominal exchange rate fluctuate. The central bank can
also replicate the benchmark economy if households owe nominal debt denominated in units of
domestic currency.17 Original sin is not present in this economy, because a depreciation of the
nominal exchange rate or of the terms of trade does not magnify the country's debt-to-GDP
ratio.
       Next, we move to the empirically relevant scenario for Hungary, a flexible exchange rate
setting with foreign-currency denominated debt. Again, the setting with flexible exchange
rates is equivalent to a real economy, as the central bank offsets the nominal rigidities through
fluctuations in the exchange rate. In this case, however, the value of households' real debt is
magnified by the external shock, because it entails a terms of trade and nominal exchange
rate depreciation.
       Third, we are interested in the policy counterfactual where the central bank chooses to
keep the nominal exchange rate fixed. Under this scenario, output can deviate from the real
flexible-price benchmark due to nominal rigidities. When debt is nominal, the implications of
fixed exchange rates are ambiguous.18 While output contracts, the lack of an exchange rate
  17
     This is because, in this equilibrium, the domestic-currency price of home good remains constant in response
to the credit supply shock.
  18
     Note that, when the exchange rate is fixed, there is no distinction between domestic- or foreign-currency


                                                                    24
depreciation limits the extent of the foreign debt revaluation. A fixed exchange rate regime can
thus prove to be advantageous since it prevents adverse balance sheet revaluations in response
to external shocks. This result is informative on why central banks might be reluctant to let
a large exchange rate depreciation take place or exhibit "fear of floating."
   Finally, we evaluate the welfare implications of the different exchange rate policies. In
particular, we study the desirability of a fixed exchange rate upon the contraction of foreign
supply. We conduct this normative analysis from the point of view of the heterogeneous
households that inhabit the SOE. We characterize how the answer to this normative question
depends on the distribution of leverage across households and the fraction of debt that is
denominated in foreign currency.


6.1    Real Benchmark or Flexible Exchange Rates

We detail below the evolution of aggregate variables in the model economy during the reversal
of capital flows. We consider first the case where the exchange rate is flexible and where
household debt is real and denominated in units of home good. While most household debt in
Hungary was denominated in foreign currency, this setting with real, home-good denominated
debt allows us to describe some important dynamics of the model in the absence of debt
revaluation effects.
   The contraction in foreign credit induces a fall in aggregate consumption and investment,
as well as in the terms of trade and in the real wage. The nominal exchange rate depreciates
upon the shock to generate a devaluation in the terms of trade while limiting fluctuations in
domestic prices. The real interest rate rises as the supply of credit is more scarce.
   Figure 7 presents the impulse response functions of aggregate quantities to the credit
supply shock (light-blue dot-dashed line). Figure 8 displays the impulse response functions of
the terms of trade, the real wage, the real interest rate and the nominal exchange rate.
   As the supply of foreign credit dries up, the real interest rate rises. The real rate rising
leads to a drop in investment from domestic firms and a drop in consumption from domestic
households. The latter leads to an associated increase in labor supply of domestic households,
which in turn leads to an increase in domestic output on impact, as capital is predetermined.
The simultaneous contraction in the domestic demand for domestic goods (both investment
denominated nominal debt.

                                               25
                                  0                                                            0

        % dev. from initial ss




                                                                     % dev. from initial ss
                                  -5
                                                                                              -10
                                 -10
                                                                                              -20
                                 -15
                                                                                              -30
                                 -20

                                 -25                                                          -40
                                       0   5     10       15   20                                   0   5     10       15   20
                                               Quarters                                                     Quarters

                                 10                                                           10
        % dev. from initial ss




                                                                     % dev. from initial ss
                                                                                               0
                                  5
                                                                                              -10

                                  0                                                           -20

                                                                                              -30
                                  -5
                                                                                              -40

                                 -10                                                          -50
                                       0   5     10       15   20                                   0   5     10       15   20
                                               Quarters                                                     Quarters

        Figure 7: Impulse response of quantities to credit supply shock, all scenarios.


and consumption) and the expansion in supply imply that in equilibrium the terms of trade
contract upon the shock.
   Under the flexible exchange rate regime that stabilizes domestic prices, the entire move-
ment in the terms of trade is driven by a depreciation in the nominal exchange rate. The
nominal exchange rate devaluation leads a relatively larger drop in consumption of foreign
good relative to that of home good. The increase in labor supply puts downward pressure on
the real wage, which falls further because of the contraction in the value of output produced
by domestic firms.


6.2    Foreign-Currency Denominated Debt

We now consider a setting where households' debt is (partially) denominated in units of foreign
currency. The key feature of the setting with foreign-currency denominated debt, relative to
the real benchmark, is that any contraction in the terms-of-trade induces an increase in the
real value of households' debt. Hence, the contraction in demand associated with the foreign
credit supply shock reduces the net wealth of households with foreign currency liabilities which
further amplifies the contraction in demand. We contrast the real benchmark with two settings


                                                                    26
                                           5                                                               5




          % dev. from initial ss




                                                                                 % dev. from initial ss
                                           0                                                               0
                                          -5                                                               -5
                                   -10                                                                    -10
                                   -15                                                                    -15
                                   -20                                                                    -20
                                   -25                                                                    -25
                                               0   5     10       15   20                                       0   5     10       15   20
                                                       Quarters                                                         Quarters

                                          25                                                              20
                 % dev. from initial ss




                                          20
                                                                                                          15
                                          15
                                                                                                          10




                                                                                        Level
                                          10
                                           5                                                               5
                                           0
                                                                                                           0
                                          -5
                                                                                                           -5
                                               0   5     10       15   20                                       0   5     10       15   20
                                                       Quarters                                                         Quarters

            Figure 8: Impulse response of prices to credit supply shock, all scenarios.


that feature foreign-currency denominated debt. First, we consider again a flexible-exchange
rate economy, where the domestic price level is fully stabilized and so there are no output
losses due to nominal rigidities. Second, we analyze a fixed-exchange rate economy, where
output may fall as a result of price stickiness, but where milder fluctuations of the terms of
trade may dampen the extent of the debt revaluation.
   In this setting, the distribution of initial household portfolios of gross positions has po-
tentially important implications for the subsequent aggregate dynamics. We consider first a
setting where household holdings of gross assets are proportional to their net asset holdings, so
that the leverage ratio is constant across households. In Section 6.3, we explore how positive
gross debt holdings amongst the poor magnify the effects of foreign credit supply shocks.
   Figures 7 and 8 again display the impulse response functions of quantities and prices,
respectively, in the economies with foreign-currency debt, with flexible (dark-blue solid lines)
or fixed (red dashed lines) exchange rates.
   In the presence of foreign denominated debt, fixed vs flexible exchange rates have dramat-
ically different implications for the dynamics of the economy in response to a foreign shock.
Under the flexible exchange rate regime, a depreciation of the nominal exchange rate is nec-


                                                                            27
essary for the central bank to close the output gap such that nominal rigidities do not bind.
The depreciation of the nominal exchange rate in the presence of foreign currency debt leads
to an amplification of the responses of all endogenous variables. The revaluation in foreign
debt contracts household net worth that in turn causes the significantly larger fluctuations.
That fall in net worth amplifies the contraction in demand, which in equilibrium results in
larger movements in quantities and prices.
   Moving to the case where the exchange rate is fixed, we now see the opposite in terms of the
dynamics of domestic output -- namely the presence of nominal rigidities leads to a recession.
In turn, the fall in domestic supply implies, in equilibrium, a smaller adjustment in the terms
of trade relative to the flexible-price case. The milder terms-of-trade contraction due to the
fixed exchange rate implies a more moderate revaluation of foreign-currency debt. When the
stock of nominal liabilities that households owe is large, this channel is powerful, and it implies
that household consumption falls by less than under flexible exchange rates. Importantly, the
fall in consumption is milder even though nominal rigidities imply that output contracts more
than under flexible exchange rates.


6.3    The Distribution of Household Leverage

We have considered so far a setting where leverage is constant across the heterogeneous house-
holds that inhabit the domestic economy. We now explore through a series of experiments the
implications of different leverage distributions for the aggregate, distributional and welfare
implications of shocks.
   In the previous section, households' holdings of gross assets and liabilities were assumed to
be proportional to their net assets. Hence, a household with zero net assets had neither gross
assets nor liabilities in that setting. We consider now two settings where wealth-poor house-
holds have significant gross holdings of debt. First, we calibrate the distribution of leverage to
the empirical distribution from Hungary as we did in Section 5. Under that calibration, the
gross debt of households with zero net worth is, on average, 24% of average household yearly
labor income. We denote this setting as the one with a middle leverage of the poor. Next, we
analyze a setting where a household with zero-wealth has twice as high a gross asset position--
equal to 12% of the average, per-capita stock of capital. We denote this setting as the one with



                                                28
              400                                               60




              350
                                                                50


              300


                                                                40
              250




              200                                               30




              150
                                                                20


              100


                                                                10
               50




                0                                                0
                    0   50   100   150   200   250   300             0   50   100   150   200   250   300




Figure 9: Distribution of gross asset and debt position across households, as a function of
household net wealth. All asset positions are expressed as the ratio of average household
yearly labor income. The three cases displayed are the ones where the poorest households
have no leverage (solid line), a middle level of leverage (dashed line), and a high level of
leverage (dashed-dotted line).


high leverage of the poor (with gross debt corresponding to 48% of average household yearly
labor income for zero net worth households). Figure 9 displays the distribution of households'
gross asset and debt positions in these two settings, as well as in the previously analyzed case
where poor households are not leveraged.19
       Figure 10 displays the effects of the credit supply contraction and the associated revaluation
of foreign currency debt on the fraction of households with zero or negative net wealth. In
the real benchmark with flexible exchange rates and real, home-good denominated debt, this
fraction is independent of the distribution of leverage. This is because no revaluation of debt
takes place and the fraction of zero-wealth households is equal to its steady-state value. When
debt is denominated in foreign currency, a higher fraction of households find themselves with
negative net wealth after the shock, as the real value of their debt increases. As shown in the
figure, this fraction is higher, the higher is the leverage of poor households, as these are hit
  19
   We interpret the capital stock and leverage here broadly, to potentially include the housing stock and
mortgages, which would be particularly relevant for households in the bottom half of the wealth distribution.


                                                           29
                        30




                        25




                        20




                        15




                        10




                         5




                         0
                                Low           Middle         High




   Figure 10: Fraction of households with negative net wealth upon credit supply shock.


by a larger revaluation of their debt. Consistent with the results in Section 6.2, this fraction
is lower when the exchange rate is fixed, as the milder terms-of trade contraction implies a
smaller foreign-currency debt revaluation.
   Figure 11 shows the impulse responses of consumption and the terms of trade to the credit
supply shock in the settings with highly leveraged poor households for the two exchange-rate
regimes with foreign denominated debt. The impulse response functions are expressed in per-
centage differences from the economy where leverage is equally distributed across households
- effectively a difference-in-differences across economies with different domestic leverage dis-
tributions. First, consider the economy with a flexible exchange rate. Where poor households
are more highly leveraged, a larger contraction in aggregate consumption takes place. This is
the case because the fall in net wealth hits poor households with a high marginal propensity
to consume, thus there is a positive correlation between the debt revaluation and the marginal
propensity to consume. The higher is the amount of debt held by poor households, the larger
is the contraction in aggregate consumption. Accordingly, the fall in the terms of trade is also
larger when poor households are highly leveraged, due to the larger fall in domestic consump-
tion and demand. Note that the aggregate leverage is constant across all three economies,
which only differ in terms of how leverage is distributed across households. In the absence of
heterogeneity in the marginal propensity to consume--as would be the case in the representa-
tive agent economy--the three economies would deliver the same aggregate responses. Thus,


                                              30
                                     1                                     1



           % Diff from No Leverage
                                     0                                     0
                                     -1                                    -1
                                     -2                                    -2
                                     -3                                    -3
                                     -4                                    -4
                                     -5                                    -5
                                          0   2   4      6   8   10             0   2   4      6   8   10
                                                  Quarters                              Quarters

                                     1                                     1
           % Diff from No Leverage




                                     0                                     0


                                     -1                                    -1


                                     -2                                    -2
                                          0   2   4      6   8   10             0   2   4      6   8   10
                                                  Quarters                              Quarters

Figure 11: Difference in impulse response functions relative to the economy with low leverage
of the wealth poor households. The left two panels correspond to the economy with middle
leverage of the poor and the right two panels correspond to the economy with high leverage
of the poor.


the differences in the consumption and terms of trade responses directly highlight the impor-
tance of market incompleteness and household heterogeneity for the transmission of aggregate
shocks.
    Turning now to the economy with a fixed-exchange rate, the milder terms-of-trade contrac-
tion implies that the distribution of leverage has negligible effects for the response of aggregate
variables. Why? The smaller contraction in the terms of trade imply only small redistribu-
tions of wealth across agents with different gross portfolios. This implies that the correlation
between the distribution of marginal propensities to consume and debt revaluation matters
less.


6.4       Welfare

The analysis thus far has focused primarily on the positive effects of the sudden stop under
different assumptions on the denomination of debt and exchange rate policy. We now focus
on deriving the welfare implications of the contraction under the two policy regimes of fixed

                                                                      31
and flexible exchange rates, in the different scenarios considered above. Further, we explore
how the distribution of household leverage and the extent of foreign denominated debt impact
those welfare conclusions.
   In figure 12 we plot the average welfare impact (in CEV terms) of the sudden stop for four
cuts in the cross-sectional wealth distribution: the bottom (first), second, third and fourth
quintiles of wealth. We calculate the welfare impact of the sudden stop under fixed and flexible
exchange rates when debt is real or denominated in foreign currency, across the three scenarios
for the distribution of household leverage.
   In the empirically relevant setting for Hungary where debt is denominated in foreign cur-
rency and the exchange rate is flexible, the credit supply contraction reduces welfare for most
households. The magnitude of the welfare change is, however, highly heterogeneous, depending
on the exchange rate policy regime, on the denomination of household debt and within the
distribution of households. In the flexible-exchange rate, foreign-currency denominated debt
scenario, the key force driving the welfare loss is the revaluation of the foreign currency debt
held by domestic households. For households in the bottom quintile of the wealth distribution,
not surprisingly, the welfare fall is the largest the more levered they are. Being highly levered,
in response to a foreign revaluation, those households experience a large fall in net worth with
no buffer stock to smooth the effects of the shock. As a result, those households are willing
to forgo more than 10% of their lifetime consumption to avoid the credit supply contraction.
Conversely, wealthy households suffer a smaller welfare loss the more leveraged poorer house-
holds are, since they are less leveraged themselves (by construction since aggregate leverage
is held constant across experiments).
   The adverse effects of a flexible exchange rate policy become even more salient in contrast to
when the central bank keeps the exchange rate fixed, where most households instead experience
a welfare gain during the sudden stop. The key advantage that a fixed exchange rate policy
delivers is the milder depreciation of the terms of trade during the sudden stop. Hence, a
smaller foreign-currency debt revaluation takes place in this regime. The negative welfare
effects from the decline in consumption are thus more than offset by the increase in leisure
when output contracts in response to the shock.
   The welfare effects of the sudden stop are mild in the economy where debt is denominated
in home good and the exchange rate is flexible. This is the case since debt does not revalue in

                                               32
this economy. Wealthy households experience a welfare gain due to the increase in the return
on their wealth, as credit becomes scarcer. Poorer households experience instead a welfare
loss, due to the terms of trade depreciation and consequent contraction in their real labor
income.
   Thus far, we have considered the extreme cases of either entirely denominated in foreign
or domestic currency. We now evaluate the intermediate case, with a mixture foreign and
domestic currency denominated debt. We conduct the same credit contraction experiment
as before, but now we assume that only a fraction of the credit supply from foreigners is
denominated in domestic currency. That fraction varies from 0 to 60% of the debt outstanding.
We then compare the welfare impact of flexible vs fixed exchanged rates as a function of
household leverage and the percentage of total debt that is denominated in foreign currency.
   In figure 13 we plot the combinations of leverage and share of foreign denominated debt for
which households at various points of the wealth distribution prefer the flexible over the fixed
exchange rate regime. Low wealth households unambiguously prefer the fixed exchange rate
regime (and so are not pictured), as they are particularly susceptible to the debt revaluation.
Further, the fixed-exchange rate pushes up the real wage, benefiting the low wealth households
even when they hold no debt. Wealthier households only prefer the flexible regime in cases
where either the leverage of the poor is low or the fraction of foreign debt is low, again
to minimize their exposure to potential revaluation effects. These results confirm that the
denomination of household debt in foreign currency is a key determinant of the desirability
of fixed exchange rates in this setting. To further assess the importance of heterogeneity, we
perform the following thought experiment: what would the "as-if" representative agent prefer
under these scenarios? To do so we compute welfare using aggregate consumption from the
HANKSOME framework. We plot the scenarios under which this "as-if" representative agent
prefers the flexible regime in figure 14. The representative agent acts much like the median
household and would choose a flexible regime even when on average welfare declines using a
utilitarian metric, highlighting the importance of heterogeneity due to heterogeneous incidence
of the revaluation and decline in consumption across the distribution.




                                              33
7     Conclusions
The aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis reignited interest in the distributional conse-
quences of aggregate shocks and the role that household heterogeneity plays in the amplifica-
tion and propagation of said shocks. While domestic market incompleteness on the household
has been integrated into closed-economy macro, the proliferation of foreign currency borrow-
ing by households in European countries has proven the need for a quantitative framework
to study household heterogeneity in the international context. In this paper we constructed
such a Heterogeneous Agent New Keynesian Small Open Model Economy (HANKSOME)
framework, specifically designed to take these challenges in the international macroeconomics
context.
    We applied our HANKSOME framework to study a current account expansion and subse-
quent reversal inspired by the experience of Hungary in the run up to and aftermath from the
Global Financial Crisis. We found that a fixed exchange rate regime would have significantly
improved welfare in consumption equivalent terms, relative to a flexible exchange rate. This
result obtains despite the fact that keeping the fixed exchange rate generates a recession.
Our HANKSOME framework delivers a welfare rationale for the empirically observed "fear
of floating", as opposed to one driven by fears of a contractionary devaluation. We perform a
variety of additional experiments to help understand our findings. The desirability of a fixed
vs floating exchange rate depends crucially on the distribution of household leverage, and the
fraction of debt denominated in foreign currency.
    There are several additional open areas for the next generation of HANKSOME models
to tackle. First, the presence of domestically incomplete markets generates a fundamental
lack of risk-sharing across households within a country--both in response to idiosyncratic
and aggregate shocks. To what extent does that lack of domestic risk-sharing help explain the
lack of international risk-sharing across countries? Second, we have considered perfect-foresight
impulse responses to unexpected shocks. Incorporating aggregate fluctuations explicitly would
enable a more meaningful evaluation of portfolio choice in this framework and how that
impacts asset prices and investment. We leave these for future work.




                                               34
                             1                                                            1




                           0.5                                                          0.5
% Consumption Equivalent




                                                             % Consumption Equivalent
                             0                                                            0




                           -0.5                                                         -0.5




                            -1                                                           -1




                           -1.5                                                         -1.5




                            -2                                                           -2
                                  Low   Middle   High                                          Low   Middle   High




                                                                                          1

                             1



                                                                                        0.5
                           0.5
                                                             % Consumption Equivalent
% Consumption Equivalent




                                                                                          0
                             0




                                                                                        -0.5
                           -0.5




                                                                                         -1
                            -1




                           -1.5                                                         -1.5




                            -2                                                           -2
                                  Low   Middle   High                                          Low   Middle   High




Figure 12: Welfare implications of a foreign credit supply contraction, for households bottom
(first), second, third and fourth quintile in the wealth distribution. Models with flexible ex-
change rate and home good-denominated debt, flexible exchange rate and foreign-currency
debt, and fixed exchange rate and foreign-currency debt. Results are presented for the mod-
els where poor households have low, middle or high leverage. The consumption equivalent is
defined as the percentage increase of lifetime consumption that gives a household the same
change in welfare as implied by the credit supply contraction. A negative value of the con-
sumption equivalent implies that the households is willing to forgo a fraction of consumption
over its lifetime rather than the foreign credit supply shock to take place.




                                                        35
                    Borrowing Constrained - Welfare                                   25th - Welfare
           10                                                           10

            8                                                            8
Leverage




                                                             Leverage
            6                                                            6

            4                                                            4

            2                                                            2

            0                                                            0
                0       20     40     60     80   100                        0   20     40     60      80   100
                             Foreign Debt                                             Foreign Debt

                             50th- Welfare                                            75th- Welfare
           10                                                           10

            8                                                            8
Leverage




                                                             Leverage




            6                                                            6

            4                                                            4

            2                                                            2

            0                                                            0
                0       20     40     60     80   100                        0   20     40     60      80   100
                             Foreign Debt                                             Foreign Debt

Figure 13: Blue shaded areas indicate the combination of household leverage and the fraction
of debt denominated in foreign currency where the household prefers a flexible exchange rate
regime over a fixed exchange rate in response to a sudden stop.




                                                        36
                             Representative Consumer - Welfare
           9


           8


           7


           6
Leverage




           5


           4


           3


           2


           1


           0
               0   10   20   30      40       50         60    70      80      90      100
                                          Foreign Debt

Figure 14: Blue shaded areas indicate the combination of household leverage and the fraction
of debt denominated in foreign currency where the "as-if" representative household prefers a
flexible exchange rate regime over a fixed exchange rate in response to a sudden stop.




                                             37
References
Aghion, P., P. Bacchetta, and A. Banerjee (2004): "A corporate balance-sheet ap-
 proach to currency crises," Journal of Economic theory, 119, 6­30.
Aiyagari, S. R. (1994): "Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving," The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 109, 659­84.
------ (1995): "Optimal Capital Income Taxation with Incomplete Markets, Borrowing Con-
  straints, and Constant Discounting," Journal of Political Economy, 103, 1158­1175.
Auclert, A. (2016): "Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel," American Eco-
 nomic Review, forthcoming.
Auclert, A. and M. Rognlie (2017): "Inequality and Aggregate Demand," Working Paper
 24280, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bayer, C., R. Lu ¨ tticke, L. Pham-Dao, and V. Tjaden (2019): "Precautionary Savings,
 Illiquid Assets, and the Aggregate Consequences of Shocks to Household Income Risk,"
 Econometrica, 87, 255­290.
Benigno, G., H. Chen, C. Otrok, A. Rebucci, and E. R. Young (2016): "Opti-
 mal capital controls and real exchange rate policies: A pecuniary externality perspective,"
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 84, 147 ­ 165.
Boeri, T. and P. Garibaldi (2006): "Are labour markets in the new member states suffi-
 ciently flexible for EMU?" Journal of Banking & Finance, 30, 1393­1407.
       ´ r, A., Z. Ke
Boldizsa            ´kesi, B. Ko     ´ n, B. Sisak, et al. (2016): "The wealth position
                                ´ czia
 of Hungarian households based on HFCS," Financial and Economic Review, 15, 115­150.
Boppart, T., P. Krusell, and K. Mitman (2018): "Exploiting MIT shocks in
 heterogeneous-agent economies: the impulse response as a numerical derivative," Journal of
 Economic Dynamics and Control, 89, 68­92.
Calvo, G. A. and C. M. Reinhart (2002): "Fear of floating," The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 117, 379­408.
 ´spedes, L. F., R. Chang, and A. Velasco (2004): "Balance sheets and exchange rate
Ce
 policy," American Economic Review, 94, 1183­1193.
Chari, V. V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2002): "Can sticky price models
 generate volatile and persistent real exchange rates?" The Review of Economic Studies, 69,
 533­563.
------ (2005): "Sudden stops and output drops," American Economic Review, 95, 381­387.
Cugat, G. (2019): "Emerging markets, household heterogeneity, and exchange rate policy,"
 in 2019 Meeting Papers, Society for Economic Dynamics, 526.


                                            38
Den Haan, W. J., P. Rendahl, and M. Riegler (2017): "Unemployment (Fears) and
 Deflationary Spirals," Journal of the European Economic Association, 16, 1281­1349.
Diaz-Alejandro, C. F. (1963): "A Note on the Impact of Devaluation and the Redistribu-
 tive Effect," Journal of Political Economy, 71, 577­580.
Eberly, J., S. Rebelo, and N. Vincent (2008): "Investment and Value: A Neoclassical
 Benchmark," Working Paper 13866, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Erceg, C. J., D. W. Henderson, and A. T. Levin (2000): "Optimal Monetary Policy
 with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts," Journal of Monetary Economics, 46, 281 ­ 313.
Fornaro, L. (2015): "Financial crises and exchange rate policy," Journal of International
 Economics, 95, 202­215.
Frankel, J. A. (2005): "Mundell-Fleming lecture: contractionary currency crashes in devel-
 oping countries," IMF Staff Papers, 52, 149­192.
Gali, J. and T. Monacelli (2005): "Monetary policy and exchange rate volatility in a
 small open economy," The Review of Economic Studies, 72, 707­734.
Gornemann, N., K. Kuester, and M. Nakajima (2012): "Monetary Policy with Het-
 erogeneous Agents," Working paper 12-21, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
Gourinchas, P.-O. (2018): "Monetary policy transmission in emerging markets: An appli-
 cation to chile," Monetary Policy and Global Spillovers: Mechanisms, Effects and Policy
 Measures, edition, 1, 279­324.
Guerrieri, V. and G. Lorenzoni (2017): "Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the
 Liquidity Trap," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132, 1427­1467.
Hagedorn, M., J. Luo, I. Manovskii, and K. Mitman (2019a): "Forward guidance,"
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 102, 1­23.
Hagedorn, M., I. Manovskii, and K. Mitman (2018): "Monetary Policy in Incomplete-
 Markets Models: Theory and Evidence," Working paper.
------ (2019b): ""The Fiscal Multiplier"," NBER Working Papers 25571, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Inc.
    ´ th, H. and Z. Szalai (2008): "Labour market institutions in Hungary with a focus
Horva
 on wage and employment flexibility," Tech. rep., MNB Occasional Papers.
Huggett, M. (1993): "The Risk-free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agent Incomplete-Insurance
 Economies," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17, 953 ­ 969.
Ilzetzki, E., C. M. Reinhart, and K. S. Rogoff (2019): "Exchange Arrangements
  Entering the Twenty-First Century: Which Anchor will Hold?" The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 134, 599­646.


                                           39
Imrohoro     lu, A. (1989): "Cost of Business Cycles with Indivisibilities and Liquidity Con-
            g
  straints," Journal of Political economy, 97, 1364­1383.
------ (1992): "The Welfare Cost of Inflation under Imperfect Insurance," Journal of Eco-
  nomic Dynamics and Control, 16, 79­91.
Iyer, T. (2015): "Inflation Targeting for India? The Implications of Limited Asset Market
  Participation," Tech. rep.
Kaplan, G., B. Moll, and G. L. Violante (2018): "Monetary Policy According to
 HANK," American Economic Review, 108, 697­743.
Kaplan, G. and G. L. Violante (2018): "Microeconomic Heterogeneity and Macroeco-
 nomic Shocks," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32, 167­194.
Krueger, D., K. Mitman, and F. Perri (2016): "Macroeconomics and Household Hetero-
 geneity," in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. Taylor and H. Uhlig, Elsevier, 843­921.
Krugman, P. and L. Taylor (1978): "Contractionary effects of devaluation," Journal of
 International Economics, 8, 445­456.
 ¨ tticke, R. (2015): "Transmission of Monetary Policy with Heterogeneity in Household
Lu
 Portfolios," Working paper.
McKay, A., E. Nakamura, and J. Steinsson (2016): "The Power of Forward Guidance
 Revisited," American Economic Review, 106, 3133­58.
Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff (2000): "New directions for stochastic open economy mod-
 els," Journal of international economics, 50, 117­153.
Oh, H. and R. Reis (2012): "Targeted Transfers and the Fiscal Response to the Great
 Recession," Journal of Monetary Economics, 59, Supplement, 50 ­ 64.
Ottonello, P. (2013): "Optimal exchange rate policy under collateral constraints and wage
 rigidity," .
Ravn, M. O. and V. Sterk (2017): "Job Uncertainty and Deep Recessions," Journal of
 Monetary Economics, 90, 125 ­ 141.
Rey, H. (2015): "Dilemma not trilemma: the global financial cycle and monetary policy
 independence," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Rotemberg, J. J. (1982): "Sticky Prices in the United States," The Journal of Political
 Economy, 1187­1211.
Schmitt-Grohe, S. and M. Uribe (2016a): "Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity, Currency
  Pegs, and Involuntary Unemployment," Journal of Political Economy, 124, 1466­1514.
------ (2016b): "Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity, Currency Pegs, and Involuntary Unem-
  ployment," Journal of Political Economy, 124, 1466­1514.


                                             40
Sunel, E. (2018): "Welfare Consequences of Gradual Disinflation in Emerging Economies,"
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 50, 705­755.
Svensson, L. E. (2000): "Open-economy inflation targeting," Journal of international eco-
  nomics, 50, 155­183.
Verner, E. and G. Gyongyosi (2018): "Household Debt Revaluation and the Real Econ-
 omy: Evidence from a Foreign Currency Debt Crisis," .




                                           41
