                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   RULES AND COMMITMENT IN COMMUNICATION:
                          AN EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS

                                     Guillaume R. Fréchette
                                      Alessandro Lizzeri
                                         Jacopo Perego

                                      Working Paper 26404
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26404


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




We thank Andreas Blume, Elliot Lipnowski, Salvatore Nunnari, Santiago Oliveros, Sara
Shahanaghi, and Emmanuel Vespa for useful comments. Fréchette and Lizzeri gratefully
acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation via grant SES-1558857.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Guillaume R. Fréchette, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Jacopo Perego. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Rules and Commitment in Communication: an Experimental Analysis
Guillaume R. Fréchette, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Jacopo Perego
NBER Working Paper No. 26404
October 2019
JEL No. C92,D7,D8,D9

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the role of commitment in communication and its interactions with rules, which
determine whether or not information is verifiable. Our framework nests models of cheap talk,
information disclosure, and Bayesian persuasion. Our model predicts that commitment has
opposite effects on information transmission under the two alternative rules. We leverage these
contrasting forces to experimentally establish that subjects react to commitment in line with the
main qualitative implications of the theory. Quantitatively, not all subjects behave as predicted.
We show that a form of commitment blindness leads some senders to overcommunicate when
information is verifiable and undercommunicate when it is not. This generates an unpredicted gap
in information transmission across the two rules, suggesting a novel role for verifiable
information in practice.

Guillaume R. Fréchette                          Jacopo Perego
New York University                             Columbia University
Department of Economics                         3022 Broadway Uris 616
19 West 4th Street                              New York, NY 10027
New York, NY 10012                              jp3754@columbia.edu
guillaume.frechette@nyu.edu

Alessandro Lizzeri
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
alessandro.lizzeri@nyu.edu
1        Introduction
The goal of this paper is to experimentally study the effects of rules and commitment in com-
munication. We think of rules as restrictions on the language. They determine, for instance,
whether an agent can freely misreport what she knows or whether she can only use verifiable
information. Commitment captures the extent to which the agent can communicate accord-
ing to predetermined protocols. In the literature, commitment has been used to model, for in-
stance, how a school chooses a grading policy and a firm chooses an accounting standard.1 To-
gether, rules and commitment are defining features at the heart of any communication environ-
ment. For instance, models of cheap talk, information disclosure, and Bayesian persuasion dif-
fer among each other in ways that lead back to differences in rules and commitment. In many
concrete applications, it is difficult to measure the exact degree of commitment available to an
agent or the extent to which rules are enforced. Yet, rules and commitment do vary signifi-
cantly in practice, depending on the context and observables such as the frequency of commu-
nication. Thus, studying their effects on communication is a natural question.
    We present a simple model of communication under partial commitment and consider two
opposing rules: verifiable and unverifiable information. The focus on partial commitment
is a key feature of our analysis: it allows us to nest many existing communication models
under the same umbrella and experimentally test key qualitative predictions about the role of
commitment in communication. The contrast between verifiable and unverifiable information
further enriches our analysis, as our main comparative static predictions have opposite signs
under these two alternative rules. Our main results indicate clear treatment effects in line
with the main qualitative predictions of the theory. We also uncover important quantitative
deviations. Specifically, we find that rules matter in ways that are unpredicted by the theory;
we propose a systematic rationalization for these departures.
    We consider a sender-receiver model with binary states and actions. The sender wants the
receiver to choose a high action, whereas the receiver wishes to match the state. There are
three stages. In the commitment stage, the sender publicly commits to an information struc-
ture, which is a map between states and messages. Under unverifiable information, the sender
can freely misreport her private information. Under verifiable information, she can only con-
ceal it. In the revision stage, the sender learns the state and can privately revise the chosen in-
formation structure. In the last stage, the receiver observes a message and chooses an action.
The message is generated with probability  from the commitment stage and with the remain-
    1
        Bergemann and Morris (2019) and Kamenica (2019) survey this literature.


                                                        2

                        Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
ing probability from the revision stage. We view the probability  as capturing the sender's
commitment power: the higher  is, the higher the probability that the sender will not be able
to revise her strategy after learning the state and thus, the higher the extent to which she is
committed to her initial communication. Variations in commitment power generate predictions
that are qualitatively different depending on the communication rule. For example, an increase
in the sender's commitment power should increase the amount of information conveyed under
unverifiable information, whereas it should decrease it under verifiable information. When the
sender can fully commit, these two scenarios coincide and the equilibrium informativeness is
independent of the communication rule. We exploit these predictions to experimentally test the
role of commitment in communication.
  With this framework, we nest models of cheap talk (Crawford and Sobel, 1982; Green and
Stokey, 2007), disclosure (Grossman, 1981; Milgrom, 1981; Jovanovic, 1982; Okuno-Fujiwara
et al., 1990), and Bayesian persuasion (Kamenica and Gentzkow, 2011). Thus, we span a
considerable portion of the strategic information transmission models that have been discussed
in the literature in the last few decades. This helps in organizing our analysis in two ways.
First, the comparison across models generates asymmetric predictions that go to the heart of
the strategic tension of communication under commitment. As we illustrate in the paper, these
asymmetries discipline which explanations can be used to rationalize potential departures from
the theory. Second, the framework itself informs a parsimonious experimental design. In our
treatments, we change two parameters--the degree of commitment  and the verifiability of
information--while leaving the underlying structure of the game unchanged.
  We begin by establishing several patterns in the data that are consistent with the key quali-
tative predictions of the theory. More specifically, we present two main sets of findings. First,
we show that both senders and receivers react to commitment. For senders, we exploit within-
treatment variation to show that between the commitment and revision stage, their behavior
changes in the directions predicted by the theory. When information is unverifiable, they reveal
much more information in the commitment stage than in the revision stage. When informa-
tion is verifiable, this ranking is reversed, as predicted by the theory. For receivers, we exploit
across-treatment variation to show that, as commitment increases, they become more respon-
sive to information from the commitment stage. That is, they understand that information con-
veyed in the commitment stage is more meaningful when the level of commitment is higher. In
our second main finding, we test how increasing commitment power changes the overall infor-
mativeness of communication. In line with the theory, we find that informativeness increases
with commitment in treatments with unverifiable information and decreases with commitment


                                                 3

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
in treatments with verifiable information. Furthermore, we find that verifiability has the pre-
dicted effect of increasing the amount of information conveyed by senders. Overall, these
strong treatment effects validate the qualitative implications of the theory.
  We then analyze the main quantitative deviations from the theory that we observe in the data.
In treatments with low commitment, we replicate existing findings in the literature by show-
ing that relative to the predictions of the theory, senders undercommunicate when information
is verifiable and overcommunicate when it is not.2 However, we find that the opposite holds
in treatments with high commitment: senders overcommunicate when information is verifiable
and undercommunicate when it is not. These deviations create an informativeness gap between
verifiable and unverifiable treatments, which is particularly apparent in the limiting case of full
commitment: empirically, informativeness is higher when information is verifiable than when
it is not, even though in theory, the informativeness should be the same. From a policy per-
spective, this excess informativeness presents a novel justification for making it more difficult
for senders to misreport their information.
  We discuss the extent to which a model with boundedly rational agents may help explain
these deviations. We note that a number of plausible biases that have been explored in prior
work--such as lying-averse senders or non-Bayesian receivers--cannot rationalize the ob-
served deviations. Thus, we consider the possibility that a fraction of senders is commitment
blind: they behave under commitment as if they had no commitment power whatsoever. These
senders are incapable of exploiting commitment to their advantage. In both stages, they choose
a strategy that is optimal under no commitment. This bias has different implications on in-
formativeness depending on the communication rule and, in particular, could explain the ob-
served informativeness gap. To find evidence for commitment blindness, we look at treatments
with partial commitment, where we can observe the behavior of the same sender in scenarios
with and without commitment power. Our analysis reveals that there is a group of senders who
behave in ways that are compatible with commitment blindness. To evaluate whether this ex-
planation is fully capable of accounting for the quantitative departures from theory, we esti-
mate a structural model of Quantal Response Equilibrium (QRE). By clustering the observed
senders' strategies in treatment-specific representative groups, we can capture the typical be-
havior of commitment-blind senders. For each treatment, we then simulate data from our es-
timated model and find that the model-implied equilibrium informativeness can explain a con-
siderable part of the gap observed in the data.
   2
     For cheap talk, see the survey by Blume et al. (2020). For information disclosure, see Jin et al. (2020) and
references therein.



                                                       4

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
  Related Literature. The role of commitment in communication is at the center of the re-
cent literature on persuasion and information design (Kamenica, 2019; Bergemann and Mor-
ris, 2019). To study the effects of commitment, we innovate by considering a versatile frame-
work in which commitment can be varied experimentally. Recent theoretical contributions by
Lipnowski et al. (2018) and Min (2017) analyze in greater generality the implications of par-
tial commitment under unverifiable information.3 In a framework with no commitment, Kartik
(2009) studies changes in lying costs, bridging models of cheap talk and information disclo-
sure.
  Our paper relates to a large body of experimental literature on cheap talk, which has been re-
cently surveyed by Blume et al. (2020). Models of cheap talk feature no commitment and un-
verifiable information and have been used to study a variety of phenomena, including lobbying
(Austen-Smith, 1993; Battaglini, 2002) and the interaction between legislative committees and
a legislature (Gilligan and Krehbiel, 1987, 1989). Dickhaut et al. (1995) was the first experi-
mental paper to test the central prediction of Crawford and Sobel (1982) that more preference
alignment between the sender and the receiver should result in more information transmission.
Their main result is consistent with this prediction. Forsythe et al. (1999) add a cheap-talk
communication stage to an adverse-selection environment with the feature that the theory pre-
dicts no trade and that communication does not help. By contrast, in the experiment, communi-
cation leads to additional trade, partly because receivers are too credulous. Blume et al. (1998)
study a richer environment and compare behavior when messages have preassigned meanings
with behavior when meanings emerge endogenously. Among other findings, they confirm that,
as in Forsythe et al. (1999), receivers are gullible. Cai and Wang (2006) also vary preference
alignment and find that senders overcommunicate relative to the predictions of the cheap-talk
model and that receivers are overly trusting.4
  Our paper also relates to the literature on information disclosure. Disclosure models feature
no commitment but verifiable information and have been used to study quality disclosure by
a privately informed seller (e.g., Verrecchia, 1983; Dye, 1985; Galor, 1985). Milgrom (2008)
and Dranove and Jin (2010) survey this literature. In contrast to experiments on cheap talk, ex-
periments on the disclosure of verifiable information typically find that sender undercommu-
nicate relative to the theoretical predictions. For instance, Jin et al. (2020) find that receivers
are insufficiently skeptical when senders do not provide any information, which in turn leads
senders to under provide information.5 Jin et al. (2019) and de Clippel and Rozen (2020) find
   3
     Perez-Richet and Skreta (2018) study a model of interim information manipulation under full commitment.
   4
     See also S´
               anchez-Pag´es and Vorsatz (2007), Wang et al. (2010), and Wilson and Vespa (2020).
   5
     See also Forsythe et al. (1989), King and Wallin (1991), Dickhaut et al. (2003), Forsythe et al. (1999),


                                                     5

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
evidence for strategic obfuscation of verifiable evidence in settings with no and full commit-
ment, respectively. Information unraveling has also been studied in the field. For instance,
Mathios (2000) and Jin and Leslie (2003) document the failures of information unraveling for
food nutrition labels and hygiene grade cards in restaurants.
    One of our treatments replicates the leading example in Kamenica and Gentzkow (2011) and
is one of the first tests of Bayesian persuasion. This treatment features full commitment and
unverifiable information. Other papers have studied a similar treatment with different designs
and goals. Aristidou et al. (2019) compare the design of information and monetary incentives.
Their remarkably simple implementation imposes some aspects of the equilibrium behavior
onto subjects' tasks. In their findings, senders are able to extract a higher rent from receivers
when using information rather than monetary incentives. On average, senders' strategies are
close to equilibrium--a result that is in line with one of our findings. Au and Li (2018) augment
Bayesian persuasion with reciprocity and test their model in the lab. In their implementation,
senders directly choose posteriors instead of information structures. This simplifies senders'
tasks and eliminates the need for receivers to do Bayesian updating. Their results highlight
interesting inconsistencies relative to the standard theory. Finally, Nguyen (2017) uses an
intuitive interface for senders and allows them to choose among a small set of precompiled
communication strategies. Overall, given receivers' behavior, a large fraction of senders behave
optimally and their behavior involves partial information transmission.



2      Theoretical Framework
In this section, we present our theoretical framework and discuss its main predictions. The
model achieves two goals. First, it captures settings where the sender has only partial commit-
ment power. Second, it highlights the contrast between verifiable and unverifiable information.
These features generate a rich set of predictions that we then exploit in our experimental design.


2.1     Model

There are two players: a sender and a receiver. The sender has private information about
the state, while the receiver can take an action that affects everyone's payoff. The sender
communicates with the receiver by transmitting information, in an attempt to influence her
action. More specifically, let  = {L , H } be the state space and µ0  [0, 1] denote the common
Benndorf et al. (2015), Hagenbach et al. (2014), and Hagenback and Perez-Richet (2018).


                                                     6

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
prior probability that the state is H . The receiver chooses an action in A = {aL , aH }, and her
preferences are given by the following utility function:

          u (aL , L ) = u (aH , H ) = 0,   u (aL , H ) = - (1 - q) ,     u (aH , L ) = -q.

Thus, the receiver wishes to match her actions to the state, and the relative cost of the mistakes
in the two states is parametrized by q. A Bayesian receiver would choose action aH whenever
her posterior belief that the state is H is larger than q. Thus, we call q the persuasion threshold.
The sender's preferences are state-independent and given by v(a) = 1(a = aH ). That is, the
sender earns a positive payoff only if she successfully persuades the receiver to take action aH .
To make the problem interesting, we assume that µ0 < q. That is, absent further information,
the receiver would choose aL .
  The sender communicates with the receiver by sending her information about the state. An
information structure is a map  :   ( M ), with M = {L , H , n} being the set of possible
messages. Denote by U the set of all such information structures and by  the subset from
which the sender can choose. The difference between  and U captures exogenous restrictions
on the sender's strategies, or communication rules. We say that information is unverifiable if no
restrictions are imposed on the sender, that is,  = U . We say that information is verifiable if,
instead,  = V := {  U : (H |L ) = (L |H ) = 0}. In other words, verifiability demands
that message m =  can only be sent by type . Therefore, we can interpret message m =  as
a certifiable statement asserting that the state is indeed . Conversely, message n is a statement
that is neither true nor false and hence, cannot be verified.
  The game unfolds in three consecutive stages. In the commitment stage, the sender publicly
chooses a commitment strategy C   before learning the state . In the revision stage, at
every history (C , ), the sender privately observes  and chooses R  . Since R is chosen
after observing , the sender has no commitment power in the revision stage. In the guessing
stage, the final stage of the game, a message m realizes with probability   [0, 1] from C (·|)
and (1 - ) from R (·|). For every history (C , R , , m), the receiver observes (C , m) and
takes an action a(C , m)  A. The receiver updates her prior belief µ0 according to some belief
assessment µ(m, C , R ) that assigns a posterior belief to each message m, possibly as a function
of C and R . We use Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium (PBE) as a solution concept.




                                                 7

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
2.2     Discussion

We refer to  as the sender's degree of commitment. It measures the extent to which the sender
is able to commit to her initial strategy C . For high values of , the commitment strategy C
is likely to be the one that determines the final message m. Conversely, for low values of , the
final message m is likely to be determined by the choice in the revision stage, after the sender
has learned the state.6
  Our framework is characterized by three main parameters: (i) the communication rule, U
versus V , (ii) the degree of commitment , (iii) the persuasion threshold q. This framework
can nest several classic communication models as special cases. When  = 0 and information
is unverifiable, our model captures cheap-talk communication. When  = 0 and information is
verifiable, our model captures a disclosure game with verifiable communication. Finally, when
 = 1 and information is unverifiable, our model becomes a Bayesian persuasion game.
  An equilibrium outcome of particular interest for us is the informativeness of the equilibrium
strategy, that is, the amount of information that the sender conveys to the receiver. We say that
an equilibrium (C , R , a, µ) under parameters (, , q) is more informative than equilibrium
(C , R , a , µ ) under parameters ( ,  , q ) if the on-the-equilibrium-path information structure
C + (1 - )R is more informative than  C + (1 -  )R . We measure the informativeness of an
information structure    as the correlation between the state and the action it induces.7 We
denote such correlation by B (). More formally, fix q and an arbitrary . Define a(m, )  A
to be action that a Bayesian receiver would choose upon receiving message m from . Then,
B () := Corr(, a(m, ))  [0, 1]. We say that an information structure is uninformative if
B () = 0, and that it is fully informative if B () = 1. We say that  is more informative than
 if B ()  B ( ).
  As in many communication games, our framework allows for multiple PBEs. We provide a
full equilibrium characterization in Appendix C. In the rest of the paper, we impose a simple
tie-breaking rule on equilibrium behavior that is inspired by Hart et al. (2017). We say that
a PBE is truth leaning if, whenever it is weakly optimal for type H in the revision stage to
tell the truth (i.e. to send message m = H ), she does so. This tie-breaking rule is simple
   6
      Alternative but equivalent interpretations are possible. One can think of the sender as having an opportunity
to revise her commitment strategy after learning the state, which occurs only with probability 1 - . Another
interpretation of the game is that the revision game is always available but the sender has a type that determines
whether she will take advantage of the opportunity to revise the strategy. The parameter  is then the probability
that the sender is not this opportunistic type.
    7
      There are other ways to measure informativeness. We offer a detailed discussion of this choice and its
alternatives in Section 3.3.



                                                        8

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
but powerful. As we show in Proposition 1, it is sufficient to guarantee the uniqueness of
equilibrium outcomes. Moreover, it is weaker than the refinement introduced in Hart et al.
(2017). Indeed, it is not imposed on all types of senders in the revision stage, but only on type
H .8 A fortiori, our tie-breaking rule is consistent with many of the equilibrium refinements
that have been proposed in the literature.9 Finally, this tie-breaking rule is consistent with our
data. For example, when information is verifiable, the average R (H |H ) in our data is about
0.95. In the rest of the paper, we maintain the specialization to truth leaning PBEs and we refer
to these as equilibria, without further qualification.


2.3     Main Predictions

We now describe the main comparative statics that we later bring to the lab. We begin with a
characterization of equilibrium informativeness for a fixed level of commitment power  and
contrast the equilibrium informativeness between the commitment and the revision stages.
                                       q-µ0                     q(1-µ0 )
Proposition 1. Fix . Let  :=          q(1-µ0 )
                                                 and ¯ :=   q(1-µ0 )+(1-q)µ0
                                                                             ,   and note that   ¯:

       [Unverifiable Information] All equilibria at  have the same informativeness. In partic-
       ular, these equilibria are uninformative if and only if  < . Moreover, when   , less
       information is transmitted in the revision stage than in the commitment stage.

       [Verifiable Information] All equilibria at  have the same informativeness. In particular,
       these equilibria are fully informative if and only if  < ¯ . Moreover, when   ¯ , more
       information is transmitted in the revision stage than in the commitment stage.

  This result establishes the uniqueness of the equilibrium outcomes for each rule and com-
mitment level and it highlights the main tension between the commitment and revision stages.
This tension manifests itself in opposite ways under the two alternative rules, thus providing
useful and testable predictions that we will exploit in our experimental analysis. To understand
this result, we first consider two extreme cases. When  = 0, the sender has no commitment
power. Therefore, equilibria are fully informative when information is verifiable and uninfor-
mative otherwise. When  = 1, the sender has full commitment power. The equilibria fea-
ture partial information revelation in both of the verifiability scenarios that we consider. The
   8
      More specifically, we do not require that, whenever type L is indifferent in the revision stage she must send
message L . When information is unverifiable, this extra requirement is too strong and can lead to non existence
of equilibria.
    9
      See online Appendix C.5 of Hart et al. (2017)


                                                            9

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
intuition for Proposition 1 is then the following. Under both verifiable and unverifiable infor-
mation, the sender would like to commit to persuading the receiver to choose the high action
as often as possible, and this requires partial information revelation. However, in the revision
stage, the sender is unable to resist the temptation to undo her commitments and manipulate in-
formation in her favor. Under verifiable information, this opportunity implies full information
disclosure in the revision stage; under unverifiable information, it implies sending the message
that induces the high action, regardless of the state (i.e. being uninformative). The presence
of the revision stage changes the sender's problem in the commitment stage relative to the full
commitment case: relative to the revision stage, the sender overcommunicates when informa-
tion is unverifiable and undercommunicates when information is verifiable. These commitment
strategies are an attempt to obtain final posteriors that are as close as possible to the full com-
mitment scenario. When  is sufficiently high, partial information revelation occurs in both
verifiability scenarios because the revision stage cannot completely undo the positive effect of
the commitment stage. Overall, this result illustrates how changes in the rules can generate
stark contrasts in the way senders react to commitment power.
  Our next result describes how equilibrium informativeness changes with commitment power
and how this depends on the communication rule.

Proposition 2. Fix q > µ0 . When information is unverifiable, equilibrium informativeness
weakly increases in . When information is verifiable, equilibrium informativeness weakly
decreases in . Moreover, when  = 1, equilibrium informativeness is independent of the
communication rules.

  This result illustrates that changes in commitment affect equilibrium informativeness in
starkly different ways depending on the communication rules.10 The intuition for this result
follows from the discussion above. As  increases, the revision stage becomes increasingly
less likely, and the relevance of the commitment stage increases. This allows the sender to ap-
proach the optimal solution under full commitment,  = 1. In our game, the equilibrium out-
come for  = 1 is independent of the rules of communication. To see this, note that when  = 1
and information is verifiable, the sender can replace the use of message H with message n. By
doing so, she can induce the same joint distribution over states and actions that is optimal un-
der unverifiable information.
  10
     These stark comparative statics hinge on the binary structure of our environments and the equilibrium refine-
ment. They may fail in more general environments. See Appendix C.1 and Lipnowski et al. (2018).




                                                       10

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
3        Experimental Design
In this section, we describe the laboratory implementation of our model, the main treatments
that we conducted, and the different ways with which we measure informativeness from the
data. We view our experimental design as a particularly useful framework to organize our anal-
ysis of commitment and communication rules. As we illustrate in the next sections, subject be-
havior in any given treatment is heterogeneous and challenging to evaluate on its own. In con-
trast, the comparison across treatments, along with the asymmetric nature of our predictions,
goes to the heart of the strategic tension in our model.


3.1      Lab Implementation and Treatments

We begin by describing the implementation of the base game. An urn contains three balls, two
blue (L = B) and one red (H = R). A ball is drawn at random and µ0 ( = R) = 1/3. The
receiver takes a guess a  {red, blue} and earns $2 if a matches the color of the ball . She
earns nothing otherwise. The sender wins $2 if a = red, irrespective of the state .
    The game has three stages.11 In the commitment stage, the sender chooses an information
structure. She does so via a simple graphical interface. The sender selects C (·|) by moving a
slider, one for each state. The slider's bar is colored according to the conditional probabilities
implied by the sender's choice. These probabilities are updated in real time in a table above the
slider bar. In the revision stage, the sender learns the color of the ball . With the same interface
as the one just described, she can revise the part of her strategy that concerns the realized
state. We do not elicit the sender's choice for the state that did not realize. This design choice
makes the revision stage simpler and highlights the stark contrast between the commitment and
revision stage. Moreover, the revision stage is presented to the sender only when it matters, that
is, when commitment is partial. To minimize confusion, we do not show the revision stage for
treatments with full commitment. In the guessing stage, the receiver observes the information
structure chosen by the sender in the commitment stage but not the one chosen in the revision
stage. We use the strategy method to elicit the receiver's choice: She makes a guess for each
possible message she could receive.
    We have a 2 × 3 factorial between-subject design. Our experimental variables are the sender's
commitment power  and the communication rules (verifiable versus unverifiable informa-
    11
    In the lab, we referred to the these three stages with neutral labels: the communication, update, and guessing
stage. In the remainder of the paper, we maintain instead the nomenclature introduced in the previous section.



                                                       11

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                               Table 1: Treatments Denominations

                                                Sender's Commitment Power

                               Information       = 0.20  = 0.80    =1

                                   Verifiable    V 20      V 80    V 100

                               Unverifiable      U 20      U 80    U 100



tion). For each rule, we conducted three treatments with different degrees of commitment:
  {0.20, 0.80, 1}. This gives us a total of six treatments, which constitute the bulk of our in-
vestigation. Treatments are denoted as illustrated in Table 1. In treatments with verifiable in-
formation, the interface prevents senders from assigning positive probability to a red message
conditional on a blue ball or to a blue message conditional on a red ball. The interfaces are
identical in all other respects.
  Table 2 reports the equilibrium strategy predictions for each treatment. Figure 1 reports the
predicted equilibrium outcomes. This set of treatments captures the key tensions of our model.
First, treatments V 80 and U 80 reveal the tension between the commitment and the revision
stage, as summarized by Proposition 1. This tension goes in opposite directions according to
whether or not information is verifiable. Second, informativeness is increasing in  when in-
formation is unverifiable, while the opposite holds when information is verifiable. Third, treat-
ments U 100 and V 100 are predicted to induce an identical outcome through senders' strategies
that are substantially different. In the following sections, we will exploit these tensions to test
the role of commitment and rules in communication.
  For each treatment, we conducted four sessions, for a total of 24 sessions. Each session
included 12 to 24 subjects (16 on average) for a total of 384 subjects recruited from the NYU
undergraduate population using hroot (Bock et al., 2014). At the beginning of each session,
instructions were read aloud, and subjects were randomly assigned into a fixed role: sender
or receiver. In each session, subjects played 25 paid rounds of the game described above,
with random rematching between rounds. At the end of every round, complete feedback was
provided to both senders and receivers. Appendix E.2 contains the instructions for one of our
treatments. In addition to their earnings from the experiment, subjects received a $10 show-
up fee. Average earnings, including the show-up fee, were $36.55, ranging from $12 to $60.
On average, sessions lasted 100 minutes. Our statistical analysis focuses on the last ten rounds
to allow enough time for subjects to familiarize themselves with the interface and to learn the
relevant strategic forces in the task they faced. As can be seen in Appendix D.3, some aspects
of behavior change over the course of the experiments.


                                                     12

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                                                Table 2: Equilibrium Predictions

                                                           Sender                                Receiver      Correlation
                                 Commitment                                  Revision            Guessing      Coefficient
      Treat.    State                 Message                  State            Message         Mes.   Guess      = B
                             r           b             n                 r         b       n
                  R          1                         0            R    1                 0     r     red
      V 20        B                      x            1-x           B              x      1-x    b     blue        1
                                                                                                 n     blue
                  R          0                         1            R    1                 0     r     red
      V 80        B                     3/4           1/4           B              0       1     b     blue       0.57
                                                                                                 n     red
                  R          0                         1                                         r     red
      V 100       B                     1/2           1/2                                        b     blue       1/2
                                                                                                 n     red
                  R          x           y           1-x-y          R    1         0       0     r     blue
      U 20        B          x           y           1-x-y          B    1         0       0     b     blue        0
                                                                                                 n     blue
                  R         1            0             0            R    1         0       0     r     red
      U 80        B        3/8          5/8            0            B    1         0       0     b     blue       1/2
                                                                                                 n     blue
                  R         1            0             0                                         r     red
      U 100       B        1/2          1/2            0                                         b     blue       1/2
                                                                                                 n     blue
      x and y indicate any (feasible) probability.




3.2     Discussion of Design Choices

We briefly discuss our main design choices.
  Treatments. It is instinctive to think of   {1/3, 2/3, 1} as natural parametric choices. How-
ever, it is important to take into account the theoretical thresholds  and ¯ . We choose  = 0.80
to allow equal distance between the theoretical threshold ¯ --key for verifiable information--
and the full-commitment benchmark. The choice of  = 0.20 ensures symmetry. In our treat-
ments, we do not include the extreme case of  = 0 for two main reasons. First, this case is
the only one for which there is already experimental evidence, both for verifiable and unverifi-
able information. Our main interest lies in treatments with partial and full commitment: these
cases have not been tested in the lab and offer a unique opportunity to study the role of com-
mitment in communication. Second, the equilibrium outcomes at  = 0 are identical to those
at  = 0.20. In particular, results from the revision stage of treatments with  = 0.20 refer to a
setting where senders have effectively no commitment power and thus, should be seen as prox-
ies for U 0 and V 0.
  Human Receivers. Senders' behavior is the central and more novel aspect of our experiment.
Of course, senders' behavior depends on their expectation of how best to manipulate receivers,
which in turn depends on the receivers' observed behavior. One may think that there could

                                                                        13

                           Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
               Informativeness B

                       1
                                 V 20
                                                                               Verifiable Information
                                                                               Unverifiable Information

                                                           V 80

                                                                   V 100
                       1
                       2
                                                           U 80    U 100




                                 U 20
                                                                           Commitment 
                       0        0.20     = 1/2   ¯ = 2/3   0.80     1

                                   Figure 1: Predictions and Treatments.

be advantages to automating receivers' behavior to conform to the theory. We have three re-
sponses to this observation. First, we believe that senders' beliefs about how receivers interpret
what message they see is central to understanding strategic communication. For instance, the
main experimental finding in the literature on disclosure games, namely the failure of unravel-
ing, would likely go undetected in a world with automated receivers. Second, the implementa-
tion of automated Bayesian receivers in the lab is far from trivial as it requires an explanation
to senders of how the automated receivers behave. Failure to properly give this explanation de-
feats the potential purpose of introducing automated receivers. Third, as we show in Section 5.1
and Appendix A.1.2, many of our receivers are non-Bayesian, but their behavior is systematic
and is monotone in information, a property that is sufficient for our comparative static exercise.
  Message n. From a theoretical perspective, the inclusion of message n in treatments with
unverifiable information may seem redundant. However, in the experiment, it allows us to
switch from unverifiable to verifiable information with minimal changes to our design. This
increases our ability to compare results between different communication rules. It is perhaps
reassuring to note that the vast majority of senders in treatments with unverifiable information
employs a "natural" language--that is, message n is only marginally used.12
  Natural Language. Instead of using abstract labels for the messages, we label messages with
colors that match the labels of the states--red and blue. In this way, messages can acquire a
literal meaning. The focus of the paper is not on whether people understand how to coordinate
on a language (Blume et al. (1998)). Thus, we wished to remove one potential obstacle to
  12
     More specifically, the average total probability of message n, across all treatments with unverifiable informa-
tion, is about 10%.



                                                           14

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
communication that would have complicated the subjects' task and our analysis. In the rest
of the paper, as we explain our results, it is convenient to distinguish states and messages by
denoting the former with upper case letters (R and B) and the latter with lower case letters (r,
b, and n).
  Fixed Roles. Before the beginning of the experiment, subjects played two unpaid practice
rounds in which they played the game from both the sender's and the receiver's perspective.
Then, subjects were assigned to a fixed role--sender or receiver--and played such role for
the duration of the experiment. Because the tasks that subjects faced in our experiment were
nontrivial, we thought it would be important for them to gain relevant experience in their role.
  Additional Treatments. We conduct two robustness treatments, discussed in Appendix A.
In our main treatments, payoffs are specified so that the persuasion threshold is q = 1/2.
In an alternative payoff specification, we let q = 3/4. This allows us to test for changes in
informativeness while keeping commitment and communication rules fixed. We also study a
version of U 100 with only two messages: r and b. This allows us to study the effects of the
redundant message n in treatments with unverifiable information. We find that behavior in this
robustness treatment is in line with U 100, with slightly less noise.
  Random Rematching. We chose to have random rematching of pairs of senders and receivers
to simulate a one-shot interaction, while still allowing subjects to gain experience. Note, for in-
stance, that experiments on duopoly games find that fixed pairing generates collusion, whereas
random pairing does not Huck et al. (2001).


3.3       Measures of Informativeness

Empirically, we measure informativeness as the correlation between the color of the ball and
the receiver's guess. This measure has been extensively used in the experimental literature on
communication.13 To fix ideas, suppose the sender truthfully discloses the color of the ball.
Then, the receiver's final guess should be perfectly correlated with the state. Conversely, if the
sender babbles, the receiver's final guess will be uncorrelated with the state.
  To compute the correlation coefficient, we take advantage of our use of the strategy method
in the communication and guessing stages to obtain significantly more precise measures of the
correlation. However, in the revision stage, we only observe the sender's strategy conditional
on the realized state. We circumvent this problem of missing data by imputing the session-
  13
       See, for instance, Forsythe et al. (1999), Cai and Wang (2006), and Wang et al. (2010).




                                                         15

                        Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
specific average behavior of the senders.14 Thanks to this, we can analytically compute the
Pearson correlation coefficients (specifically, the phi coefficients, since our variables are bi-
nary). Through simulations, we verified that the improvement in precision from using this
method is significant.
  We use two different versions of the correlation coefficient between the state and the guess.
These two versions capture different aspects of equilibrium informativeness that are both use-
ful in different ways. With our first measure, we compute the correlation by using the observed
receiver's behavior. We denote such a measure by  and refer to it as the correlation coeffi-
cient, without further qualifications. This way of measuring informativeness has the drawback
of compounding the potential sender's inability to communicate with the potential receiver's
unresponsiveness to information. Suppose, for instance, that the sender truthfully discloses the
state, but the receiver does not listen. In this case,  = 0, although a great deal of information
was offered to the receiver. To isolate the sender's behavior from the mistakes of the receivers,
we use a second measure that we call Bayesian correlation, denoted by B . This is the correla-
tion coefficient implied by the sender's observed strategy combined with the guess of a hypo-
thetical Bayesian receiver. Clearly, in a perfect Bayesian equilibrium, receivers are assumed to
be Bayesian and thus  = B .
  Informativeness of senders' strategies can also be measured by looking at moments of the
distribution of induced (Bayesian) beliefs. This approach is akin to using B , as it disregards
the receiver's observed behavior. It differs from B in the following sense. Consider a sender's
strategy (C , R ) inducing a distribution of posterior beliefs as follows: if m = r, the induced
belief is just below 1/2, if m = b, it is 0. Message n, instead, is sent with zero probability. This
strategy does convey some information to the receiver. Yet, B (C , R ) = 0 because a Bayesian
receiver would guess blue regardless of the message. To circumvent this problem, we can
measure informativeness by computing moments (e.g. variance) of the distribution of induced
beliefs.
  In summary, the correlation , the Bayesian correlation B , and the moments of the distri-
bution of induced beliefs present different advantages and are useful to highlight different as-
pects of our data. While choosing one or the other does not change the qualitative conclusion
  14
     This choice seems natural and, due to the random rematching, receivers should hold comparable beliefs when
facing a random sender in the last ten rounds of the experiment. Our results are robust to different imputation
methods: For example, we can impute subject-specific averages and get essentially similar results. Also, it is
important to note that the results for treatments with  = 0.80 (where we perform the imputation) are similar to
those with  = 1 (where we do not need to use the imputation), suggesting the results are robust to our imputation
method.




                                                      16

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
of our analysis nor the prediction of our theory,15 these measures will be part of our toolbox in
the next sections.



4         Treatment Effects
In this section, we present the treatment effects, which are in line with the main predictions
of our theory. We will discuss two main sets of results. In Section 4.1, we test Proposition 1
by looking at how senders' behavior changes between the commitment and the revision stages
as well as how receivers' responsiveness to information changes with commitment. In Section
4.2, we test Proposition 2 and analyze how informativeness changes as we vary the level of
commitment. The predicted changes have opposite signs depending on the communication
rules.
    The results in this section also suggest that subjects' behavior is highly heterogeneous. The
treatment effects that we document are the result of the aggregation of different communication
"styles." While some subjects behave approximately as predicted by the theory, others under or
over react to commitment and rules. In Section 5, we will focus exclusively on these deviations
to better understand their sources and implications.


4.1         Commitment and Subjects' Behavior

4.1.1        Senders

We begin by focusing on senders' behavior. We explore the simplest and most direct evi-
dence to test whether senders understand how to take advantage of commitment. By exploiting
within-treatment variation, we observe how a sender's behavior changes between the commit-
ment and the revision stages. Proposition 1 governs our predictions, which have opposite signs
depending on whether the information is verifiable.
    In Figure 2, we present the average difference in senders' strategies between the revision and
the commitment stages in treatments U 80 and V 80. In the figure, a positive bar indicates a
message that, conditional on the state, is sent more often in the revision stage. A negative bar
indicates a message that is sent more often in the commitment stage.
    Let us first consider treatment U 80. From Table 2, the sender should be more informative in
the commitment stage than in the revision stage. In particular, when in the revision stage she
    15
         See Appendix D.1 for the case of posterior variance.


                                                           17

                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                                              Treatment U 80                                                            Treatment V 80
                  0.50                                                                        0.50

                                 m=r
                                 m=b
                                 m=n
                  0.25                                                                        0.25
R (m|) - C (m|)




                                                                            R (m|) - C (m|)
                  0.00                                                                        0.00




           -0.25                                                                       -0.25
                         Informativeness:                                                            Informativeness:
                         B (C ) = 0.43                                                               B (C ) = 0.83
                         B (R ) = 0.02                                                               B (R ) = 0.99
           -0.50                                                                       -0.50
                                      =R                       =B                                                 =R                     =B


                                         Figure 2: Sender's Strategy: Commitment vs. Revision,  = 0.8

learns that the state is B, she should replace message b with message r. That is, she should
renege on her commitment to telling the truth. The results in the left panel of Figure 2 are very
much in line with these predictions. More specifically, when the state is R, the equilibrium
strategy is not predicted to change between the commitment and the revision stages. That is, all
three bars should be of zero height. This is what we observe in the data. Although statistically
significant changes occur for r and b, they are very small in magnitude.16 Conversely, when
the state is B, message r should replace b in the revision stage, whereas message n should not
change. Again, qualitatively, this pattern is consistent with what we observe in the data. On
average senders increase the frequency of message r at the expenses of b ( p < 0.01). Overall,
as predicted by Proposition 1, the average informativeness of senders' strategies is significantly
higher ( p < 0.01) in the commitment stage--B (C ) = 0.43--than in the revision stage--
B (R ) = 0.02.
         We now turn to treatment V 80 (right panel of Figure 2). In contrast with the previous discus-
sion, the sender should be less informative in the commitment stage than in the revision stage
(Table 2). In particular, when learning that the state is R, she should replace message n with
message r, thus revealing the state. Conversely, when learning that the state is B, she should re-
place message b with message n. These predicted changes are consistent with what we observe
in the data. On average, when the ball is R, senders entering the revision stage increase the
likelihood of message r at the expense of message n. Instead, when the ball is B, they increase
     Unless noted otherwise, all statistical results allow for random effects at the subject level and are clustered
         16

at the session level. We include random effects to account for persistent heterogeneity across subjects; clustering
is motivated by potential session effects (see Fr´echette, 2012). Results for alternative specifications are reported
in the appendix. We note that the findings in the alternative specifications suggest that session-effects are not
important in this setting.


                                                                         18

                                            Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
the likelihood of message n at the expense of message b. Both changes are significant at the
1% level. Overall, we find that the directions of the predicted changes are matched by the data
as shown. Moreover, as predicted by Proposition 1, the average informativeness of senders'
strategies is significantly lower ( p < 0.01) in the commitment stage--B (C ) = 0.83--than in
the revision stage--B (R ) = 0.99.
  From a quantitative point of view, it is not surprising to see that, on average, senders fall
short of exactly matching the equilibrium predictions. It is perhaps more interesting to note that
most of the quantitative deviations come from behavior in the commitment stage. In contrast,
behavior in the revision stage is quite close to the theory. This distinction in the tendency of
behavior to conform with theory in the two different stages has important consequences, as we
discuss in Section 5.
  In sum, the joint qualitative evidence arising from treatments U 80 and V 80 suggests that
senders react to commitment and do so in ways that are consistent with the theory. One useful
feature of considering different communication rules is that they generate opposing predictions
within the same environment. On average, we see that senders exploit their commitment power
to strategically hide good news (i.e., m = n if  = R) when information is verifiable, and
disclose bad news (i.e., m = b if  = B) when information is unverifiable. Once in the revision
stage, these commitments are no longer optimal, and indeed senders partially renege on them.
We consistently observe the average informativeness of each stage changing as predicted.


4.1.2   Receivers

We now focus on receivers. Our goal is to evaluate the extent to which they understand the
strategic implications of commitment and whether their reactions are consistent with the theory.
To explicitly test for this hypothesis we exploit across-treatment variations. We first introduce
the idea of interim vs final posteriors. Consider the posterior belief that a Bayesian receiver
would hold upon observing message m given some (C , R ), if she were to ignore the existence
of the revision stage. We call such belief the interim posterior, which is formally equal to
µ0 (R)C (m|R)/(      µ0 ()C (m|)). Clearly, interim and final posteriors--that is, those that do
take into account the revision stage--coincide when  = 1. More generally, given C and
R , the higher the degree of commitment , the closer the interim posterior is to the final one.
We use this simple observation to test whether receivers understand the strategic implications
of different levels of commitment. We should observe different guessing behavior at identical
interim beliefs for different degrees of commitment. In particular, at high levels of commitment,
interim beliefs should be highly predictive of receivers' behavior; at low levels of commitment,

                                                 19

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                                           Unverifiable Information                                                                  Verifiable Information
                       1.0                                                                                      1.0
                                   U 20                                                                                     V 20
                                   U 100                                                                                    V 100
                       0.8                                                                                      0.8
Frequency of a = red




                                                                                         Frequency of a = red
                       0.6                                                                                      0.6




                       0.4                                                                                      0.4




                       0.2                                                                                      0.2




                       0.0                                                                                      0.0
                             0.0     0.2        0.4        0.6         0. 8   1.0                                     0.0     0.2        0.4        0.6         0.8   1.0
                                    Interim Posterior Conditional on m = r                                                   Interim Posterior Conditional on m = n


                                   Figure 3: Receiver's Response to Persuasive Messages:  = 0.2 vs.  = 1

they should not.17
                       This analysis is carried out in Figure 3. We look at how receivers' responsiveness to interim
posteriors changes in treatments with low ( = 0.20) versus high ( = 1) commitment.18
We plot polynomial fits of the average receiver's guess as a function of the interim posterior
induced by the observed sender's C , the strategy from the commitment stage, and message m.
                       We begin by comparing treatments U 20 and U 100. Our focus is on message m = r. If
receivers understood the implications of commitment, this message should lead to a guess
of blue in U 20, irrespective of the interim posterior. In U 20, the interim posterior should
have little or no impact on the receiver's guess because it is likely that message r did not
come from the observed C . Therefore, the interim posterior is likely to be far from the final
posterior. By contrast, in U 100, the interim posterior should have a substantial positive effect
on the probability that the receiver guesses red (Table 2). Indeed, interim and final posteriors
coincide in this case. We report our results in the left panel of Figure 3. Consistently with the
predictions, the estimated receivers' response is mostly flat in U 20 and unresponsive to interim
beliefs, whereas it is strictly increasing in U 100.19
                       Similar--if not stronger--evidence is found when comparing V 20 and V 100 (right panel
of Figure 3). By the nature of verifiable information, messages r and b induce trivial interim
beliefs of either 1 or 0. For this reason, we focus on message n, which is the one requiring
                   17
      We use Bayesian posteriors as a benchmark against which to compare actual receivers' behavior. The latter
may of course be far from Bayesian, something that we will investigate in Section 5.
   18
      In the online appendix, Figure D18 shows the comparison between  = 0.20 and  = 0.80.
   19
      The linearity in posteriors may be suggestive of probability matching. In Appendix B, we show that it instead
results from aggregating receivers who employ heterogeneous threshold strategies.


                                                                                    20

                                             Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
receivers to be sophisticated. We find that receivers' guessing behavior in V 20 is quite flat in
the interim posterior. In contrast, responsiveness is strong and positive for treatment V 100.20
  Overall, the joint evidence coming from Figure 3 suggests that, on average, receivers under-
stand and react to commitment in ways that are consistent with the theory. They correctly an-
ticipate senders' incentives to renege on their commitments. As a consequence, receivers un-
derstand that messages inducing identical interim beliefs should be treated differently for dif-
ferent degrees of commitment. While this shows that receivers react to commitment, their be-
havior could still be far from Bayesian. In line with a large body of experimental literature,
Figure 3 suggests that this may be the case. We return to this point in Section 5 when we ex-
plore in detail the main quantitative deviations that we observe.


4.2     Commitment and Informativeness

The starkest prediction of our theory concerns how equilibrium informativeness changes with
commitment under verifiable and unverifiable information. Proposition 2 predicts that equilib-
rium informativeness should increase with commitment under unverifiable information, whereas
it should decrease under verifiable information. To test this prediction, we compute the aver-
age Bayesian correlation B (C , R ) for each sender and then plot its cumulative distribution
function (CDF). We present the results in Figure 4. Each dot represents the average informa-
tiveness of a given sender in one of our treatments.
  Two patterns emerge from this figure. First, when information is unverifiable (left panel), we
observe a noticeable first-order stochastic increase in the informativeness of U 100 and U 80
relative to U 20. That is, informativeness increases in commitment not just on average, but
rather at all percentiles of the distribution. Moreover, U 80 and U 100 are unranked, as predicted
by the theory (Table 2). Second, when information is verifiable (right panel), we observe a first-
order stochastic decrease in informativeness of V 100 relative to V 20. This change is relatively
less pronounced in V 80 relative to V 20. Nonetheless, informativeness appears to decrease in
commitment not just on average, but at all (or most, for V 80) percentiles of the distribution.
Again, this is consistent with the theory (Table 2).
  To provide further evidence on these comparative statics, we can also look at the posterior
distributions that senders induce with their communication strategies. This is an alternative
  20
     The probability that the receiver guesses red when the interim posterior is below 1/2 does not differ statisti-
cally between  = 0.2 and  = 1, both for the case with unverifiable information (left panel) and verifiable infor-
mation (right panel). Instead, for interim posteriors above 1/2 we find a statistically significant difference in both
cases ( p < 0.01). Perhaps more importantly, the magnitude of the change--below and above 1/2--is sizable: 56
versus 14 percentage points in the verifiable case, and 40 versus 6 percentage points in the unverifiable case.

                                                         21

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                                         Unverifiable Information                                                                    Verifiable Information
             1.00                                                                                       1.00
                                                                                                                      V 20
                                                                                                                      V 80
                                                                                                                      V 100
             0.75                                                                                       0.75
Percentile




                                                                                           Percentile
             0.50                                                                                       0.50




             0.25                                                                                       0.25

                                                                           U 20
                                                                           U 80
                                                                           U 100
             0.00                                                                                       0.00
                    0.00          0.25             0.50             0.75       1.00                            0.00           0.25            0.50            0.75   1.00
                                                          B
                              Bayesian Correlation  (C , R ) by Sender                                                 Bayesian Correlation B (C , R ) by Sender


                           Figure 4: Cumulative Distribution of Sender-Average B (C , R ) by Treatment

measure of informativeness that, in particular, does not depend on payoffs. We focus attention
on the expected posteriors conditional on the state. That is, given C , R and , we compute
         m          (C (m|) + (1 - )R (m|) µ(m, C , R ). The left panel of Figure 5 displays the kernel
density estimates of the observed expected posteriors. The vertical dashed lines indicate the
theoretical predictions. For instance, for U 100, the expected posterior conditional on state R is
at 1/2 because, in equilibrium, message r is sent with probability one and induces a posterior of
1/2. Conversely, the expected posterior conditional on state B is at 1/4 because, in equilibrium,
messages r and b are sent with 50% probability and induce posteriors of 1/2 and 0, respectively.
             In Figure 5, we see a sizable shift of the kernel distributions in the direction predicted by the
theory, for both verifiable and unverifiable information. Moving from U 20 to U 100, the two
distributions become more spread out, whereas moving from V 20 to V 100, the posteriors move
closer, as predicted by theory. These shifts are quantified in the right panel of Figure 5, which
reports the average difference between the expected posterior conditional on R (in solid black)
and the one conditional on B (in dashed gray). The table shows that the data move in the right
direction for both verifiable and unverifiable treatments, but that the mean difference is much
closer to the theoretical predictions in the case of the unverifiable treatments than in the case
of verifiable treatments.
             Overall, the findings from Figure 4 and Figure 5 validate the asymmetric comparative statics
of Proposition 2. The theory appears to explain the main qualitative features of how senders'
behavior changes with commitment and rules. Under verifiable information, senders use com-
mitment to decrease the total amount of information that they convey to receivers. Under un-
verifiable information, senders use commitment to increase the total amount of information


                                                                                      22

                                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
    0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
                                          V20                                                       V80                                                      V100




                                                              0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18




                                                                                                                        0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Commitment ()
           Density




                                                                     Density




                                                                                                                               Density
                                                                                                                                                                                                   20%           80%          100%
                                                                                                                                                                                  Verifiable
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.80          0.78          0.69
                               0   .2    .4     .6   .8   1                              0   .2    .4     .6   .8   1                              0   .2    .4     .6   .8   1   Difference:
                                     Posterior on Red                                          Posterior on Red                                          Posterior on Red                          (1.00)        (0.40)        (0.25)
                                                                                                                                                                                                  B      R      B      R      B      R
                                          U20                                                       U80                                                      U100                     Mean:      0.07   0.87   0.07   0.86   0.10   0.79
                                                              0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18




                                                                                                                        0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
                                                                                                                                                                                  Unverifiable
    0 2 4 6 8 1012141618




                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.11          0.24          0.30
             Density




                                                                     Density




                                                                                                                               Density
                                                                                                                                                                                  Difference:
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (0.00)        (0.25)        (0.25)
                                                                                                                                                                                                  B      R      B      R      B      R
                                                                                                                                                                                      Mean:      0.30   0.41   0.25   0.49   0.23   0.53

                               0   .2    .4     .6   .8   1                              0   .2    .4     .6   .8   1                              0   .2    .4     .6   .8   1
                                     Posterior on Red                                          Posterior on Red                                          Posterior on Red

 Solid (black): B ball.
 Short dash (gray): R ball.
 Vertical dashed lines indicate the equilibrium predictions.




Figure 5: On the left: Kernel Density of Expected Posterior Conditional on State. On the
right: Average Differences in Expected Posteriors Conditional on State (theoretical values in
parentheses)

that they convey to the receivers. This asymmetric use of commitment that we observe in the
data shows that, on average, senders understand the strategic tension that underlies our model.



5                              Understanding Departures from Theory
In the previous section, we showed evidence of treatment effects that match the main qualitative
predictions of the model. Qualitatively, senders and receivers react to variations in commitment
in the predicted ways. These treatment effects, however, hide substantial heterogeneity at the
subject's level, which generates quantitative deviations from the theory. In this section, we
document and explain these deviations.
    We begin by looking at the average informativeness by treatment. Table 3 reports the pre-
dicted Bayesian correlation (left panel) and the observed one (right panel), averaged across ses-
sions and subjects. As expected, we note again that informativeness moves in the right direc-
tion as commitment changes. Moreover, in treatments with partial commitment, we note that
more information is conveyed by the senders under verifiable information than under unveri-
fiable information. These changes are in line with Section 4.2 and with our theory. However,
Table 3 also highlights important quantitative deviations.
    For each communication rule, the observed changes are more muted relative to the theoretical
predictions. In the case of unverifiable information for example, the observed increase in infor-


                                                                                                                                                       23

                                                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                               Table 3: Average Bayesian Correlations B

               B ­ Theoretical Predictions                                 B ­ Observed

                       Degree of Commitment                                 Degree of Commitment ()

                       = 0.2      = 0.8      =1                            = 0.2        = 0.8       =1

       Verifiable       1         0.57       0.50          Verifiable      0.90         0.84    >   0.77
                                                                                                     
       Unverifiable     0         0.50       0.50          Unverifiable    0.00    <    0.33        0.34

        Notes: Symbol ">" indicates p < 0.01. Green symbol: as predicted. Red symbol: not as predicted.


mativeness from U 20 to U 100 is only 68% of the change predicted by the theory. In the case of
verifiable information, the theory predicts that, moving from V 20 to V 100, we should observe
a drop of 0.50 in the Bayesian correlation. Instead, in the data the corresponding reduction is
only 0.13, or 26% of the predicted change. More specifically, in treatments with low commit-
ment, we find evidence of undercommunication when information is verifiable and overcom-
munication when it is not. This is in line with the existing experimental literature on disclosure
(e.g., Jin et al., 2020) and cheap talk (e.g., Cai and Wang, 2006), respectively.21 Interestingly,
these results do not extend to high-commitment environments. When the level of commitment
is high, we find that the opposite holds: senders tend to overcommunicate in treatments with
verifiable information and undercommunicate in treatments with unverifiable information.
  As a consequence of this observation, communication rules affect informativeness even when
this is not predicted by the theory. In particular, treatments V 100 and U 100 are predicted by
Proposition 2 to be equally informative, but the observed Bayesian correlations are 0.78 and
0.34, respectively. This difference (significance at p < 0.01) represents a remarkable deviation
from the theory. Furthermore, by comparing the black lines on the left and right panels of
Figure 4, we can see that there is a gap at all percentiles of the distribution of B .
  We refer to these quantitative departures from the theory as the informativeness gap. In
principle, this gap can be due to anomalous behavior on the part of receivers, senders, or an
interaction between the two. In Section 5.1, we first explore receiver behavior and argue that
despite their clear departures from the Bayesian benchmark, it is unlikely that receivers are
primarily responsible for this gap. In Section 5.2, we turn our attention to sender behavior.
We show evidence of a behavioral bias that could explain these deviations. We call this bias
commitment blindness and show that indeed it generates opposing effects on informativeness
depending on the communication rule and thus could generate a gap. Finally, in Section 5.3,
  21
    In Appendix B, we show other ways in which our low-commitment treatments are in line with the existing
experimental evidence that test no-commitment environments.


                                                      24

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
we estimate a structural model that accounts for such heterogeneity in senders' behavior and
show that it can explain a large part of the observed deviations.


5.1     Can Receiver Behavior Explain the Informativeness Gap?

Although Section 4.1.2 illustrates that receivers do react to commitment, a large body of ex-
perimental literature suggests that their behavior is likely to be non-Bayesian.22 In Appendix
A.1.2 and B, we take a detailed look at receivers' behavior. Our analysis reveals that receiver
behavior is indeed non-Bayesian. Yet, it is quite systematic. For example, most receiver behav-
ior is consistent with threshold strategies: they guess red if the posterior is higher than some
receiver-specific threshold. However, our analysis suggests that receiver behavior is unlikely
to be the main explanation for the informativeness gap. We discuss three main reasons for this.
  First, we note that this gap cannot be directly determined by receivers' non-Bayesian behav-
ior. Indeed, we expressed these gaps in terms of B , the Bayesian correlation coefficient. By
construction, this measure is immune to receivers' mistakes, as explained in Section 3.23
  Second, let us entertain the possibility that the informativeness gap could be indirectly gen-
erated by receivers' non-Bayesian behavior through its effects on sender behavior. Suppose
that receivers are inherently skeptical of message n and senders know it (as in Jin et al., 2020).
That is, suppose that receivers guess blue no matter how high the posterior induced by mes-
sage n. In treatments with unverifiable information, such a receiver's bias would have negligi-
ble consequences on senders' behavior: message n can be avoided in equilibrium and indeed
is not used often in the data. In contrast, in treatments V 80 and V 100, message n plays a key
role in the equilibrium prediction. In the presence of such a bias against message n, senders'
optimal strategy would then have to be fully informative, thus contributing to the informative-
ness gap. This rationalization is unsatisfactory for two reasons. The first one is theoretical, as
this bias only explains the overcommunication in verifiable treatments and not the undercom-
munication in unverifiable ones. The second one is empirical: we do not see evidence of such
a bias. Data show that receivers respond in similar ways to message n in treatments with verifi-
able information and r in treatments with unverifiable information. This can be seen in Figure
3. The dashed lines report receivers' responsiveness to message r in U 100 (left panel) and n in
  22
     See, e.g., Charness and Levin (2005) and (Holt, 2007, Chapter 30) for an overview of such literature.
  23
     When we explicitly include receivers' behavior--that is, when we compute  instead of B --we find infor-
mativeness gaps of similar magnitudes. In particular, we find that  is 0.22 and 0.68 for treatments U 100 and
V 100, respectively. Similarly, we find that  is 0.19 and 0.78 for treatments U 80 and V 80, respectively. Note that
receivers' mistakes create a garbling in the mapping from states to guesses and therefore can only decrease the
correlation  relative to B .


                                                        25

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                                                       1.25       U 100
                                                                  V 100
                                                                  Predictions
                                                       1.00




                            Sender's Expected Payoff
                                                       0.75




                                                       0.50




                                                       0.25




                                                       0.00
                                                           0.00          0.25            0.50             0.75   1.00
                                                                          x ­ Parametrized Sender's Strategy



                          Figure 6: Sender's Empirical Expected Payoff

V 100 (right panel), controlling for their induced posterior. Receivers' responsiveness does not
appear to be significantly different in the two cases.
  Third, let us again entertain the possibility that this gap could be indirectly generated by re-
ceivers' non-Bayesian behavior, but in ways that are more complicated than our previous argu-
ment. To address this point, we estimate a simple model of receivers' behavior and then com-
pute the sender's empirical best response. To be concise, we focus attention on treatments with
full commitment. In Figure 6, we report the expected payoff that a sender would earn by play-
ing various strategies C when facing a typical receiver in our sample. For each treatment, we
first fit a probit model to estimate the probability that a = red given message m, its induced
posterior, and subject fixed effects. Second, we use the estimated model to compute the ex-
pected payoff that a sender would earn when choosing various commitment strategies C . More
specifically, we define a class of information structures parametrized by x  [0, 1]. This class
is rich enough to approximate most of the observed strategies, including the equilibrium strate-
gies for these treatments. In particular, for U 100, we consider strategies such that C (r|R) = 1
and C (b| B) = 1 - C (r| B) = x. For V 100, we consider strategies such that C (n|R) = 1 and
C (b| B) = x. In both U 100 and V 100, C is the equilibrium strategy when x = 1/2 (Table 2); it
is uninformative when x = 0; and it is fully informative when x = 1. More generally, B (C ) is
weakly increasing in x.
  Figure 6 shows that receiver behavior leads to a payoff function for the sender that is flatter
than it would be if all receivers were fully Bayesian. Moreover, for both treatments, the sender's
best response to the receivers' behavior requires x > 1/2. This is intuitive: x = 1/2 is a
knife-edge condition that leaves a Bayesian receiver just indifferent. Although receivers do not
conform with the Bayesian paradigm, the vast majority of them are more likely to guess red
following a message that carries more evidence in favor of the state being R. This monotone


                                                                                      26

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
responsiveness in induced beliefs is a milder rationality requirement than Bayesianism, and it
has been documented in other experiments (see Camerer (1998) for a discussion). Importantly,
as shown by Figure 6, the extent of monotonicity displayed in our experiment is sufficient to
confirm a key insight from models of communication under commitment, namely the fact that
the best-response involves some degree of strategic obfuscation.24 Therefore, an uninformative
C is worse than a fully informative C , which is in turn worse than commitment to mixing. The
finding that senders' empirical expected payoff is non monotone in the amount of information
conveyed to the receiver is consistent with the theory.
  More importantly, Figure 6 shows that receiver behavior alone appears insufficient to ex-
plain the large gaps in informativeness that we documented in Table 3. If senders were best-
responding to the typical receivers' behavior, we would observe B (C ) = 0.60 in treatment
U 100 and B (C ) = 0.75 in treatment V 100. This explanation is, therefore, unsatisfactory on
two levels. First, it captures only a small fraction (35%) of the observed gap. Second, the em-
pirical best response for U 100 leads to an increase in informativeness--not a decrease, as it is
observed.
  Overall, the three points above suggest that receivers' non-equilibrium behavior is insuffi-
cient to explain the informativeness gap. As we show in the remainder of the section, senders
are likely to be the primary drivers of these observed deviations.


5.2    Commitment Blindness

In this section, we introduce a simple bias in senders' behavior that can explain a large part of
the informativeness gap. We begin by noting that senders employ very heterogeneous commu-
nication "styles" as illustrated in Figure 4. Understanding the sources of this heterogeneity is
key to explaining the informativeness gap.
  To this end, we introduce the notion of commitment blindness. A sender is commitment-
blind if she behaves under commitment as if she had no commitment power at all. More specif-
ically, her commitment strategy is the equilibrium strategy of a hypothetical game with  = 0.
Commitment blindness has very different implications depending on the communication rule.
Specifically, when information is unverifiable,  = 0 is equivalent to a cheap-talk game and the
optimal strategy involves babbling. Such a strategy is uninformative (B = 0). If instead infor-
mation is verifiable,  = 0 indicates an information-disclosure game and the optimal strategy
  24
     Relatedly, de Clippel and Zhang (2020) explore the relative robustness of the Bayesian Persuasion model if
the receiver is non-Bayesian.



                                                      27

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
involves unraveling; hence, it is fully informative (B = 1). These very different levels of infor-
mativeness suggest that commitment blindness could explain the unpredicted gap that we have
documented: the same behavioral bias can inflate the average informativeness in treatments
with verifiable information and deflate it in treatments with unverifiable information.25
  Note that commitment blindness is different from lying aversion and has different implica-
tions. To see this, consider a sender who is fully averse to lying, regardless of her commitment
power. To begin, when information is unverifiable, such a sender does not play the equilib-
rium strategy of a hypothetical game with  = 0. Moreover, she would play highly informa-
tive strategies irrespective of the communication rule. Thus, lying aversion cannot successfully
generate the informativeness gap that we observe in the data.
  We exploit our experimental design to test for the presence of senders who are compatible
with commitment blindness. This can only be done in treatments with partial commitment.
Indeed, one needs to observe how the same sender behaves in two opposing scenarios, with and
without commitment power. Therefore, we focus our attention on treatments U 80 and V 80 and
compare how sender behavior changes between the commitment and the revision stages. We
seek to identify senders who (i) play the same strategy in both the commitment and revision
stage and (ii) play the equilibrium strategy in the revision stage as defined in Table 2.
  In contrast to our work from Section 4.1.1--where we focused on some features of aver-
age senders' strategies--we now describe their behavior at the observation level. Our goal is
to identify the representative strategies (C , R ) played in the treatments under consideration.
Such an analysis presents a technical challenge, as senders' strategies are complex and high-
dimensional objects. To organize the observed strategies, we use a standard machine-learning
algorithm, the k-means, to cluster strategies into four representative groups (that is, k = 4).26
We cluster the strategies by treatment and report the results in Figures 7 and 8 for treatments
U 80 and V 80, respectively. To visualize all the data, we plot the clustered strategies onto two
separate panels, one for C and one for R . The representative strategies are indicated with
larger markers. Note that strategies that appear similar in the commitment (respectively re-
vision) stage may belong to different clusters because they differ in the revision (respectively
  25
      The experimental literature on Cournot competition with endogenous timing also studies commitment in the
lab. A player can choose to publicly commit to a production quantity, thus emerging as a Stackelberg leader and
increasing her payoff. See, for instance, Huck and M¨    uller (2000), Huck et al. (2001), and Morgan and V´  ardy
(2004, 2013)
   26
      A commonly used method to group data is k-means clustering (see, MacQueen, 1967; Hastie et al., 2009;
Murphy, 2012) The procedure selects points to be the centers of clusters: an observation is associated with the
closest center, and the centers are iterated on to minimize the total within-cluster variance. We choose k = 4 and
input entries: C (m|) and R (m|) for m  {r, b} and   {R, B}.



                                                       28

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                        U 80 ­ Commitment Stage                                               U 80 ­ Revision Stage
      100                                                              100
                                                                                                                                 Prediction, B = 0.50
                                                                                                                                 Freq 46.0%, B = 0.51
       80                                                               80                                                       Freq 30.0%, B = 0.01
                                                                                                                                 Freq 9.0%, B = 0.64
                                                                                                                                 Freq 15.0%, B = 0.2
       60                                                               60
C (b|B )




                                                                 R (b|B )
       40                                                               40




       20                                                               20




           0                                                                0

               0   20         40                 60   80   100                  0        20       40             60   80   100
                                    C (r | R )                                                         R (r|R)


                              Figure 7: Treatment U 80 ­ Clustering of Senders' Strategies

commitment) stage.27
      We begin our analysis with treatment U 80, that is, Figure 7. The strategies indicated by red
circles are those compatible with commitment blindness. The representative strategy consists
of sending message r regardless of the state, in both the commitment and the revision stage.
This strategy coincides with equilibrium behavior in the revision stage (Table 2). As expected,
this strategy is mostly uninformative, that is, B = 0.01. This strategy is also quite common:
30% of the observed strategies are of this kind. We now discuss the remaining clusters of Figure
7. The strategies indicated by blue squares are compatible with equilibrium behavior and
are the most prevalent ones. These strategies drive most of the treatment effects documented
in Section 4. Note that the induced informativeness B = 0.51 is remarkably close to the
equilibrium prediction of 0.50. Strategies indicated by yellow circles are consistent with a
weak form of lying aversion and are not prevalent in our data. Finally, strategies marked by
green diamonds belong to a residual cluster that cannot be grouped in any of the categories
above. We interpret these residual strategies as noise.
      We now turn to the analysis of sender behavior in treatment V 80 (Figure 8). Again, strate-
gies indicated by red circles are those compatible with commitment blindness. The represen-
tative strategy consists of sending message r given R, and n given B, in both the commitment
and the revision stages. This coincides with equilibrium behavior in the revision stage (Table
2). In contrast to U 80, commitment-blind strategies are highly informative (B = 0.94). In
terms of prevalence, 33% of the observed strategies are of this kind. We now discuss the re-
maining clusters of Figure 8. Strategies indicated by blue squares are consistent with equilib-
rium behavior. They react to commitment and induce an informativeness B = 0.57, which
     27
    We present data at the observation level, but these clusters capture persistent senders' types, with a typical
sender playing in the same cluster more than 80% of the times.



                                                                                    29

                                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                            V 80 ­ Commitment Stage                                               V 80 ­ Revision Stage
      100                                                                  100
                                                                                                                                     Prediction, B = 0.57
                                                                                                                                     Freq 23.0%, B = 0.57
       80                                                                   80                                                       Freq 33.0%, B = 0.94
                                                                                                                                     Freq 22.0%, B = 0.89
                                                                                                                                     Freq 22.0%, B = 0.93
       60                                                                   60
C (b|B )




                                                                     R (b|B )
       40                                                                   40




       20                                                                   20




           0                                                                    0

                0      20         40                 60   80   100                  0        20       40             60   80   100
                                        C (r | R )                                                         R (r|R)


                                  Figure 8: Treatment V 80 ­ Clustering of Senders' Strategies

is at the equilibrium level. Strategies indicated by purple stars also react to commitment and
play the equilibrium strategy in the revision stage, but fail to conceal information in the com-
mitment stage. As a result, they induce higher-than-optimal levels of informativeness, that is,
B = 0.89. Together, these last two clusters we discussed represent 45% of the data and drive
the treatment effects documented in Section 4. Finally, strategies indicated by yellow triangles
are consistent with lying aversion and induce high informativeness, that is, B = 0.93.
      In sum, we have documented the existence of a behavioral type that is consistent with com-
mitment blindness. Such behavior has opposite implications depending on the communication
rule. Under unverifiable information, these senders tend to decrease the average informative-
ness. Under verifiable information, they tend to increase the average informativeness. Thus, the
same behavioral bias could jointly explain the asymmetric departures documented in Table 3.


5.3                 QRE: Quantifying Departures From Equilibrium

In this final part of the section, our goal is to quantitatively reproduce the gap in informative-
ness through a structural model. This model has two components. First, it accounts for the het-
erogeneity in senders' behavior that we documented. Second, it accounts for players' mistakes
and noisy behavior through a quantal-response equilibrium (QRE).28 We use the estimates from
this structural model to compute the implied correlations--both B and --and show that they
reproduce between 70% and 80% of the observed informativeness gap.
      In a QRE, players are assumed to respond with errors to their beliefs, which in turn correctly
account for the errors that other players make. Two technical challenges make the estimation of
our structural model nontrivial: first, senders choose among a continuum of high-dimensional
     28
               See Goeree et al. (2016).



                                                                                        30

                                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
strategies, and second, our games have multiple stages and feature incomplete information.
We address the first challenge by using the same k-means algorithm that we discussed in Sec-
tion 5.2. We address the second challenge by using the methodology in Bajari and Hortacsu
(2005). In the following paragraphs, we explain these two points in more detail. For simplic-
ity, we will focus attention on treatments U 100 and V 100. Although a similar analysis could
be performed under partial commitment, the focus on full commitment significantly simplifies
our estimations. Moreover, the informativeness gap in these treatments is the farthest from the
theoretical predictions and thus, the more interesting to explain.
  Discretization and Senders' Heterogeneity. To estimate QRE, we first need to discretize
senders' strategy space  into a grid containing k representative strategies. This is usually
achieved by manually gridding the strategy space (e.g., Camerer et al. (2016)). This approach
is productive especially when the strategy space is sufficiently simple, e.g., one-dimensional.
In our case, the high dimensionality of the strategy space renders this approach infeasible. A
natural solution is to use a clustering algorithm. We use the k-means algorithm to identify
the set of representative strategies k .29 As before, we set k = 4. Importantly, we compute
k separately for each treatment. This allows us to capture the very different ways in which
senders play in treatments with verifiable and unverifiable information, as shown in Section
5.2. In particular, it allows us to capture the different implications of commitment blindness
for these two treatments.
  Multi-Stage QRE. For representative strategy C  k and message m  M , denote by
U (a, C , m) the receiver's expected payoff from choosing action a  {aL , aH }. The Logit QRE
model specifies that a receiver of type R  0 chooses action aH with the following probability:

                                                               eR U (aH ,C ,m)
                               PR (aH |C , m, R ) =                                     .
                                                      eR U (aH ,C ,m) + eR U (aL ,C ,m)

That is, the probability of choosing the optimal action increases in the utility difference between
the two possible actions. Given R , the sender's expected utility from choosing C is given by
V (C |R ) :=        ,m   µ0 ()C (m|)PR (aH |C , m, R ). That is, the sender takes the receiver's errors
into account when computing her expected payoff from playing a certain strategy. As in the
receiver's case, the probability that a sender of type S  0 chooses C is given by

                                                              eS V (C |R )
                                     PS (C |S , R ) =               S V (C |R )
                                                                                .
                                                             C k e

  29
       Figure D19 reports k-means clusters for treatments with full commitment.




                                                        31

                         Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                                        Table 4: QRE-Implied Correlations

                                         Bayesian Correlation B               Correlation 

                           Treatment    QRE-Implied      Observed       QRE-Implied      Observed

                             V 100           0.72          0.77              0.64          0.68
                             U 100           0.41          0.34              0.26          0.22



The parameters (S , R ) capture the extent to which players best respond to their opponent's
behavior. At one extreme, as i  , the player in role i never makes a mistake. At the other
extreme, when i = 0, the player in role i randomizes uniformly across all available strategies.
We allow S            R since senders and receivers face substantially different tasks.
  Estimation. We now describe how we estimate this model. Notice that our game has multiple
stages. In treatments with full commitment, there are two stages and, importantly, the receiver
perfectly observes the strategy chosen by the sender. Whether this strategy was chosen by
mistake is irrelevant for the receiver, who simply responds as described above. Effectively, the
receiver solves a single-agent decision problem. Thus, we can estimate    ^ R independent of S .
Instead, the sender, moves before the receiver. Therefore, she must form expectations about the
receiver's behavior. Since R enters the payoff function V (C |R ), the equilibrium S depends
on the true R . We can consistently estimate V (C |R ) for each strategy C by computing the
average sender's expected payoffs of playing strategy C (Bajari and Hortacsu, 2005). Using
maximum likelihood, it is then straightforward to estimate (^S , ^ R ).30

  Simulation. Given these estimates, we simulate a dataset with 104 observations and compute
counterfactual correlations  and Bayesian correlations B . The state  is drawn at random
from a Bernoulli distribution with parameter 1/3, just as in the experiment. The sender chooses
strategies in k according to PS (C | ^S , ^ R ). Message m is generated according to the chosen
C and the realized state . The receiver chooses aH with probability PR (aH |C , m, ^ R ).

  In Table 4, we report both the QRE-implied correlations as well as the observed ones. The
main conclusion from this table is that the combination of (i) treatment-specific clustering and
(ii) noisy players' behavior as modeled by QRE can reproduce correlations that are remark-
ably similar to those we observed. In particular, the model explains between 70% and 80% of
the observed gaps in informativeness. It is useful to point out that, in the procedure described
above, we fit data in two separate steps. First, we use the data from each treatment to compute
k . That is, the representative strategies of treatment U 100 are allowed to differ from those
for treatment V 100. The need for doing so follows from the discussion in Section 5.2, where
  30
       For U 100, we have (^S , ^ R ) = (0.41, 1.68). For V 100, we have (^S , ^ R ) = (0.21, 1.28).


                                                             32

                         Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
we argued that communication rules affect senders' play in a substantial and unpredicted way.
Second, we use the data again to estimate treatment-specific (^S , ^ R ). By doing so, we account
for inevitable noise in the behavior of senders and receivers. The combination of these method-
ologies generates correlations that closely fit the data.


5.4    Alternative Approaches

We now briefly discuss other theories that could in principle account for the informativeness
gap: level-k, other-regarding preferences, and lying aversion. Although behaviors compatible
with these theories may be present in our data to some extent, we argue that they are not the
most natural avenues to explore, as they either fail to account for some of the key deviations or
they would need to be enhanced relative to their standard specifications.
  For instance, let us consider the simplest form of a level-k model.31 A key component of a
level-k analysis is the specification of level-0 players. First, in our full-commitment treatments,
the strategy of the sender is fully observable by the receiver. Thus, there is little room for the
different levels of strategic sophistication on the part of receivers to play a role. Second, in
treatments with verifiable information, there is no leeway in specifying receivers' beliefs (or
behavior) following the verifiable messages r or b. The only degree of freedom is in specifying
non-equilibrium beliefs and play conditional on message n. The natural assumption is that a
level-0 receiver naively updates in a passive manner, with a posterior of 1/3, the same as the
prior. However, in our setting, such belief leads the receiver to guess blue, the same guess she
would take following message b. The fact that receivers' behavior is identical between level-
0 and equilibrium play implies that this concept, taken as is, gives us little leverage to explain
departures from equilibrium in our environment. This is of course not to say that a more
elaborate version of level-k--possibly combined with other approaches--may not be a fruitful
avenue to explore.
  Other-regarding preferences have been successfully used to understand important patterns
in a variety of experiments (see Cooper and Kagel, 2016). However, the informativeness gap
entails departures that, in some cases, go in a direction that is opposite to the common predic-
tion of such models--namely, away from equating players' payoffs. For instance, in U 100, a
commitment-blind sender plays an uninformative strategy and thus, earns the lowest possible
payoff (see Figure 6), while the receiver can secure an expected payoff of $1.33 (or $2 times
2/3) by guessing blue. By playing the empirical best response, the sender would instead in-
  31
    Crawford et al. (2013) reviews this literature. In cheap-talk games, Cai and Wang (2006), Kawagoe and
Takizawa (2009), and Wang et al. (2010) discuss level-k models.

                                                   33

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
crease her payoffs away from zero, while also increasing the payoff for the receiver. This sug-
gests that commitment-blind senders do not behave in a way that is compatible with the spirit
of many models of other-regarding preferences. Of course, this literature is incredibly rich, and
there may be additional and more-complex types of behaviors that could be useful to explore
in the future.
  Finally, lying aversion has been studied in the context of cheap-talk experiments (e.g., Gneezy,
2005; S´
       anchez-Pag´
                 es and Vorsatz, 2007; Hurkens and Kartik, 2009). Lying aversion is consis-
tent with the fraction of subjects who always tell the truth, as discussed in Section 5.2. How-
ever, such behavior is markedly different from the behavior of a commitment-blind sender, es-
pecially in treatments with unverifiable information. More importantly, it leads to implications
that are, in principle, different from the observed departures: Lying aversion should indeed
inflate the informativeness in treatments with unverifiable information, whereas the opposite
happens in the data.



References
Aristidou, A., G. Coricelli, and A. Vostroknutov (2019): "Incentives or Persuasion? An Experimental Investi-
  gation," Working Paper.
Au, P. H. and K. K. Li (2018): "Bayesian Persuasion and Reciprocity Concern: Theory and Experiment," Working
  Paper.
Austen-Smith, D. (1993): "Information and Influence: Lobbying for Agendas and Votes," American Journal of
  Political Science, 37(3), 799­833.
Bajari, P. and A. Hortacsu (2005): "Are Structural Estimates of Auction Models Reasonable? Evidence from
  Experimental Data," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 113, No. 4, pp. 703­741.
Battaglini, M. (2002): "Multiple Referrals and Multidimensional Cheap Talk," Econometrica, 70(4), 1379­1401.
Battigalli, P. and M. Siniscalchi (2002): "Strong Belief and Forward-Induction Reasoning," Journal of Economic
  Theory.
Benndorf, V., D. K¨
                  ubler, and H.-T. Normann (2015): "Privacy concerns, voluntary disclosure of information,
  and unraveling: An experiment," European Economic Review, 75, 43­59.
Bergemann, D. and S. Morris (2019): "Information Design: A Unified Perspective," Journal of Economic Liter-
  ature, 57(1), 44­95.
Blume, A., D. De Jong, Y. Kim, and G. Sprinkle (1998): "Experimental Evidence on the Evolution of Meaning of
  Messages in Sender-Receiver Games," American Economic Review, 88, 1323­1340.
Blume, A., E. K. Lai, and W. Lim (2020): "Strategic Information Transmission: A Survey of Experiments and
  Theoretical Foundations," in Handbook of Experimental Game Theory, ed. by C. M. Capra, R. Croson, M. Rig-
  don, and T. Rosenblat, Edward Elgar Publishing.
Bock, O., I. Baetge, and A. Nicklisch (2014): "hroot: Hamburg registration and organization online tool," Euro-
  pean Economic Review, 71, 117­120.


                                                      34

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
Cai, H. and J. T. Y. Wang (2006): "Overcommunication in strategic information transmission games," Games and
  Economic Behavior, 56, 7­36.
Camerer, C. (1998): "Bounded Rationality in Individual Decision Making," Experimental Economics, 1, 163­
  183.
Camerer, C., S. Nunnari, and T. R. Palfrey (2016): "Quantal Response and Nonequilibrium Beliefs Explain
  Overbidding in Maximum-Value Auctions," Games and Economic Behavior, Vol 98, 243­263.
Cameron, A. C. and D. L. Miller (2015): "A Practitioner's Guide to Cluster-Robust Inference," Journal of Human
  Resources, 50, 317­372.
Carter, A. V., K. T. Schnepel, and D. G. Steigerwald (2017): "Asymptotic Behavior of at Test Robust to Cluster
  Heterogeneity," Review of Economics and Statistics.
Charness, G. and D. Levin (2005): "When Optimal Choices Feel Wrong: A Laboratory Study of Bayesian
  Updating, Complexity, and Affect," American Economic Review, 95, 1300­1309.
Cooper, D. J. and J. H. Kagel (2016): "Other-Regarding Preferences: A Selective Survey of Experimental Re-
  sults," in The Handbook of Experimental Economics, Volume 2, ed. by J. H. Kagel and A. E. Roth, Princeton
  University Press.
Crawford, V. P., M. A. Costa-Gomes, and N. Iriberri (2013): "Structural Models of Nonequilibrium Strategic
  Thinking: Theory, Evidence, and Applications," Journal of Economic Literature, 51:1, 5­62.
Crawford, V. P. and J. Sobel (1982): "Strategic Information Transmission," Econometrica, 50, 1431­1451.
de Clippel, G. and K. Rozen (2020): "Communication, Perception, and Strategic Obfuscation," Working Paper.
de Clippel, G. and X. Zhang (2020): "Non-Bayesian Persuasion," Working Paper.
Dickhaut, J., M. Ledyard, A. Mukherji, and H. Sapra (2003): "Information management and valuation: an
  experimental investigation," Games and Economic Behavior, 44, 26­53.
Dickhaut, J., K. McCabe, and A. Mukherji (1995): "An Experimental Study of Strategic Information Transmis-
  sion," Economic Theory, 6, 389­403.
Dranove, D. and G. Jin (2010): "Quality Disclosure and Certification: Theory and Practice," Journal of Economic
  Literature, 48, 935­963.
Dye, R. (1985): "Disclosure of Nonproprietary Information," Journal of Accounting Research, 23(1), 123­145.
                    ´ chette, and S. Yuksel (2017): "Cooperation in the Finitely Repeated Prisoner's Dilemma,"
Embrey, M., G. R. Fre
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133, 509­551.
Forsythe, R., R. M. Isaac, and T. R. Palfrey (1989): "Theories and Tests of "Blind Bidding" in Sealed-bid
  Auctions," RAND Journal of Economics, 20, 214­238.
Forsythe, R., R. Lundholm, and T. Rietz (1999): "Cheap Talk, Fraud, and Adverse Selection in Financial Mar-
  kets: Some Experimental Evidence," The Review of Financial Studies, 12, 481­518.
  ´ chette, G. R. (2012): "Session-Effects in the Laboratory," Experimental Economics, 15, 485­498.
Fre
Galor, E. (1985): "Information Sharing in Oligopoly," Econometrica, 53, 329­343.
Gilligan, T. W. and K. Krehbiel (1987): "Decisionmaking and Standing Committees: An Informational Rationale
  for Restrictive Amendment Procedures," Journal of Law, Economics, 3, 287­335.
------ (1989): "Information and Legislative Rules with a Heterogeneous Committee," American Journal of
  Political Science, 33, 459­490.
Gneezy, U. (2005): "Deception: the role of consequences," American Economic Review, 95(1), 384­394.
Goeree, J. K., C. A. Holt, and T. R. Palfrey (2016): Quantal Response Equilibrium: A Stochastic Theory of
  Games, Princeton University Press.


                                                      35

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
Green, J. R. and N. L. Stokey (2007): "A Two-person Game Of Information Transmission," Journal Of Economic
  Theory, 135, 90­104.
Grossman, S. J. (1981): "The Informational Role of Warranties and Private Disclosure about Product Quality,"
  Journal of Law and Economics, 24, 461.
Hagenbach, J., F. Koessler, and E. Perez-Richet (2014): "Certifiable Pre-Play Communication: Full Disclosure,"
  Econometrica, 82(3), 1093­1131.
Hagenback, J. and E. Perez-Richet (2018): "Communication with Evidence in the Lab," Working Paper.
Hart, S., I. Kremer, and M. Perry (2017): "Evidence Games: Truth and Commitment," American Economic
  Review, 107(3), 690­713.
Hastie, T., R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman (2009): The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference,
  and Prediction, Springer series in statistics New York, NY, USA:, second Edition.
Holt, C. A. (2007): Markets, Games, and Strategic Behavior, Pearson Addison Wesley Boston, MA.
Huck, S., W. Muller, and H.-T. Normann (2001): "Stackelberg Beats Cournot -- On Collusion and Efficiency in
  Experimental Markets," Economic Journal, 111, 749­765.
Huck, S. and W. M¨
                 uller (2000): "Perfect versus Imperfect Observability--An Experimental Test of Bagwell's
  Result," Games and Economic Behavior, 31, 174 ­ 190.
Hurkens, S. and N. Kartik (2009): "Would I lie to you? On social preferences and lying aversion," Experimental
  Economics, 12, 180­192.
Ibragimov, R. and U. K. M¨
                         uller (2010): "t-Statistic Based Correlation and Heterogeneity Robust Inference,"
  Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 28, 453­468.
Jin, G. and P. Leslie (2003): "The effect of information on product quality: Evidence from restaurant hygiene
  grade cards," Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Jin, G., M. Luca, and D. Martin (2019): "Complex Disclosure," Working Paper.
------ (2020): "Is No News (Perceived As) Bad News? An Experimental Investigation of Information Disclo-
  sure," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics.
Jovanovic, B. (1982): "Truthful Disclosure of Information," Bell Journal of Economics, 13, 36­44.
Kamenica, E. (2019): "Bayesian Persuasion and Information Design," Annual Review of Economics, 11, 249­272.
Kamenica, E. and M. Gentzkow (2011): "Bayesian persuasion," American Economic Review, 101, 2590­2615.
Kartik, N. (2009): "Strategic communication with lying costs," The Review of Economic Studies, 76, 1359­1395.
Kawagoe, T. and H. Takizawa (2009): "Equilibrium Refinement vs Level-k Analysis: An Experimental Study of
  Cheap-Talk Games with Private Information," Games and Economic Behavior.
King, R. and D. Wallin (1991): "Market-induced information disclosures: An experimental markets investiga-
  tion," Contemporary Accounting Research, 8, 170­197.
Lipnowski, E., D. Ravid, and D. Shishkin (2018): "Persuasion via Weak Institutions," Working Paper.
MacQueen, J. (1967): "Some Methods for Classification and Analysis of Multivariate Observations," in Proceed-
  ings of the Fifth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, Oakland, CA, USA, vol. 1,
  281­297.
Mathios, A. (2000): "The impact of mandatory disclosure laws on product choices: An analysis of the salad
  dressing market," Journal of Law and Economics.
Milgrom, P. (1981): "Good News and Bad News: Representation Theorems and Applications," The Bell Journal
  of Economics, 12, 380­391.
------ (2008): "What the Seller Won't Tell You: Persuasion and Disclosure in Markets," Journal of Economic


                                                      36

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
  Perspectives, 22, 115­131.
Min, D. (2017): "Bayesian Persuasion under Partial Commitment," Working Paper.
Morgan, J. and F. V´
                   ardy (2004): "An experimental study of commitment in Stackelberg games with observation
  costs," Games and Economic Behavior, 49, 401 ­ 423.
------ (2013): "The Fragility of Commitment," Management Science, Vol. 59, No. 6, 1344­1353.
Murphy, K. P. (2012): Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective, MIT Press.
Nguyen, Q. (2017): "Bayesian Persuasion: Evidence from the Laboratory," Working Paper.
Okuno-Fujiwara, M., A. Postlewaite, and K. Suzumura (1990): "Strategic Information Revelation," The Review
  of Economic Studies, 57, 25­47.
Perez-Richet, E. and V. Skreta (2018): "Test Design under Falsification," Working Paper.
S´         ´ s, S. and M. Vorsatz (2007): "An experimental study of truth-telling in a sender-receiver game,"
 anchez-Page
  Games and Economic Behavior, 61, 86­112.
S´         ´ s, S. and M. Vorsatz (2007): "An Experimental Study of Truth-Telling in a Sender-Receiver Game,"
 anchez-Page
  Games and Economic Behavior, 61(1), 86­112.
Verrecchia, R. E. (1983): "Discretionary Disclosure." Journal of Accounting and Economics, 5, 179­194.
Wang, J., M. Spezio, and C. Camerer (2010): "Pinocchio's Pupil: Using Eyetracking and Pupil Dilation to
  Understand Truth Telling and Deception in Sender-Receiver Games," American Economic Review, 100, 984­
  1007.
Wilson, A. and E. Vespa (2020): "Information Transmission Under the Shadow of the Future: An Experiment,"
  American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, Forthcoming.




                                                     37

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
A       Additional Treatments
In this section, we explore two robustness treatments. In Section A.1, we simplify the message
space by excluding message n. This message is redundant when information is unverifiable. We
find that results without message n are comparable overall to those with message n, but feature
less noise. We also take advantage of the simpler setup to take a deeper dive into receivers'
behavior. We find that, although receivers do not conform to the Bayesian paradigm, their
behavior is highly systematic and monotone to information. In Section A.2, we test a different
comparative static result: instead of varying commitment or rules, we change the alignment
between sender's and receivers' preferences.


A.1     Simplifying the Message Space

In our main treatments, senders can choose among three messages: r, b, and n. In theory, when
information is unverifiable, one of these messages is redundant and its presence (or absence)
does not change equilibrium outcomes. In practice, message n is convenient as it allows a
clean comparison between treatments with and without verifiable information. In this section,
we show that adding message n does not significantly alter agents' behavior. We report the
results of a treatment with unverifiable information and full commitment where the message
space includes only r and b. Every other aspect of this treatment, which we label U 100S , is
identical to U 100.32 Our main conclusion from the comparison of U 100 and U 100S is that
adding message n increases the noise, but does not significantly alter agents' behavior. We also
take advantage of the simpler setting in U 100S to perform an analysis of receivers' behavior,
which is representative of receivers' behavior in all other treatments (see Appendix B).


A.1.1    Comparison between U 100 and U 100S

We begin by comparing the senders' behavior in treatments U 100 and U 100S . The left panel
of Figure A9 reports the main clusters for these treatments computed through a k-means al-
gorithm, as described in Section 5.2. Solid markers indicate the representative strategies for
U 100S . Hollow markers indicate those for U 100. A9 shows that the strategies that senders
play in these two treatments are highly comparable, despite the difference in the message space.
  32
    We conducted four sessions of U 100S , each with 14-20 subjects (17.5 on average per session) for a total
of 70 subjects. In addition to their earnings from the experiment, subjects received a $10 show-up fee. Average
earnings, including the show-up fee, were $34 (ranging from $14 to $52) per session.



                                                      38

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                              Clusters in Treatment U 100S (solid) and U 100 (hollow)                                                        Receivers Responsiveness in U 100 and U 100S
                1.00                                                                                                       1.00
                                                                                                                                             U 100
                                                                                                                                             U 100S

                0.75                                                                                                       0.75




                                                                                                    Frequency of a = red
          C (b|B )

                0.50                                                                                                       0.50




                0.25
                                                                                                                           0.25




                0.00
                                                                                                                           0.00
                       0.00              0.25              0.50              0.75           1.00                            [0.00, 0.25]              (0.25, 0.50]       (0.50, 0.75]          (0.75, 1.00]
                                                       C ( r | R )                                                                         µ(C , r): Posterior Induced by C Conditional on r
                                                B                                   B
                                    Freq 34.6%,  = 0.35              Freq 25.4%,  = 0.4
                                    Freq 28.9%, B = 0.82             Freq 18.5%, B = 0.98
                                    Freq 23.7%, B = 0.03             Freq 35.0%, B = 0.02
                                                B
                                    Freq 12.9%,  = 0.36              Freq 21.1%, B = 0.22                                            .



 Figure A9: Senders' (left panel) and Receivers' (right panel) Behavior in U 100 and U 100S

We note that the behavior in U 100S is less noisy than in U 100. This can be deduced from the
fact that the residual cluster, indicated by green diamonds, has a lower frequency in U 100S
(12.9%) relative to U 100 (21.1%). There is a higher frequency of senders who approximately
best respond to receiver U 100S relative to U 100. From Figure 6 and A10, we can deduce
that, in these treatments, the best response involves a combination of blue squares and yel-
low triangles. These represent 63.5% and 44% of the data in U 100S and U 100, respectively.
This last observation is also reflected in the average Bayesian correlation that is induced by
senders in these two treatments. We find that B (C ) = 0.41 in U 100S . This is significantly
lower ( p < 0.01) than the equilibrium prediction of 0.5, but the sign is significantly higher
( p < 0.05)) than in U 100. We conclude that senders' behavior in U 100S is qualitatively com-
parable to U 100, but cleaner and less noisy than in U 100.
  We now compare receivers' behavior in treatments U 100 and U 100S . The right panel of
Figure A9 reports the average receivers' responsiveness to Bayesian posteriors belonging to
four key intervals (horizontal axis). We focus attention on the posteriors induced by message
m = r, the potentially persuasive message. In none of the intervals is the receivers' behavior
significantly different in the two treatments considered. We conclude that receivers do not seem
to react in unexpected ways to the presence of the redundant message n.


A.1.2   A Closer Look at Receivers' Behavior

We take advantage of the relative simplicity of treatment U 100S to take a closer look at re-
ceivers' behavior. A similar analysis for all the other treatments can be found in Appendix B.
We begin by describing some aggregate features of the data. First, receivers' responsiveness is
monotonic in the induced posterior. That is, on average, receivers are more persuaded to guess

                                                                                                   39

                                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
red by messages that carry more evidence in favor of the state being R. As highlighted in Sec-
tion 5.1, this is a robust feature of receivers' behavior that holds across all our treatments, in-
cluding U 100S . For U 100S , this is illustrated graphically in Figure A9 when m = r. When
pooling message r and b, we find that, for posteriors above 1
                                                            2
                                                              , receivers guess red 57% of the
time, whereas they guess red only 11% of the time for posteriors below                   1
                                                                                         2
                                                                                             ( p  0.01).
  The extent of monotonicity that we observe in receivers' behavior is sufficient to confirm
one of the main insights from models of communication under commitment, namely that the
best response involves some degree of strategic obfuscation: an uninformative C is worse
than a fully informative C , which is worse than using commitment to mix. In Figure A10,
we replicate the same exercise performed in Figure 6 for U 100S . As was the case for U 100
and V 100, we find that senders' empirical expected payoff is non monotone in the amount of
information conveyed to the receiver, in line with the theory.
  Monotonicity is, of course, a mild requirement for receivers' rationality. A Bayesian re-
ceiver should choose a = red for any posterior µ(m, C )                    1
                                                                           2
                                                                               and a = blue otherwise. The ag-
gregate evidence presented in Figure A9 fails to satisfy this stronger requirement of rational-
ity. Furthermore, receivers respond to the color of the message independently of the posterior
this color conveys. When µ(m, C )  1
                                   2
                                     , receivers guess a = red 62% of the time if m = r and
38% of the time if m = b. In contrast, when µ(m, C ) < 1
                                                       2
                                                         , receivers guess a = red 21% if
m = r and 5% of the time if m = b. These differences, which are significant at the 1% level,
are inconsistent with the behavior of a Bayesian receiver. Even when provided with conclu-
sive evidence that the state is R, that is, even when µ(m, C )  1, some receivers nonetheless
guess blue at least some of the time. To summarize, at the aggregate level, receivers are non-
Bayesian, an observation that is in line with a large body of experimental literature (e.g., Char-
ness and Levin, 2005; Holt, 2007, Ch. 30).
  To understand better whether the deviations are driven by a few subjects or shared by most,
we turn to individual behavior. We demonstrate that, despite not being Bayesian, receivers
react to information as summarized by the posterior belief in systematic ways. In particular,
we consider the possibility that subjects follow (potentially different) threshold strategies. A
µ
¯ -threshold strategy, for µ
                           ¯  [0, 1], consists of guessing a = red if and only if µ(m, C ) 
¯ . When µ
µ        ¯ =         1
                     2
                       ,   the receiver is Bayesian. When µ
                                                          ¯            1
                                                                       2
                                                                           the receiver is non-Bayesian, but
behaves systematically: she requires stronger or weaker than needed evidence to choose a =
red. Given our data, we can estimate a receiver-specific threshold that rationalizes the greatest
fraction of her guesses.33 We find that the behavior of many subjects is consistent with a
  33
       See Appendix B for more details. In U 100S , when focusing on the last ten rounds of the game, we observe a


                                                        40

                           Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                           1.25       U 100S
                                      Predictions                                                        Blue


                                                                                                          1.0
                           1.00
Sender's Expected Payoff




                                                                                                          0.8




                                                                                            Thresholds
                           0.75
                                                                                                          0.6


                                                                                                          0.4
                           0.50

                                                                                                          0.2

                           0.25
                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                0.0                0.2               0.4        0.6        0.8                                      1.0                Blue
                                                                                                                                                    Bayesian Responder Threshold
                                                                                                                Diamonds for subjects harder to convince than a Bayesian, square for subjects easier to convince than a Bayesian, circle otherwise.
                           0.00                                                                                 Hollow marker for subjects whose threshold is accurate in less than 80% of cases.
                                                                                                                Blue indicates a subject who's choices are best explained by the rule always guess blue.
                               0.00        0.25          0.50           0.75   1.00                             Values are jittered slightly to make multiple overlapping thresholds distinguishable.

                                          x ­ Parametrized Sender's Strategy

                                                                                            Figure A11: Estimated Thresholds: Ac-
Figure A10: Probability of Guessing                                                         tual Receivers vs Bayesians
Red by Posterior and Message

threshold strategy. Almost half the receivers (46%) display behavior that is always consistent
with a threshold strategy, and almost nine out of ten receivers (89%) behave consistently with a
threshold strategy for more than 80% of their guesses. Figure A11 plots the estimated threshold
for each receiver (vertical axis). We compare these thresholds with the thresholds that we
would have estimated from the same data if receivers were Bayesian (horizontal axis).34 The
figure shows substantial heterogeneity in receivers' behavior. Dots lying above the 45-degree
line indicate receivers who are reluctant to guess red, even when a Bayesian would conclude
that there is enough evidence. By contrast, the points below the 45-degree line indicate subjects
who are too eager to guess red, despite insufficient evidence from the perspective of a Bayesian
agent. The aggregation of this heterogeneous behavior is partly responsible for the smoothness
of aggregate responses to the posterior that is displayed in Figure A9 (right panel). Also note
that Figure A11 shows a sizable fraction of receivers who exhibit behavior consistent with the
Bayesian benchmark: one-quarter of the receivers have thresholds within 5 percentage points
of being consistent with a Bayesian receiver; the number increases to one third if we are more
permissive and allow for a band of 10 percentage points around the Bayesian receiver.
                           Overall, this threshold analysis reveals three important aspects of receivers' behavior. First,
the vast majority of receivers appear to behave in systematic ways, as summarized by threshold
strategies. Second, there is a substantial heterogeneity in the thresholds: some receivers are
receiver's guess on 20 occasions following r and b messages. We look for the threshold that best describes these
20 observations. This procedure typically results in a range of best-fitting thresholds. We report the average of
these thresholds. This method akin to perceptrons in machine learning; see, for instance, Murphy (2012).
   34
      Given the finite sample, even a Bayesian receiver can have an estimated average threshold that is different
from 1/2. As an example, imagine a receiver who is perfectly Bayesian, but for whom the closest posteriors to
0.5 that we observe are 0.45 and 0.65. Her estimated threshold would then be 0.55. Figure B16 in the appendix
presents the estimated threshold and their respective precision.



                                                                                      41

                                                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
skeptical, some are approximately Bayesian, some others are gullible. Third, virtually all
receivers respond to information in monotonic ways. It is thanks to this that the senders'
empirical best responses (Figure A10) are qualitatively in line with the theory.


A.2     Changing Receiver's Incentives

Propositions 1 and 2 in Section 2 constitute the bulk of our experimental strategy, which re-
volves around the idea of partial commitment. A different kind of comparative static exercise
that we considered does not vary the degree of commitment  nor the communication rule. In-
stead, it shows how equilibrium informativeness changes with the persuasion threshold q. As
we explain below, this can be done experimentally by changing the preferences of the receiver.
Formally, the prediction that we test is the following.
                                                                   q -µ0
Proposition 3. Fix q > q > µ0 and consider any                    q (1-µ0 )
                                                                            .   Equilibrium informativeness
under q is strictly higher than under q, irrespective of the rules of communication.

  This result shows that when  is sufficiently high, an increase in q increases equilibrium
informativeness irrespective of the communication rules. In particular, when  = 1, raising q
strictly increases the equilibrium informativeness for both verifiability scenarios.
  Based on this idea, we designed an additional treatment with full commitment ( = 1) and
unverifiable information. We label this treatment U 100H and compare it directly to U 100.
Payoffs are as follows. As in all other treatments, the receiver earns nothing if she guesses
incorrectly. In contrast to our main treatments however, the receiver earns $2 if she correctly
guesses that  = B, but only 67¢ if she correctly guesses that  = R. This payoff structure
increases the persuasion threshold from q = 1/2 to q = 3/4. Since the receiver is harder to
persuade, the sender is automatically worse off relative to U 100. Therefore, to guarantee the
comparability between treatments, we also modify the sender's payoff in U 100H . In particular,
she earns $3 (instead of $2) whenever a = red. In this way, her expected equilibrium payoff
is the same for U 100 and U 100S . In equilibrium, the sender is to choose C (r|R) = 1 and
                                                                
C (b| B) = 5/6 and the predicted informativeness is B (C ) = 5/ 40  0.79. We conducted
four sessions of U 100H , each with 16-20 subjects (72 in total).35
  The left panel of Figure A12 reports the main clusters of senders' behavior in treatment
U 100H . These are computed through a k-means algorithm, as described in Section 5.2. A large
fraction of senders, indicated by a blue square, choose strategies that are close to equilibrium
  35
    The sessions lasted approximately 100 minutes. Subjects earned on average $32, including a show-up fee of
$10. On average, senders and receivers made $23 and $40, respectively.

                                                     42

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                                          Clusters for Treatment U 100H                                                                           Posterior Variance
                    1.00                                                                                                1.00




                    0.75                                                                                                0.75




                                                                                                           Percentile
             C ( b| B )

                    0.50                                                                                                0.50




                    0.25                                                                                                0.25




                    0.00                                                                                                0.00
                           0.00         0.25                 0.50               0.75           1.00                            0.00   0.05              0.10       0.15     0.20
                                                          C ( r | R )                                                                        Posterior Variance by Sender
                                   Prediction, B = 0.79                 Freq 18.1%, B = 0.01                                                    U 100           U 100H
                                   Freq 40.0%, B = 0.7                  Freq 15.8%, B = 0.14
                                   Freq 26.1%, B = 0.12                                                                                                  .



   Figure A12: Strategy Clusters (left) and Posterior Variance (right) in Treatment U 100H

behavior. A smaller but significant fraction of senders, indicated by a purple star, choose a
strategy that would be close to equilibrium behavior in U 100 but are not informative enough to
persuade a Bayesian receiver in U 100H . The strategies summarized by the red circle capture
commitment blindness, while those summarized by the green diamond capture a cluster of
residual strategies that should be interpreted as noise. When comparing these clusters with
those computed for treatment U 100 (Figure D19, right panel) or U 80 (Figure 7), we observe
an overall shift toward more-informative strategies, as predicted by the theory (upper-right
corner).
  Quantifying this shift is complicated by the fact that receivers' preferences between U 100
and U 100H have changed. Therefore, Bayesian correlations B have to be computed using
different Bayesian receivers in the two treatments. For example, a posterior of 0.74 induces a =
red for a Bayesian receiver in U 100, but a = blue in U 100H . When using Bayesian correlation
B to measure informativeness, we do not find a significant change between U 100 and U 100H .
However, this is caused by the fact that B is a conservative measure of informativeness: when
a sender induces a posterior distribution with support {0, q - }, the Bayesian correlation is zero,
even if a great deal of information was conveyed by the sender. To avoid this problem, we can
compute the variance of the posterior distribution induced by C . As described in Section 3.3
and D.1, the variance of induced posteriors is an alternative measure of informativeness which,
unlike B , does not depend on q, and thus, may be more appropriate when comparing data
from treatments that feature different q's. The posterior variance in U 100 is 0.067 (predicted
0.055); in U 100H , it is 0.094 (predicted 0.14). The increase from U 100 to U 100H is significant
( p < 0.01), in line with Proposition 3. Moreover, the sender-by-sender CDF of the posterior
variance increases from U 100 to U 100H in a first-order stochastic sense, as reported in the
right panel of Figure A12.

                                                                                                      43

                                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                                  V20                                                 V80                                                 V100                                                      V20                                             V80                                         V100
                Blue                                                Blue                                                Blue                                                       Blue                                            Blue                                         Blue
                 1.0                                                 1.0                                                 1.0                                                        1.0                                             1.0                                          1.0
   Thresholds




                                                       Thresholds




                                                                                                           Thresholds
                 0.8                                                 0.8                                                 0.8




                                                                                                                                                                      Thresholds




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Thresholds




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Thresholds
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.8                                             0.8                                          0.8
                 0.6                                                 0.6                                                 0.6                                                        0.6                                             0.6                                          0.6
                 0.4                                                 0.4                                                 0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.4                                             0.4                                          0.4
                 0.2                                                 0.2                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2                                             0.2                                          0.2
                 0.0                                                 0.0                                                 0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.0                                             0.0                                          0.0
                        0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Blue                        0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Blue                        0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Blue
                       Bayesian Responder Threshold                        Bayesian Responder Threshold                        Bayesian Responder Threshold                               0   .2    .4 .6 .8   1                          0   .2    .4 .6 .8   1                       0   .2    .4 .6 .8   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Precision                                       Precision                                    Precision

                                  U20                                                 U80                                                 U100
                Blue                                                Blue                                                Blue
                                                                                                                                                                                                    U20                                             U80                                         U100
                                                                                                                                                                                   Blue                                            Blue                                         Blue
                 1.0                                                 1.0                                                 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                    1.0                                             1.0                                          1.0
   Thresholds




                                                       Thresholds




                                                                                                           Thresholds
                 0.8                                                 0.8                                                 0.8




                                                                                                                                                                      Thresholds




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Thresholds




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Thresholds
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.8                                             0.8                                          0.8
                 0.6                                                 0.6                                                 0.6
                 0.4                                                 0.4                                                 0.4                                                        0.6                                             0.6                                          0.6

                 0.2                                                 0.2                                                 0.2                                                        0.4                                             0.4                                          0.4

                 0.0                                                 0.0                                                 0.0                                                        0.2                                             0.2                                          0.2
                        0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Blue                        0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Blue                        0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Blue                        0.0                                             0.0                                          0.0
                       Bayesian Responder Threshold                        Bayesian Responder Threshold                        Bayesian Responder Threshold
                                                                                                                                                                                          0   .2    .4 .6 .8   1                          0   .2    .4 .6 .8   1                       0   .2    .4 .6 .8   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Precision                                       Precision                                    Precision
 Black for subjects harder to convince than a Bayesian, gray for subjects easier to convince than a Bayesian.
 Blue indicates a subject who's choices are best explained by the rule always guess blue.
 Values are jittered slightly to make multiple overlapping thresholds distinguishable.                                                                              Blue indicates a subject who's choices are best explained by the rule always guess blue.
 Only includes responders for whom the best fitting threshold accounts for at least 80% of choices.                                                                 Values are jittered slightly to make multiple overlapping thresholds distinguishable.




Figure B13: Estimated Threshold: Actual Re- Figure B14: Estimated Threshold and Preci-
ceivers Against Bayesian                    sion

B                          Threshold Strategies in Main Treatments
The relevant data for the estimation of threshold strategies comprises pairs of induced poste-
riors µ and guesses a for each receiver and message. We look for a threshold µ
                                                                             ¯  [0, 1] that
minimizes #{a                                                       1{µ  µ
                                                                         ¯ }} where a takes a value of 1 for red and 0 for blue. In other words,
we find the threshold µ
                      ¯ that rationalizes the greatest number of choices a receiver has made.
We refer to the fraction of choices properly accounted for by the threshold as the precision of
µ
¯ . Given that the sample is finite and thresholds exist on the unit interval, there will be an infi-
nite number of thresholds with the same precision. For instance, imagine a hypothetical sam-
ple comprising only two observations: a receiver that guessed red given a posterior of 0.7 and
guessed blue when the posterior was 0.4. In this case, any threshold µ
                                                                     ¯  [0.4, 0.7] would have
the same precision, namely 1. We report the midpoints of the estimated ranges.
          The theory assumes receivers are Bayesian. However, notice that even a Bayesian receiver
is unlikely to yield a threshold of 0.5. This is because the sample is finite. For instance, in
the two-observation example proposed above, the estimated threshold is 0.55, even if the agent
behaves as a Bayesian. To account for this, we compare thresholds for the receivers in our
experiment with the hypothetical thresholds that we would estimate given the observed sample
if the receivers were Bayesian.
          Figure B13 and B14 illustrate the best-fitting thresholds and their precisions for the main
treatments. Unlike for the U 100S treatment, these thresholds are computed with 30 choices
per subject, thus achieving high precision is more difficult. Nonetheless, precision is still high:
the treatment with the lowest precision still has 81% of subjects with 80% precision; across all
treatments, 90% of subjects meet that criteria.

                                                                                                                                                               44

                                                                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                                                                                                                  Blue




                       1
                                                                                                                   1.0


                                   .8
        Probability of Guessing red
                                                                                                                   0.8




                                                                                                     Thresholds
                         .6


                                                                                                                   0.6
             .4




                                                                                                                   0.4


                                                                                                                   0.2
                       .2




                                                                                                                   0.0
                                                                                                                         0                       .2                     .4                      .6                  .8   1
                       0




                                        V20 V80 V100 U20 U80 U100   V20 V80 V100 U20 U80 U100                                                                                  Precision
                                                                                                                         Blue indicates a subject who's choices are best explained by the rule always guess blue.
                                          Posterior on Red < 0.25     Posterior on Red > 0.75                            Values are jittered slightly to make multiple overlapping thresholds distinguishable.




Figure B15: Frequency of a = red for All Figure B16: Estimated Threshold and Preci-
Messages Given Posterior                 sion for Treatment U100S

  Figure B14 also shows that precision is particularly high when information is verifiable: 55%
of receivers always choose in a way that is consistent with a threshold. That number is 24% for
the treatments with unverifiable messages. From Figure B13, we deduce that receiver behavior
is highly heterogeneous. A nontrivial fraction of subjects are close to the behavior Bayesian
receivers would exhibit. There is also a substantial fraction of subjects who are skeptical, that
is, they require higher-than-needed evidence to guess red, and there is a fraction of subjects
who are instead, gullible. Finally, note that in the treatment that comes closest to the setup of
a cheap-talk experiment, namely U 20, all receivers that are not compatible with the Bayesian
benchmark are classified as gullible. This is in line with one of the main findings in Cai and
Wang (2006). Overall, the aggregation of this heterogeneous behavior is partly responsible for
the linearity of aggregate responses to the posterior that is displayed in Figure 3.36
  Finally, in all treatments, receivers' responsiveness is monotone increasing in information.
However, there are some expected differences between communication rules. As Figure B15
illustrates, in treatments with verifiable information, receivers are more likely to guess a = red
conditional on any message m that leads to a posterior above 3/4. This is in part due to the
fact that, in these treatments, the frequency of extreme posteriors, that is µ = 1, is higher, since
information is verifiable. Conversely, the frequency of a = red conditional on any message m
that leads to a posterior below 1/4 is lower in the verifiable treatments (it is already very low in
the unverifiable treatments). Again, this is in part because the frequency of extreme posteriors,
in this case µ = 0, is higher in treatments with verifiable information.



  36
    This linearity may appear consistent with probability matching. That is, subjects guess red with a probability
equal to the posterior belief. To test for this, we compute for each subject the mean-squared error (MSE) of the
predicted guess using the estimated threshold strategies and compare it with the MSE of the probability-matching
model. Across all treatments, we find that for about 80% of the receivers, threshold strategies have lower MSE
than probability matching.


                                                                                                45

                                                        Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                                 Online Appendix for

          Rules and Commitment in Communication:
                 An Experimental Analysis

           Guillaume Fr´
                       echette         Alessandro Lizzeri            Jacopo Perego
          New York University        New York University          Columbia University




Contents

C Equilibrium, Refinement and Proofs                                                            2
    C.1 Equilibrium Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     2
    C.2 Truth-Leaning Equilibria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     3
    C.3 Proofs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5

D Additional Material                                                                          13
    D.1 Alternative Measures of Informativeness: Posteriors Variance . . . . . . . . . . 13
    D.2 Statistical Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
    D.3 Subjects' Behavior Over Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

E   Design                                                                                     18
    E.1 Graphical Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
    E.2 Sample Instructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18




                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
C      Equilibrium, Refinement and Proofs

C.1     Equilibrium Characterization

In this section, we characterize the set of Perfect Bayesian Equilibria (PBE) for the framework
introduced in Section 2. In a PBE, the sender chooses an information structure C   in the
commitment stage. Then, at every history C , the sender chooses R  , possibly as a function
of C . Finally, the receiver observes history (m, C ) and responds with an action in {aH , aL }.
We call such an action a(m, C ). Finally, a belief assessment µ assigns a belief to every triple
(m, C , R ). For notational simplicity, we omit the dependence of R on C .

Definition 1. Fix (, , q). The tuple (C , R , a, µ) is a Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium if:

  (1) C maximizes         ,m   µ0 () C (m|) + (1 - )R (m|) v(a(m, C ));

  (2) For all (C , ), R maximizes           m   R (m|)v a(m, C ) ;

  (3) For all (m, C ), a(m, C ) = aH iff µ(m, C , R )  q;

  (4) For all (m, C , R ), posterior belief µ(m, C , R ) is computed from  := C + (1 - )R
                                                    37
       using Bayes' rule whenever possible.

  Next, we provide a characterization of the equilibrium set, before imposing a refinement on
our equilibrium notion. We say that an equilibrium (C , R , a, µ) under (, , q) achieves full-
                                                         q-µ0                         1
commitment informativeness (FCI) if B (C + (1 - )R ) = ( 1 -µ0
                                                               ) 2 . This is the equilibrium
informativeness that can be achieved under full commitment and unverifiable information. It
                                                              q-µ0                   q(1-µ0 )
is also useful to define two thresholds for :  :=            q(1-µ0 )
                                                                        and ¯=   q(1-µ0 )+(1-q)µ0
                                                                                                  .   Note that   ¯.
We begin from the case of unverifiable information.

Lemma 1. Fix q > µ0 and let information be unverifiable.

  (a) If  < , all equilibria are uninformative.

  (b) If   [, ¯ ), uninformative equilibria exist. Equilibria that are as informative or more
       informative than FCI exist.

  (c) If   ¯ , there is no uninformative equilibrium. Equilibria that are as informative or
       more informative than FCI exist.
   When information is verifiable, we naturally assume that an off-path message H (resp. L ), i.e. the verifiable
  37

message, leads to an off-path belief of 1 (resp. 0). This is in the spirit of Battigalli and Siniscalchi (2002).

                                                         2

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
  The proof for this and the next result are in Section C.3. When commitment power is low, all
equilibria are uninformative. When commitment power is sufficiently high, instead, all equi-
libria are strictly informative. Furthermore, in this case, FCI can be achieved in equilibrium,
even if the sender may lack full commitment power. She does so by appropriately overcom-
municating in the commitment stage, anticipating that her behavior in the revision stage will
reduce the credibility of her communication.
  Next, we present the equilibrium characterization for the case of verifiable information.

Lemma 2. Fix q > µ0 and let that information be verifiable.

  (a) If  < , all equilibria are fully informative.

  (b) If   [, ¯ ), the least informative equilibrium is FCI; fully informative equilibria exist.

  (c) If   ¯ , there are no fully informative equilibria; the least informative equilibrium is
      FCI.

  From this result, we appreciate the contrast between verifiable and unverifiable information.
When information is verifiable, all equilibria are fully informative when the commitment power
is low. This is in stark contrast with the unverifiable case. Moreover, when the commitment is
sufficiently high, there are no fully informative equilibria and, thus, the sender can avoid the
unattractive scenario where she fully disclose all her private information.
  Overall, these Lemmas provide a complete characterization of the equilibrium set. Modulo
the equilibrium multiplicity, which we will address in the next subsection, these results partially
replicate the comparative statics that we presented in Section 2.


C.2    Truth-Leaning Equilibria

In this section, we provide two examples--one for unverifiable and one for verifiable information--
of PBEs that do not satisfy the truth-leaning tie-breaking rule that we introduced in Section 2.
We use these examples to argue that equilibria that are not truth-leaning feature behavior in the
revision stage that is somewhat unreasonable.

Example 1: Unverifiable Information.

Assume that information is unverifiable and let  = 5
                                                   3
                                                     , the persuasion threshold to q = 1
                                                                                       2
                                                                                         , and
the prior to µ0 = 1
                  3
                    . Consider the pair (C , R ) that is reported in Table C5. First note that
µ(H , C , R ) < q and µ(L , C , R ) < q. That is, despite the fact that C is fully informative, the

                                                 3

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
sender's behavior in the revision stage entirely garbles the information from the commitment
stage.
                                             Table C5

                            C    H     L    n          R   H    L     n

                            H     1    0    0          H    0    1    0
                            L     0    1    0          L    1    0    0


  We show that the pair (C , R ) can be used to construct an equilibrium. Suppose that for
any deviation at the commitment stage C , the sender chooses an appropriate R at the revision
stage so as to make the pair (C , R ) uninformative. The Proof of Lemma 1.(b) establishes that,
for  sufficiently low, such a R exists. Given the receiver's beliefs about the revision stage
strategy, the receiver would choose action aL for both messages. Thus, the sender is indifferent
among all her strategies in the revision stage and is willing to choose R . Furthermore, given the
receiver's expectation about R , in the commitment stage the sender is also indifferent among
all his strategies: all of them lead to a payoff of zero. This particularly strange behavior of the
sender in the revision stage is ruled out by the truth-leaning refinement. In this equilibrium, in
the revision stage the sender of type H is indifferent between sending message L and being
truthful. Truth-leaning requires that such a sender choose R (H |L ) = 1 instead.

Example 2: Verifiable Information.

Now assume that information is verifiable. As above, let  = 3
                                                            5
                                                              ,q=         1
                                                                          2
                                                                              and µ0 = 1
                                                                                       3
                                                                                         . We consider
the pair (C , R ) that is described in Table C6.
                                             Table C6

                            C    H     L    n          R   H    L     n

                            H     0    0    1          H    0    0    1
                            L     0    5
                                       6
                                             1
                                             6
                                                       L    0    0    1


Given such a C , in the revision stage the sender of type L strictly prefers message n to message
L , whereas the sender of type H is indifferent among the two feasible messages. Furthermore,
the pair (C , R ) described in the table is FCI, i.e., it leads to the maximal achievable equilibrium
payoff for the sender. Therefore, the sender has no incentive to deviate at the commitment stage.
This equilibrium relies on unrealistic behavior at the revision stage. To see this, consider the
on-path decision of the sender of type H in the revision stage. She can choose between sending


                                                   4

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                                         1
message n, inducing an on-path belief of 2 , or sending an off-path message H , inducing an off-
path belief of 1 (See Footnote 37). Both messages trigger action aH by the receiver. Therefore,
the sender is indifferent and, yet, not truthful. Hence, while consistent with the requirement of
PBE, this equilibrium is not truth-leaning.
  The truth-leaning refinement is a simple tie-breaking rule, but it is powerful enough to select
a unique equilibrium outcome for each . This is formalized in the next result.

Lemma 3. Fix   [0, 1] and q > µ0 .

        (Unverifiable) If  < , truth-leaning equilibria are uninformative. If   , truth-
        leaning equilibria are FCI.

        (Verifiable) If  < ¯ , truth-leaning equilibria are fully informative. If   ¯ , all truth-
        leaning equilibria are equally informative.

  The proof for this result is relegated to Online Appendix C.3.


C.3      Proofs

C.3.1    Proof of Proposition 1

In Lemma 3, we have established that, for any given  and q > µ0 and verifiability scenario,
all truth-leaning equilibria are equally informative. Assume that information is unverifiable.
Lemma 3 also establishes that truth-leaning equilibria are uninformative if  <  and FCI
                                               q-µ0 )    1
otherwise. Moreover, B (C +(1-)R ) =           (1-µ0 )
                                                         2
                                                             > 0, since q > µ0 . Finally, we want to show
that, when   , any truth-leaning equilibrium (C , R , µ, a) satisfies B (C ) > B (R ). Since
the equilibrium is strictly informative, there exists a message m inducing action aH . Then,
                                                                            q-µ0                     1
R (m |) = 1, for all . Therefore, B (R ) = 0. However, B (C + (1 - )R ) = ( 1 -µ0
                                                                                  ) 2 > 0,
implying that B (C ) > 0. We conclude that C is more informative than R . Now assume that
information is verifiable. In Lemma 3, we established that truth-leaning equilibria are fully
informative if  < ¯ . Moreover, we also established that, if   ¯ , any truth-leaning equilibrium
                                           q-µ0 (+q(1-))      1
(C , R , µ, a) has B (C + (1 - )R ) =     (1-µ0 )(+q(1-))
                                                              2
                                                                  < 1. In this case, we argued that the fact
that truth-leaning equilibria are not fully informative pins down the on-path sender behavior
                                                                                      1-
(C , R ). In particular, we showed that C (n|H ) = 1, C (n|L ) = (1 - ) -              
                                                                                             [0, 1] and that
R (H |H ) = R (n|L ) = 1. Given this, it is straightforward to conclude that  (C ) < B (R ).
                                                                                        B




                                                  5

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
C.3.2      Proof of Proposition 2

When information is unverifiable, Lemma 3 established that, any truth-leaning equilibrium
(C , R , µ, a) satisfies
                                                     
                                                           0        if  < 
                                  B (C + (1 - )R ) = 
                                                     
                                                            µ     1
                                                      (
                                                        q -
                                                        1-µ0
                                                              0
                                                                ) 2 if   

Therefore, when information is unverifiable, equilibrium informativeness is weakly increasing
in . Assume now that information is verifiable. In the proof of Lemma 3, we established that
any truth-leaning equilibrium (C , R , µ, a) satisfies
                                             
                                                                          1              if  < ¯
                            (C + (1 - )R ) = 
                            B
                                             
                                                                 q-µ0 (+q(1-))       1
                                             
                                                                (1-µ0 )(+q(1-))
                                                                                     2
                                                                                         if   ¯

                                 q-µ0 (+q(1-))    1
It is easy to verify that       (1-µ0 )(+q(1-))
                                                  2
                                                      is decreasing (strictly) in . Therefore, we conclude that
equilibrium informativeness when information is verifiable is weakly decreasing in . Finally,
consider the extreme case,  = 1. It's immediate to check that in this case, irrespective of
weather information is verifiable or not, equilibrium informativeness coincides and it is equal
       -µ0 1
to ( q
     1-µ0
           )2 .


C.3.3      Proof of Proposition 3
                                                                                                           q -µ0
Assume that information is unverifiable. Fix q > q > µ0 and consider                                      q (1-µ0 )
                                                                                                                    .   We
want to show that the informativeness of truth-leaning equilibria under q is higher than under
q. To see this, note that  is large enough that equilibria are strictly informative, for both q
and q. In particular, due to Lemma 3 and Proposition 2, we know that under q equilibrium
                                -µ0        1                  q-µ0       q-µ0
informativeness is equal to ( q
                              1-µ0
                                    ) 2 and, since            1-µ0
                                                                     <   1-µ0
                                                                              ,   we conclude that the informativeness
of truth-leaning equilibria under q is higher than under q. Now assume that information is
                                        q-µ0 (+q(1-))     1
verifiable. Then, both ¯ and           (1-µ0 )(+q(1-))
                                                          2
                                                              are increasing in q. Therefore, for any value of ,
equilibrium informativeness under q is higher than under q.


C.3.4      Proof of Lemma 1

Proof of Lemma 1.(a). Let information be unverifiable and  < . Suppose by way of contra-
diction that there is an equilibrium (C , R , a, µ) such that B (C + (1 - )R ) > 0. This im-
plies that there are positive probability messages that lead to action aH . There are two cases to

                                                               6

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
consider.
Case 1. There exists exactly one positive probability message m such that a(m, C , R ) = aH .
In this case, the equilibrium conditions imply that R (m |) = 1 for all . However, given this
we have that

                                                µ0 (C m |H ) + (1 - ))
              q  µ(m ) =
                              µ0 (C (m |H ) + (1 - )) + (1 - µ0 )(C (m |L ) + (1 - ))
                                       µ0
                            
                              µ0 + (1 - µ0 )(1 - )
                                       µ0
                            <                       = q.
                              µ0 + (1 - µ0 )(1 - )

The first inequality holds because m leads to action aH . The first equality follows from Bayes'
rule. The second inequality holds because µ(m ) is maximized when we set C (m |H ) = 1 -
C (m |L ) = 1. The third inequality holds because  < . This leads to a contradiction, and
therefore we can rule out Case 1.
Case 2. There are exactly two positive probability messages m , m  M such that a(m, C , R ) =
aH , for m  {m , m }. Define i (m , m |) := i (m |) + i (m |), for all  and i  {C, R}. Be-
cause both m and m lead to aH , equilibrium conditions imply that R (m , m |) = 1 for all .
Denote by µ(m , m ) the posterior belief conditional on observing m or m . That is,

                                              µ0 ((C (m , m |H ) + (1 - ))
                 µ(m , m ) =
                                  µ0 C (m , m |H ) + (1 - µ0 )C (m , m |L ) + (1 - )
                                           µ0
                                
                                  µ0 + (1 - µ0 )(1 - )
                                           µ0
                                <                      = q.
                                  µ0 + (1 - µ0 )(1 - )

The first inequality holds because µ(m , m ) is maximized when C (m , m |H ) = 1-C (m , m |L ) =
1. This shows that µ(m , m ) < q. However, Bayes' rule also implies that, for appropriately
chosen weight ,38
                                     µ(m , m ) = µ(m ) + (1 - )µ(m )  q.

Therefore, we have q  µ(m , m ) < q, a contradiction. We conclude that the equilibrium
cannot be informative.

Proof of Lemma 1.(b).

Existence of FCI equilibria. Fix   . We first show that FCI equilibria exist. We do so
by constructing such an equilibrium. We start by defining strategies on the equilibrium path.
                                       µ0 ()(C (m |)+(1-)R (m |))
  38
       More specifically,  :=      µ0 ()(C (m ,m |)+(1-)R (m ,m |))




                                                               7

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
For the commitment stage, let C (m |H ) = 1, C (m |L ) = x and C (m |L ) = 1 - x, where
     1 µ0 (1-q)                                                                              µ0 (1-q)
x=    q(1-µ0 )
                  - (1 - ) . Note that C is well-defined. On the one hand, x  0 if           q(1-µ0 )
                                                                                                         1- 
                                               µ0 (1-q)
1 - , which is true since 1 -  =               q(1-µ0 )
                                                        .   On the other hand, x  1 follows directly from our
maintained assumption q > µ0 . For the revision stage, let R (m |) = 1, for all . Given this
choice of C and R , we have that µ(m , C , R ) = q and µ(m , C , R ) = 0, hence let a(m , C ) =
                                                                                   -µ0                   1
aH and a(m , C ) = aL . It is straightforward to check that B (C + (1 - )R ) = ( q
                                                                                 1-µ0
                                                                                       ) 2 , i.e.
it is consistent with FCI. We now define strategies off the equilibrium path. For any C , let
                      µ0 C (m|H )
µ(m, C ) =    µ0 C (m|H )+(1-µ0 )C (m|L )
                                          .                        ¯ , C )  µ(m, C ), for all m  M . Let
                                                  ¯ be such that µ(m
                                              Let m
   ¯ |) = 1 for all . For such pairs (C , R ), let a(m, C ) = aH if and only if µ(m, C , R )  q.
R (m
Whenever a message m has zero probability let µ(m, C , R ) = 0. It is straightforward to check
that this strategy is indeed an equilibrium and, as noted above, FCI.

Existence of uninformative equilibria.
Next, we show that when   [, ¯ ), an uninformative equilibrium exists. The proof is by
construction and consists in finding, for each possible history C , a revision strategy R such
that B (C + (1 - )R ) = 0. The existence of such R for each history C guarantees the
existence of an uninformative equilibrium. To this end, consider an arbitrary C . If µ(m, C ) <
q, for all m  M , then let R = C , which gives B (C + (1 - )R ) = 0. Conversely, suppose
that there exists a message m such that µ(m, C )  q. For arbitrary C , Bayes plausibility
requires that there exists at least one message, call it m , such that µ(m , C )  µ0 . To
simplify notation, let C (m |H ) = a , C (m |H ) = a , C (m |H ) = a , C (m |L ) = b ,
C (m |L ) = b , C (m |L ) = b . Define the revision strategy as follows: R (m |H ) = 1, and
let R (m |L ) = x , R (m |L ) = x and R (m |L ) = x . We want to show that there exists
( x , x , x ) such that x + x + x                = 1 and (m, C , R ) < q, for all m  M . We have that
µ(m , C , R ) < q is equivalent to:

                                                             
                                        x >  :=                (1 - )a - b .
                                                            1-

Similarly, µ(m , C , R ) < q is equivalent to:

                                                             
                                      x >  :=                  (1 - )a - b .
                                                            1-

Finally, the last condition µ(m , C , R ) < q is equivalent to:

                                                               
                                x +x <¯ :=  +                    b - a + a          .
                                                              1-



                                                               8

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
It is straightforward to check that  +  < ¯ and also that  +  < 1 if and only if  < ¯.
Therefore, x and x can be found so that the thus defined R is an information structure and
B (C + (1 - )R ) = 0.
  It is straightforward to complete the construction of the uninformative equilibrium. Note that
the sender has no profitable deviation in the commitment stage. In fact, all possible deviations
C lead to a R that, by construction, only induces beliefs strictly below q, hence a guess
aL . Similarly, the sender has no profitable deviation in the revision stage, for reasons that are
similar to the existence of a babbling equilibrium in a cheap talk game.

Existence of equilibria that are more informative than FCI. The construction of these equilibria
is tightly related to the construction of uninformative equilibria above. Fix   . We start
by constructing the sender's strategies on the equilibrium path. Let C (m |H ) = C (m |L ) =
1, that is, C is fully informative. Let R (m |) = 1 for all . Following these choices, the
receiver's guesses and beliefs are naturally pinned down. For all "off-path" C                 C , we
associate a R that is constructed as in the case of an uninformative equilibrium, as explained
above. This means that for all C      C , B (C + (1 - )R ) = 0, the receiver always guesses
aL and the sender's expected utility is 0. Clearly, in light of this construction, the sender in
the commitment stage has no incentive to deviate from C . Thus, this defines an equilibrium.
                                                               µ0        1
Moreover, it is easy to verify that B (C + (1 - )R ) =       1-(1-µ0 )
                                                                         2
                                                                             , which is higher than FCI
for all   .

Proof of Lemma 1.(c).
The existence of FCI equilibria as well as the existence of equilibria that are more informative
than FCI follows directly from the Proof of Lemma 1.(b).

Non-existence of uninformative equilibria. We now prove that when   ¯ all equilibria are
strictly informative. Suppose not. That is let   ¯ and let (C , R , µ, a) be an uninformative
equilibrium. Thus, the sender earns a payoff of zero. We construct a profitable deviation C
under which there exists a message m that induces action aH with strictly positive probability.
We construct this deviation to be fully informative, namely, C (m |H ) = 1 and C (m |L ) = 1,
for m    m . Call R the continuation strategy of the sender in the revision stage. We have that,

                                                µ0 ( + R (m |H ))
                 µ(m , C , R ) =
                                   µ0 ( + R (m |H )) + (1 - µ0 )(1 - )R (m |L )

                                 µ0                     µ0 ¯
                                                                      =q
                        µ0  + (1 - µ0 )(1 - ) µ0 ¯ + (1 - µ0 )(1 - ¯)


                                                9

                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
The first inequality holds because setting R (m |H ) = 0 and R (m |L ) = 1 induces a lower
bound for µ(m , C , R ). The second inequality holds because   ,
                                                               ¯ by assumption. Therefore,
in the continuation game following deviation C , the receiver plays aH with positive probability
so that the deviation is strictly profitable.


C.3.5   Proof of Lemma 2

Proof of Lemma 2.(a). Assume now that information is verifiable and  < . We want to show
that all equilibria are fully informative. Suppose not. That is, (C , R , a, µ) is an equilibrium
with B (C + (1 - )R ) < 1. Because information is verifiable, such a situation implies
that a(n, C ) = aH . Therefore, µ(n, C , R )  q. However, equilibrium conditions also imply
that R (n|L ) = 1, i.e., in the revision stage, the sender of type L always sends message n.
Therefore, we have that:

                                            µ0                   µ0 
              q  µ(n, C , R )                          <                      = q.
                                   µ0 + (1 - µ0 )(1 - ) µ0  + (1 - µ0 )(1 - )

The first inequality comes from a(n, C ) = aH . The second inequality holds because set-
ting C (n|H ) = 1, C (n|L ) = 0 and R (n|R ) = 1 generates an upper bound for the value
of µ(n, C , R ). The last inequality holds because  < , by assumption. Therefore, q 
µ(n, C , R ) < q, a contradiction.

Proof of Lemma 2.(b).

Existence of FCI equilibria. We prove this by construction. Fix   . Let C and R be such
that C (n|H ) = R (n|H ) = R (n|L ) = 1 and C (n|L ) = x. Let x :=       1
                                                                         
                                                                              -  and note that, by
assumption,   , hence x  [0, 1]. Moreover, it is easy to verify that µ(n, C , R ) = q. Let
a(n, C ) = aH , therefore R is a best response to C given the receiver's behavior. It is also easy
                                    q-µ0        1
to verify that B (C + (1 - )R ) = ( 1 -µ0
                                          ) 2 . Therefore, (C , R ) is FCI. As a consequence, no
profitable deviation away from C exists. Thus, we have have constructed an equilibrium that
is FCI. Moreover, this is the least informative equilibrium that exists in this case. To see this,
note that, because of the nature of verifiable information, B (C + (1 - )R ) < 1 requires that
µ(n, C , R )  [q, 1). Moreover, B (C +(1-)R ) is increasing in µ(n, C , R ). The equilibrium
that we constructed above has µ(n, C , R ) = q and it is therefore minimally informative.

Existence of fully informative equilibria. We prove this by construction. Consider a revision
strategy R defined as R (H |H ) = R (n|L ) = 1. Moreover, suppose that R is played for all



                                                    10

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
histories C . Consider an arbitrary history C . Note that, for all  < ,
                                                                      ¯

                                                µ0 C (n|H )
                µ(n, C , R ) =                                              < q.
                                 µ0 C (n|H ) + (1 - µ0 )(C (n|L ) + (1 - ))

Moreover, note that R is a best-response to this arbitrary C . Finally, note that, in the subgame
indexed by C , the sender expects to receive a payoff of µ0 (C (H |H ) + (1 - )R (H |H )  µ0 .
Now consider the strategy C = R . This strategy gives a payoff of µ0 and, due to the argument
above, no profitable deviation from this strategy exists. Moreover, B (C + (1 - )R ) = 1.

Proof of Lemma 2.(c). The existence of FCI equilibria as well as the fact that these are the
least informative equilibria follows directly from the Proof of Lemma 2.(b).

Non-existence of fully informative equilibria. We first show that when   ¯ , there exist no
fully informative equilibrium. When  = 1 the result is a straightforward consequence of full
commitment, so let us focus on the case   [,
                                           ¯ 1). Suppose that there exists an equilibrium
(C , R , a, µ) such that B (C + (1 - )R ) = 1. In this equilibrium, the sender expects to earn µ0 .
Consider a deviation C such that C (n|H ) = 1 and C (L |L ) = 1. We argue that this deviation
leads to a subgame in which the sender earns strictly more than µ0 . First, note that for all R ,

                                            µ0 ( + (1 - )R (n|H ))
               µ(n, C , R ) =                                                    
                                µ0 ( + (1 - )R (n|H )) + (1 - µ0 )(1 - )R (n|L )

                                 µ0                     µ0 ¯
                                                                      = q.
                        µ0  + (1 - µ0 )(1 - ) µ0 ¯ + (1 - µ0 )(1 - ¯)
Therefore, a(C , n) = aH . This implies that R (n|L ) = 1. Hence, the expected payoff for the
sender in the commitment stage is bounded below by µ0 (C (n|H ) + (1 - )R (H |H ) + (1 -
µ0 )(1 - )R (n|L ) = µ0 + (1 - )(1 - µ0 ) > µ0 . Therefore, C is a profitable deviation. Moreover,
irrespective of what R (n|H ) is, the fact that n is sent with strictly positive probability in both
states implies that, as long as  < 1, µ(n, C , R ) < 1; hence, B (C + (1 - )R ) < 1.


C.3.6   Proof of Lemma 3

Unverifiable Information. If  < , Lemma 1.(a), all PBEs are uninformative. A fortiori, under
this assumption, all truth-leaning are uninformative. Note that, truth-leaning equilibria exist in
this case. For example, let C and R be defined as C (|) = 1 for all  and R (H |) = 1 for all
, µ(m, C , R ) = µ0 , and a(m, C ) = aL . Therefore, consider instead the case   . We want to
argue that all truth-leaning equilibria are FCI. In order to do so, we argue that there exists a pair
(C , R ) such that (1) R is a best-response to C , (2) R is uniquely pinned down by the truth-

                                                 11

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                                                          -µ0           1
leaning refinement and, moreover, (3) B (C +(1-)R ) = ( q
                                                        1-µ0
                                                              ) 2 . To this end, let C (H |H ) =
1, C (H |L ) = x and C (L |L ) = 1 - x, where x := 1
                                                     ( - ). Note that x  [0, 1], hence C is
well-defined. Conversely, let R be such that R (H |) = 1 for all . First, let us establish that R
best-responds to C . To see this note that, by construction, µ(L , C , R ) = 0 and µ(H , C , R ) =
q. Therefore, a(H , C ) = aH and a(L , C ) = aL . Consistently, R gives positive probability to
m = H only. Hence R best-responds to C . Second, let us argue that R is indeed truth-leaning.
To see this, just notice that, in the revision stage, the sender of type H is being truthful, hence
R is truth-leaning. Type L is also truth-leaning since she is not indifferent between m = H and
m = L . Finally, it is straightforward to verify that, given this choice of (C , R ), we have that
                       -µ0      1
B (C + (1 - )R ) = ( q
                     1-µ0
                           ) 2 , i.e. it is FCI. This implies that, if the pair (C , R ) is played on the
equilibrium path, it leads to the first-best payoff, namely µ
                                                            q
                                                              . This proves that all truth-leaning
equilibria of the grand-game are FCI. To see this, suppose that this is not the case, i.e. there
exists a truth-leaning equilibrium (C , R , µ , a ) that is not FCI, so that the sender's expected
payoff in this equilibrium is strictly smaller than µ
                                                    q
                                                      . However, a deviation at the commitment
stage exists, namely strategy C , that leads to a unique best-response in the revision stage,
namely R , that is consistent with truth-leaning and that achieves the first-best payoff, namely
µ
q
  .   Therefore, such deviation is strictly profitable and (C , R , µ , a ) is not an equilibrium.

Verifiable Information. If  < , Lemma 2.(a) shows that all PBE are fully informative. A
fortiori, all truth-leaning equilibria are fully informative. Trivially, a truth-leaning equilibrium
exists. For example, i (|) = 1 for all  and i  {C, R}; µ(m, C , R ) = 1 if m = H and 0
otherwise; a(m, C ) = aH iff m = H and aL otherwise. Therefore, consider instead the case
  [, ¯ ). We want to show that all truth-leaning equilibria are fully informative. Suppose
not, namely let (C , R , µ, a) be a truth-leaning equilibrium such that B (C + (1 - )R ) <
1. Since equilibrium informativeness is strictly less than one, there must exist a message m
such that µ(m, C , R )  (0, 1). When information is verifiable, it is necessarily the case that
m = n. Moreover, a(n, C ) = aH . If this were not the case, i (n|H ) = 0, for i  {C, R},
hence µ(n, C , R ) = 0, a contradiction. Therefore, let µ(n, C , R )  [q, 1). On the one hand,
equilibrium requires that R (n|L ) = 1. (Note that this is consistent with truth-leaning since
the two messages lead to different payoffs). On the other hand, type H in the revision stage
is indifferent between H and n, as they both lead to action aH . The truth-leaning refinement
requires that R (H |H ) = 1. Therefore, the fact that the equilibrium is not fully informative
uniquely pins down R . Given this, we note that:

                                           µ                  µ ¯
                    µ(n, C , R )                     <                    = q.
                                    µ + (1 - µ)(1 - ) µ¯ + (1 - µ)(1 - ¯)


                                                   12

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
             Table D7: Predicted and Observed Posterior Variances by Treatment

                B ­ Theoretical Predictions             B ­ Empirical Posterior Variance
                            Commitment ()                                Commitment ()

                           20% 80%       100%                           20% 80%       100%

            Verifiable     0.22   0.08    0.05         Verifiable       0.18   0.17   0.15
            Unverifiable   0.00   0.05    0.05         Unverifiable     0.02   0.05   0.06


Hence, µ(m, C , R ) < q, a contradiction. Finally, let us consider the case   ¯ . We want
to show that all truth-leaning equilibria are equally informative. Let (C , R , µ, a) be a truth-
leaning equilibrium. By Lemma 2.(c), no equilibrium is fully informative. Therefore, by the
argument made above, µ(n, C , R )  [q, 1) and R is uniquely pinned down. Moreover, R is
independent of C . Therefore, there exists a unique best-response C to such a revision strategy
                                                                                         1-
R . Such C is given by C (n|H ) = 1 and C (n|L ) = x, where x := (1 - ) -                 
                                                                                               [0, 1].
This strategy C satisfies µ(n, C , R ) = q, while maximizing the ex-ante probability of sending
message n. By construction, all truth-leaning equilibria share the same on-path sender behavior
(C , R ). Therefore, all truth-leaning equilibria have to be equally informative. Moreover, it is
                                               q-µ0 (+q(1-))    1
easy to verify that B (C + (1 - )R ) =        (1-µ0 )(+q(1-))
                                                                2
                                                                    .



D     Additional Material

D.1    Alternative Measures of Informativeness: Posteriors Variance

In the paper, Bayesian correlation B has been our principal way to measure the informative-
ness of a sender's strategy. In Section 3.3, we discussed the merits of this measure and how it
relates to the existing literature. In this section, we re-evaluate our main comparative static ex-
ercise from Section 4 using an alternative measure of informativeness, the variance of induced
posteriors. More formally, a strategy (C , R ) induces a distribution   (()) over posterior
beliefs µ(m, C , R ). The variance of , denoted B := E (µ - µ0 )2 , is what we call the vari-
ance of induced posteriors. Clearly, B and B have much in common. First, they are highly
correlated: Across all our treatments, the correlation between B and B is above 0.95. Sec-
ond, they are both immune to receivers' mistakes. The main difference between the two is that
B does not require the specification of a payoff function for the (Bayesian) receiver. Thus, it
is perhaps better suited to compare treatments with different q, like U 100 and U 100H .
  In Table D7, we report the average posterior variance across treatments together with the

                                                 13

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                                                    Unverifiable Information                                                          Verifiable Information
                     1.00                                                                                1.00
                                     U 20                                                                              V 20
                                     U 80                                                                              V 80
                                     U 100                                                                             V 100
                     0.75                                                                                0.75
        Percentile




                                                                                            Percentile
                     0.50                                                                                0.50




                     0.25                                                                                0.25




                     0.00                                                                                0.00
                              0.00           0.05            0.10        0.15   0.20                            0.00           0.05           0.10         0.15   0.20
                                        Induced Posterior Variance by Sender                                              Induced Posterior Variance by Sender



                            Figure D17: CDF of Sender-Average Variance of Induced Posteriors ()

theoretical predictions. As for Table 3, this measure of informativeness moves in the direction
predicted by the theory. Namely, it increases in treatments with unverifiable information and it
decreases in treatments with verifiable information. Yet, as for B , the point-predictions are far
from the empirical averages. In particular, senders in V 100 appear to be overly informative rel-
ative to the prediction and there is a large gap between V 100 and U 100. This is all in line with
the evidence reported in Section 5. Similarly, Figure D17 reports the CDF of sender-average
B , which replicates Figure 4 in the main text from the perspective of posterior variance.


D.2    Statistical Tests

The p-values reported in the main text are obtained by regressing the variable of interest on
the relevant regressor (sometimes an indicator variable) with subject-level random effects and
clustering of the variance-covariance matrix at the session-level. This specification has the ad-
vantage of being uniform (the same throughout the paper), it directly accounts for heterogene-
ity across subjects via the random effects (as the paper documents, there is clear evidence of
heterogeneity between subjects), and it permits unmodeled dependencies between observations
from the same session (see Fr´
                             echette, 2012, where such possibilities are discussed). However,
it does not directly account for the fact that we are often dealing with a limited dependent vari-
able. Also, clustering with a small number of clusters can lead to insufficient corrections (see
Cameron and Miller, 2015, for a survey). But this observation relies mostly on simulations that
do not necessarily mirror the situation of most laboratory experiments. In particular, the extent
of the problem is found to depend on the size of the within session correlation (see, for example,
Carter et al., 2017). For many experiment, such correlation can be expected to be low (once the
appropriate factors are controlled for). Hence, we are more concerned with controlling for the
source of dependencies across the observations of a given subject than for the within-session

                                                                                       14

                                        Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                                                   Unverifiable Information: m = r                                                                                              Verifiable Information: m = n
                           1.0                                                                                                                    1.0
                                         Treatment U20                                                                                                                 Treatment V20
                                         Treatment U80                                                                                                                 Treatment V80

                           0.8                                                                                                                    0.8
    Frequency of a = red




                                                                                                                           Frequency of a = red
                           0.6                                                                                                                    0.6




                           0.4                                                                                                                    0.4




                           0.2                                                                                                                    0.2




                           0.0                                                                                                                    0.0
                                 0.0        0.2               0.4                 0.6            0.8            1.0                                     0.0               0.2           0.4                 0.6              0.8         1.0
                                            Posterior Induced by C Conditional on m = r                                                                                   Posterior Induced by C Conditional on m = n



  Figure D18: Receiver's Response to Persuasive Messages:  = 0.2 vs.  = 1
                                                             Treatment V 100                                                                                                               Treatment U 100
                           1.00                                                                                                                          1.00




                           0.75                                                                                                                          0.75
   C (b|B )




                                                                                                                                                  C (b|B )




                           0.50                                                                                                                          0.50




                           0.25                                                                                                                          0.25




                           0.00                                                                                                                          0.00
                                  0.00            0.25                 0.50               0.75           1.00                                                   0.00            0.25                 0.50                 0.75           1.00
                                                                    C ( r | R )                                                                                                                   C ( r | R )
                                          Prediction, B = 0.79                    Freq 31.6%, B = 0.93                                                                     Prediction, B = 0.79                   Freq 35.0%, B = 0.02
                                          Freq 27.5%, B = 0.47                    Freq 16.2%, B = 0.97                                                                     Freq 25.4%, B = 0.4                    Freq 21.1%, B = 0.22
                                                         B                                                                                                                             B
                                          Freq 24.7%,  = 0.78                                                                                                              Freq 18.5%,  = 0.98




Figure D19: k-Means ­ Representative Strategies in Treatments with Full Commitment




                                                                                                                      15

                                              Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                                         Table D8: P-Values of Statistical Tests
                                                               Model Linear         Linear   Pr(T)obit   Pr(T)obit Linear    Linear
                                                              Subject  RE            RE         RE          RE       FE        FE
                                                              Session Cluster        RE       Cluster       RE     Cluster   Cluster
                                                             Bootstrap                                             CATs
            Test
                     Left panel Figure 2, all bars = 0 when ball is R       0.000   0.000
                     Left panel Figure 2, all bars = 0 when ball is B       0.000   0.000
             Right panel Figure 2, r message bar = 0 when ball is R         0.000   0.000
                                                      C B
                                                          = R  B
                                                                  in U80    0.000   0.000     0.000       0.996
                                                      C B
                                                          = R  B
                                                                  in V80    0.000   0.000     0.006       0.000
                Pr red|m = r, µ < 2  1
                                        = Pr red|m = r, µ  2 1
                                                                  in U20    0.053   0.002     0.083       0.004     0.150    0.126
               Pr red|m = r, µ < 2 1
                                       = Pr red|m = r, µ  21
                                                                in U100     0.000   0.000     0.024       0.000     0.040    0.021
            Pr red|m = r, µ < 2
                              1
                                , U20 = Pr red|m = r, µ < 2    1
                                                                 , U100     0.627   0.535     0.718       0.610
            Pr red|m = r, µ  21
                                , U20 = Pr red|m = r, µ  2     1
                                                                 , U100     0.000   0.001     0.002       0.003
               Pr red|m = n, µ < 2   1
                                        = Pr red|m = n, µ  2 1
                                                                  in V20    0.038   0.002     0.133       0.006     0.257    0.163
              Pr red|m = n, µ < 2  1
                                       = Pr red|m = n, µ  21
                                                                in V100     0.000   0.000     0.000       0.000     0.022    0.014
            Pr red|m = r, µ < 21
                                 , V20 = Pr red|m = r, µ < 2   1
                                                                 , V100     0.566   0.674     0.536       0.452
            Pr red|m = r, µ  2 , V20 = Pr red|m = r, µ  2
                               1                               1
                                                                 , V100     0.000   0.000     0.000       0.000
                                                     (V20) = (V80)          0.217   0.215
                                                   (V80) = (V100)           0.001   0.020     0.258       0.451
                                                    (U20) = (U80)           0.002   0.001
                                                   (U80) = (U100)           0.696   0.676     0.486       0.441
                                                     (V20) = (U20)          0.000   0.000
                                                     (V80) = (U80)          0.000   0.000
                                                  (V100) = (U100)           0.000   0.000     0.000       0.000
                                                   (V20) = B (V80)
                                                    B
                                                                            0.156   0.130
                                                 B (V80) = B (V100)         0.032   0.052     0.608       0.648
                                                  B (U20) = B (U80)         0.000   0.000
                                                 B (U80) = B (U100)         0.957   0.925     0.711       0.661
                                                  B (V20) = B (U20)         0.000   0.000
                                                  B (V80) = B (U80)         0.000   0.000
                                                B (V100) = B (U100)         0.000   0.000     0.000       0.000



correlations (see also Appendix A.4 of Embrey et al. (2017) for a discussion of these issues).
  In Table D8 we document the robustness of the tests reported in the text by exploring al-
ternative specifications. These include directly accounting for the limited nature of the de-
pendent variable by using a probit or Tobit when appropriate. When possible we also report
bootstrapped estimates that have been shown to perform better when the number of clusters is
small (cluster-adjusted t-statistics or CAT) and allow for subject-specific fixed-effects (Ibrag-
imov and M¨
          uller, 2010). When we report those we also include results from a standard sub-
ject specific fixed-effects estimation with session clustering to provide a benchmark. As can be
seen, p-values are not systematically larger for CATs than with the "standard" clustering, nor
are they very different when estimating a probit or tobit.39 As a whole, results are fairly robust:
out of the 28 hypotheses tested, for only five of them are results not the same for all tests re-
ported (in the sense of being consistently significant­or not­at the 10% level). The few cases
where there are differences are for the most part not difficult to make sense of. Two of them in-
volve comparing V 80 and V 100, where the difference is small in magnitude. Hence, whether
  39
     Note that if a tobit could have been estimated but is not reported, it means that the dependant variable was
not actually censored.


                                                                           16

                        Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                                              V20                                           V80                                      V100




                                                                                                                0 .2 .4 .6
                  0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
                   Frequency




                                                                  Frequency




                                                                                                                 Frequency
                                     0   5   10 15    20   25                      0   5   10 15    20   25                  0   5   10 15    20   25
                                              Round                                         Round                                     Round


                                              U20                                           U80                                      U100
                  0 .2 .4 .6




                                                                 0 .2 .4 .6




                                                                                                                0 .2 .4 .6
                   Frequency




                                                                  Frequency




                                                                                                                 Frequency
                                     0   5   10 15    20   25                      0   5   10 15    20   25                  0   5   10 15    20   25
                                              Round                                         Round                                     Round


                                             U100S                                         U100H
                  0 .2 .4 .6




                                                                 0 .2 .4 .6
                   Frequency




                                                                  Frequency
                                                                                                                                        0.4
                                                                                                                                      0.5   < 0.75
                                                                                                                                      0.75   < 1
                                     0   5   10 15    20   25                      0   5   10 15    20   25
                                              Round                                         Round                                     =1

                Posterior following a critical message: no message for V treatments and red message for U treatments
                V20 and V80 are drawn with a different y-axis.




                                    Figure D20: Senders' Frequency of Inducing µ(m, C , R )

or not the difference is statistically significant is not clear, but either way it is not large. In most
other cases, the p-values are either under the 0.1 cutoff or just slightly above.


D.3     Subjects' Behavior Over Time

Figures D20 and D21 illustrate changes in behavior over the course of the experiment.
  Senders. Figure D20 studies senders by coarsely separating their strategies by the posterior
they induce conditional on the persuasive message; that is, message n under verifiable infor-
mation and r otherwise. Four posterior intervals are considered: low (µ < 0.4), close to full-
commitment equilibrium (0.5  µ < 0.75), high (0.75  µ < 1), and maximal (µ = 1). We ex-
cluded posteriors in the interval 0.4 < µ < 0.5. As the figure shows, overall there are very few
changes over time (at least, no change across these groups of posteriors). Notable exceptions
are treatment U 100H and, to a lesser extent U 100S and U 100, where senders seem to learn to
provide more information over time.
  Receivers. Figure D21 studies receivers and displays changes in terms of the likelihood a
given posterior leads to a a = red. Overall, time effects are limited. There appears to be an
increase in the frequency of a = red conditional on higher posteriors (U 80 is one exception)
and a decrease of such frequency conditional on lower posteriors.




                                                                                           17

                                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
               Probability of Guessing Red




                                                                        Probability of Guessing Red




                                                                                                                                 Probability of Guessing Red
                                                      V20                                                      V80                                                     V100




                     0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                              0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                                                                                       0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
                                             0   5   10 15    20   25                                 0   5   10 15    20   25                                 0   5   10 15    20   25
               Probability of Guessing Red            Round                                                    Round                                                    Round




                                                                        Probability of Guessing Red




                                                                                                                                 Probability of Guessing Red
                                                      U20                                                      U80                                                     U100
                     0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                              0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                                                                                       0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
                                             0   5   10 15    20   25                                 0   5   10 15    20   25                                 0   5   10 15    20   25
                                                      Round                                                    Round                                                    Round
               Probability of Guessing Red




                                                                        Probability of Guessing Red
                                                     U100S                                                    U100H
                     0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                              0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
                                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                                                                                        0.5   < 0.75
                                                                                                                                                                        0.75   < 1
                                             0   5   10 15    20   25                                 0   5   10 15    20   25
                                                      Round                                                    Round                                                    =1




           Figure D21: Receivers's Frequency of a = red Grouped by Posterior (µ)

E     Design

E.1    Graphical Interface

Figures D22 and D23 show the software interface of our experiment. More specifically, Figures
D22 show the commitment and revision stages. To avoid framing, the experiment referred to
these stages as "communication" and "update." Figure D23 show the guessing stage and the
feedback screen. In the feedback screen, all relevant information are reported to both players,
with the exception of the sender's choices in the Revision stage.


E.2    Sample Instructions

In this section, we reproduce instruction for one of our treatment, V80. These instruction
were read out aloud so that everybody could hear. A copy of these instructions was handout
to the subject and available at any point during the experiment. Finally, while reading these
instructions, screenshots similar to those in Figures D22 and D23 were shown with a projector,
to ease the exposition and the understanding of the tasks.




                                                                                                              18

                                             Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
Figure D22: Samples Screenshots U80, Commitment and Revision Stages




                                    19

       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
Figure D23: Samples Screenshots U80, Guessing Stage and Feedback




                                  20

     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
E.2.1     Welcome:

You are about to participate in a session on decision-making, and you will be paid for your participation with cash
vouchers (privately) at the end of the session. What you earn depends partly on your decisions, partly on the de-
cisions of others, and partly on chance. On top of what you will earn during the session, you will receive an addi-
tional $10 as show-up fee.
Please turn off phones and tablets now. The entire session will take place through computers. All interaction
among you will take place through computers. Please do not talk or in any way try to communicate with other
participants during the session. We will start with a brief instruction period. During the instruction period you
will be given a description of the main features of the session. If you have any questions during this period, raise
your hand and your question will be answered privately.




E.2.2     Instructions

You will play for 25 matches in either of two roles: sender or receiver. At the beginning of every Match one ball
is drawn at random from an urn with three balls. Two balls are Blue and one is Red. The receiver earns $2 if she
guesses the right color of the ball. The sender's payoff only depends on the receiver's guess. She earns $2 only if
the receiver guesses Red. Specifically, payoffs are determined illustrated in Table E9.

                                                    If Ball is Red           If Ball is Blue

                        If Receiver guesses Red    Receiver     Sender    Receiver    Sender
                                                     $2           $2         $0         $2

                        If Receiver guesses Blue   Receiver     Sender    Receiver    Sender
                                                     $0           $0         $2         $0



                                               Table E9: Payoffs
  The sender learns the color of the ball. The receiver does not. The sender can send a message to the receiver.
The messages that the sender can choose among are reported in Table E10.

                       If Ball is Red:                        If Ball is Blue:

                          - Message: "The Ball is Red."          - Message: "The Ball is Blue."

                          - No Message.                          - No Message.

                                             Table E10: Messages
  Each Match is divided in three stages: Communication, Update and Guessing.

    1. Communication Stage: before knowing the true color of the ball, the sender chooses a Communication
        Plan to send a message to the receiver.

    2. Update Stage: A ball is drawn from the urn. The computer reveals its color to the sender. The sender can
        now Update the plan she previously chose.


                                                          21

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
    3. Guessing Stage: The actual message received by the receiver may come from the Communication stage or
        the Update stage. Specifically, with probability 80% the message comes from the Communication Stage
        and with probability 20% it comes from the Update Stage. The receiver will not be informed what stage
        the message comes from. The receiver can see the Communication Plan, but she cannot see the Update.
        Given this information, the receiver has to guess the color of the ball.

  At the end of a Match, subjects are randomly matched into new pairs. We now describe what happens in each
one of these stages and what each screen looks like.


E.2.3      Communication Stage: (Only the sender plays)

In this stage, the sender doesn't yet know the true color of the ball. However, she instructs the computer on what
message to send once the ball is drawn. In the left panel, the sender decides what message to send if the Ball is
Red. In the right panel, she decides what message to send if the Ball is Blue. We call this a Communication Plan.
  Every time you see this screen, pointers in each slider will appear in a different random initial position. The
position you see now is completely random. If I had to reproduce the screen once again I would get a different
initial position. By sliding these pointers, the sender can color the bar in different ways and change the probabil-
ities with which each message will be sent. The implied probabilities of your current choice can be read in the
table above the sliders.
  When clicking Confirm, the Communication Plan is submitted and immediately reported to the receiver.


E.2.4     Update Stage: (Only the sender plays)

In this Stage, the sender learns the true color of the ball. She can now update the Communication Plan she selected
at the previous stage. We call this decision Update. The receiver will not be informed whether at this stage the
sender updated her Communication Plan.


E.2.5     Guessing Stage. (Only the receiver plays)

While the sender is in Update Stage, the receiver will have to guess the color of the ball. On the left, she can see
the Communication Plan that the sender selected in the Communication Stage. By hovering on the bars, she can
read the probabilities the sender chose in the Communication Stage. Notice that the receiver cannot see whether
and how the sender updated her Communication Plan in the Update Stage. On the right, the receiver needs to
express her best guess for each possible message she could receive. We call this A Guessing Plan. Notice that
once you click on these buttons, you won't be able to change your choice. Every click is final.




                                                         22

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
                          With 80% probability                          With 20% probability

                      The message is sent according to              The message is sent according to
                           Communication Plan                                  Update

                  (Remember: Communication Plan is always        (Remember: Update is never seen by the
                          seen by the Receiver)                              Receiver)


E.2.6     How is a message generated?

E.2.7     Practice Rounds:

Before the beginning of the experiment, you will play 2 Practice rounds. These rounds are meant for you to
familiarize yourselves with the screens and tasks of both roles. You will be both the sender and the receiver at
the same time. All the choices that you make in the Practice Rounds are unpaid. They do not affect the actual
experiment.


E.2.8     Final Summary:

Before we start, let me remind you that.

    - The receiver wins $2 if she guesses the right color of the ball.

    - The sender wins $2 if the receiver says the ball is Red, regardless of its true color.

    - There are three balls in the urn: two are Blue (66.6% probability), one is Red (33.3% probability). After
        the Practice rounds, you will play in a given role for the rest of the experiment.

    - The message the receiver sees is sent with probability 80% using Communication Plan and with probability
        20% using Update.

    - The choice in the Communication Stage is communicated to the receiver. The choice in the Update stage
        is not.

    - At the end of each Match you are randomly paired with a new player.




                                                            23

                        Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3475075
