                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE EITC AND THE EXTENSIVE MARGIN:
                                    A REAPPRAISAL

                                          Henrik Kleven

                                       Working Paper 26405
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26405


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 2019, Revised February 2020




I thank Richard Blundell, Raj Chetty, Monica Costa Dias, Arindrajit Dube, Amy Finkelstein,
John Friedman, Peter Ganong, Alex Gelber, Jeffrey Grogger, Hilary Hoynes, Theodore Joyce,
Larry Katz, Pat Kline,Wojciech Kopczuk, Ilyana Kuziemko, Claus Kreiner, Camille Landais,
Adam Looney, Day Manoli, Alex Mas, Larry Mead, Costas Meghir, Bruce Meyer, Pascal Noel,
Matthew Notowidigdo, Jesse Rothstein, Dominik Sachs, Emmanuel Saez, Stefanie Stantcheva,
Michael Wiseman, Owen Zidar, and Jim Ziliak for comments and discussions. I am especially
grateful to Elena Marchetti-Bowick and Shreya Tandon for their outstanding research assistance
on this project, and I also thank Stephanie Kestelman and Dana Scott for their excellent research
assistance at earlier stages of the project. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Henrik Kleven. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The EITC and the Extensive Margin: A Reappraisal
Henrik Kleven
NBER Working Paper No. 26405
October 2019, Revised February 2020
JEL No. H20,H24,H31,J20,J21,J22

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper reconsiders the impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) on labor supply at the
extensive margin. I investigate every EITC reform at the state and federal level since the
inception of the policy in 1975. Based on event studies comparing single women with and
without children, or comparing single mothers with different numbers of children, I show that the
only EITC reform associated with clear employment increases is the expansion enacted in 1993.
The employment increases in the mid-late nineties are very large, but they are influenced by the
confounding effects of welfare reform and a booming macroeconomy. Based on different
approaches that exploit variation in these confounders across household type, space and time, I
show that the employment effects align closely with exposure to welfare reform and the business
cycle. Single mothers who were unaffected by welfare reform (but eligible for the EITC) did not
respond. Overall and contrary to consensus, the case for sizable extensive margin effects of the
EITC is fragile. I highlight the presence of informational frictions, widely documented in the
literature, as a natural explanation for the absence of extensive margin responses.


Henrik Kleven
Department of Economics
Princeton University
238 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and CEPR
and also NBER
kleven@princeton.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26405
1   Introduction

Anti-poverty policy in the United States has changed fundamentally over the last four to five
decades. One of the most profound changes has been the expansion of support to the working
poor through the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) along with the downsizing of traditional cash
welfare to the poorest segments of the population. This transition from welfare state to workfare
state is illustrated in Figure 1, which plots the number of EITC recipients and the number of welfare
recipients over time. The EITC has taken over as the main source of cash support and now dwarfs
cash welfare by a factor of almost six. While this shift has distributional consequences, a key
motivation has been to encourage labor supply at the extensive margin. Traditional welfare has
long been blamed for keeping families out of the workforce (e.g. Murray 1984), while the EITC is
supposed to draw them in. This paper revisits the extensive margin effects of the EITC.
    The large literature on the EITC features a striking degree of consensus. Most authors agree that
the program has had sizable extensive margin impacts, particularly on single mothers. Starting
with important contributions by Eissa & Liebman (1996) and Meyer & Rosenbaum (2001), the
literature has focused mostly on the federal EITC reforms in the 1980s and 1990s and relied on
difference-in-differences approaches using variation by the presence and number of children. The
most striking evidence brought forward in support of extensive margin responses is the sharp
rise in the employment of single mothers, especially single mothers with two or more children,
following the large 1993 EITC expansion for these family types (Hotz et al. 2006; Meyer 2010).
    Given the importance of the historical change in welfare state design and the current proposals
to further expand the EITC, it is critical that we have a correct understanding of its effects. The
conclusions from the EITC literature are also central to a wider narrative regarding the impact of
tax incentives on the extensive margin (see e.g., Blundell & MaCurdy 1999; Chetty et al. 2013a).
In this paper, I do three things to shed new light on the EITC. First, I take a long-run perspective
and consider every EITC reform since its inception in the mid-1970s, including all federal and state
reforms. Second, I study all reforms in an event study framework, investigating the dynamics of
labor supply changes before and after legislated reforms. Third, I carefully investigate the role
of confounding factors, especially for the 1993 reform which underpins much of the consensus.
I am far from the first to think about confounders in the 1990s, but I will try to offer some fresh


                                                  1
perspectives.
    Like most of the existing literature, I use Current Population Survey (CPS) data and focus on
the labor supply of single mothers.1 For these women, the extensive margin incentives created
by the EITC are unambiguously positive. I start from a long-run perspective, documenting the
evolution in labor force participation of single women with and without children over the last
50 years. The observed patterns are striking. The participation rates for these two groups have
evolved in parallel over this entire period, except for the mid-late 1990s. The participation rate for
those with children was about 14 percentage points lower than for those without children in the
late 1960s. This gap was about the same 25 years later, in the early 1990s. Then single mothers
closed the entire gap in about five years, after which the two groups reverted to parallel trends.
The dramatic increase for single mothers followed the 1993 EITC expansion, but the long-run series
highlight that this period was an anomaly. If the EITC was important for the extensive margin in
the 1990s, then why did it not narrow the gap in other time periods? There were federal EITC
reforms in 1975, 1986, 1990 and 2009 along with numerous state EITC reforms between 1984-2018,
which significantly increased the incentive to enter the labor market for single mothers.
    Turning to event studies of each individual EITC reform further highlights how unusual the
1993 reform looks. Apart from this reform episode, event studies are essentially flat around the
various EITC expansions at the federal and state levels. Any compelling narrative regarding the
EITC and the extensive margin must reconcile the starkly different patterns around 1993 and else-
where. One view is that the 1993 reform was different simply by virtue of being bigger and size
matters in a world with optimization frictions (Chetty et al. 2011; Chetty 2012). A problem with
this interpretation is that the 1993 reform was bigger only for those with two or more children,
and yet employment also increased substantially for those with one child. Another view is that the
anomalous patterns of the 1990s were driven, not by the EITC, but by confounding factors. The
importance of such factors has been discussed in the literature (e.g., Ellwood 2000; Meyer & Rosen-
baum 2001; Blank 2002; Grogger 2003; Fang & Keane 2004), with authors arguing that the EITC was
in fact a major component of what happened in the 1990s even if it wasn't solely responsible.
    What were the main confounders? First, there was the collapse of traditional cash welfare as il-
lustrated by the caseload reductions in Figure 1. These caseload reductions were linked to welfare
reform, both the federal welfare reform act of 1996 and the numerous state welfare reforms ("wel-
  1
    While the existing literature has relied primarily on the March supplement of the CPS, I use linked March and
monthly files. The larger dataset is very useful for precision in some of the more demanding event study specifications.




                                                           2
fare waivers") implemented between 1992-96. These policy changes put constraints on welfare
receipt through aspects such as time limits, work requirements, training and job search activities.
Because of the close link between welfare receipt and number of children, welfare reform produced
extensive margin incentives correlated with the EITC. Second, the economy was booming at this
time and the favorable business cycle may have had heterogeneous effects on single women with
and without children. In particular, welfare reform and the business cycle are likely to interact: In
a situation where single mothers are pushed off welfare, the labor market dynamics will depend
on the tightness of the labor market at the time of the reform. I will argue that the dramatic labor
market changes in the mid-late 1990s were driven primarily, if not exclusively, by welfare reform
aided by the strong economy.
    I conduct a number of exercises that highlight the importance of welfare reform over the EITC.
I start by considering event studies around the 1993 reform by family size. The extensive margin
effects are strictly increasing in the number of children: In the years following the 1993 reform,
employment increased by about 10pp for single women with one child, 15pp for single women
with two children, 20pp for single women with three children, and close to 30pp for those with
four or more children. This pattern of heterogeneity is consistent with welfare reform due to the
aforementioned link between AFDC benefits and the number of children.2 Conversely, the patterns
are not consistent with the EITC, which was increased sharply for all families with two or more
children and only modestly for families with one child (relative to those without children). This
would predict a sharp divergence in the effects between those with one and two children and little
divergence elsewhere.
    Is it possible that the fanning-out of effects by family size is driven by heterogeneity in extensive
margin elasticities? To probe this question, I convert the effects into elasticities assuming that they
are driven entirely by the EITC. This analysis produces elasticities that are enormous overall and
sharply increasing in family size. The average elasticity across all single mothers equals 2, while
the elasticity for those with, say, four or more children is about 5. Elasticities of such magnitudes
are not credible, implying that any argument that all or most of the employment effects in the 1990s
were driven by the EITC must be far off. To put it differently, if we assume sizable but potentially
reasonable elasticities, then a very small fraction of what happened in the 1990s was driven by the
EITC. This highlights the challenges of using the 1990s to learn about the effects of the EITC. We
  2
    As I will show, AFDC participation levels prior to welfare reform and the subsequent AFDC participation drops
were strongly increasing in the number of children.




                                                       3
are trying to pick out a potential EITC effect in a pattern that is mostly not about the EITC.
    Besides the number of children, the age of the youngest child is a strong predictor of AFDC
participation (see also Grogger 2002, 2003; Looney & Manoli 2016). The pre-reform level of AFDC
participation and its ensuing fall are strongly declining in the age of the youngest child and close
to zero for those with older children. As a result, the age of the youngest child can be used as
a proxy for welfare treatment, allowing for a comparison of employment effects after the 1993
EITC expansion by intensity of welfare treatment. These employment effects are monotonically
declining in the age of the youngest child. Among those with EITC eligible children above 9 years
of age, the effects are virtually zero. Building on this idea, I also present an analysis that uses the
age of the youngest child together with the number of children and other demographic variables
to predict a probability of pre-reform AFDC participation, and consider employment effects by
this measure of welfare treatment intensity.3 There are no employment effects in the lowest deciles
of predicted AFDC participation.
    The final test focuses on the years 1994-1996, i.e. after EITC reform but before federal welfare
reform. During these years, the main confounders are due to welfare waivers and the business
cycle, both of which can be potentially controlled for using state-level variables. Augmenting the
EITC event study specification with controls for the effect of state welfare waivers (allowed to vary
by year and children) and controls for state-level unemployment (allowed to vary by children)
renders the employment effects between 1994-1996 small and statistically insignificant. In other
words, absorbing the variation that can be explained by waivers and unemployment changes a
series that look like an event study of the 1993 EITC expansion into a series that look like an event
study of the 1996 welfare reform. This holds across different samples and specifications.
    To summarize, the different analyses I present suggest that the dramatic employment increases
in the nineties were driven by welfare reform aided by a favorable business cycle. Of course,
it would be difficult to prove conclusively that these increases were completely unrelated to the
EITC, even if the empirical patterns do not point in that direction. The magnitude of the labor
market changes in the 1990s may swamp any EITC-related pattern as I demonstrate through sim-
ple simulation exercises. This puts the onus on EITC reforms that are less confounded. When
   3
     Because the analysis is based on EITC eligible children -- defined as children living at home who are younger than
18 or between 18-23 and still in education -- the number of children and the age of the youngest child are correlated (see
also Looney & Manoli 2016). Having more children living at home implies that the last-born tends to be younger. As a
result, the univariate analyses of heterogeneity by number of children and age of the youngest child partially overlap,
whereas the multivariate analysis of heterogeneity by the probability of AFDC participation exploits the joint predictive
power of the two.



                                                            4
investigating the long-run evolution of labor supply for single mothers and doing event studies of
other EITC reforms, it is hard to conclude that the EITC has played any major role for the historic
extensive margin changes in the U.S. In fact, when merging all of the EITC reforms at the state and
federal level in a stacked event study, I obtain a precisely estimated zero.
       How do we reconcile the observational findings presented here with the many randomized
evaluations finding extensive margin effects of work incentives?4 The bulk of these randomized
evaluations have considered the impact of welfare reform treatments such as time limits, work
requirements and various financial incentives, often bundled together. These are precisely the
aspects that featured prominently in both TANF reform and state welfare waivers, and in fact many
of the experiments were demonstration projects for statewide waivers. The findings of extensive
margin effects in this literature (e.g. Kline & Tartari 2016) are consistent with the arguments in this
paper. As for in-work transfers like the EITC, Card & Hyslop (2005) evaluate an earnings subsidy
to welfare recipients in Canada -- finding effects in the short run, but not in the long run -- but
this policy was structured quite differently from the EITC. More importantly, the EITC is different
from experimental settings in terms of salience, information, administration and claiming. There
is a considerable amount of evidence that most potential recipients are either unaware of the EITC
or have a limited understanding of the schedule, eligibility and claiming (e.g., Bhargava & Manoli
2015). Given these aspects, the EITC is not an a priori likely candidate for finding large effects on
labor supply at the intensive or extensive margins.5 I come back to these issues below.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related literature. Section 3
describes the policy context and the data. Section 4 provides descriptive evidence on the evolution
of the extensive margin for single women over the last fifty years. Section 5 presents a series of
exercises trying to understand the historic changes in the nineties. Section 6 presents a combined
analysis of all the EITC expansion at the federal and state level. Section 7 concludes.
   4
      See Grogger & Karoly (2005) for a comprehensive review of the early literature, and Card & Hyslop (2005), Kline &
Tartari (2016) and Miller et al. (2018) for more recent experimental evaluations.
    5
      While the informational and psychological frictions associated with the EITC are widely acknowledged in the lit-
erature, they have been used almost exclusively as an explanation for not observing any intensive margin responses.
However, theoretical models of intensive and extensive margin responses (see Kleven & Kreiner 2006) imply that such
frictions are equally important for the extensive margin.




                                                          5
2    Literature Review

An enormous body of work has examined the labor market impacts of the EITC and welfare re-
form. This section discusses a number of closely related papers, referring those interested in a
more exhaustive summary to one of the many excellent reviews of the literature.6
    Much of the EITC literature has focused on the extensive margin responses by single mothers,
using Current Population Survey (CPS) data and variation from the federal EITC expansions in
the 1980s and 1990s. These papers consider difference-in-differences approaches that rely on EITC
variation by the presence and/or numbers of children. The early study by Eissa & Liebman (1996)
finds sizable employment effects based on comparing single women with and without children
before and after the 1986 EITC expansion. Meyer & Rosenbaum (2001) expand the time period
to include the 1986, 1990 and 1993 tax reforms, and take a more structural approach based on
modeling income taxes and welfare parameters from AFDC, Food Stamps and Medicaid. They
estimate that tax changes (including the EITC) account for over 60 percent of the employment
increase of single mothers between 1984-96. Hotz et al. (2006) use administrative panel data from
California, covering families on welfare during the period 1991-2000. Their empirical strategy
exploits the differential EITC expansion for families with two or more children relative to families
with one child following the 1993 reform. They find sizable employment effects. Gelber & Mitchell
(2011) confirm the qualitative findings from these earlier studies using PSID data from 1975-2004.
Hoynes & Patel (2018) present event studies of the 1993 reform, comparing single women with
zero, one and two or more children. Their focus is one poverty effects, but their online appendix
shows employment effects as well. In a recent study of the 1975 introduction of the EITC, Bastian
(2018) estimates large effects on maternal employment based on comparing women (single and
married together) with and without children.
    There are some exceptions to the consensus view described above. Cancian & Levinson (2005)
examine Wisconsin's large EITC supplement to families with three or more children, and find no
effects on labor supply at the extensive margin. In a paper analyzing the experience effects of
employment, Looney & Manoli (2016) emphasize a point closely related to one of the analyses
presented in this paper. They highlight that much of the variation in employment by family size
(i.e., by number of minor children living at home) is really variation by the age of the youngest
child, and that the age of the youngest child is strongly related to AFDC receipt prior to welfare
   6
     The EITC literature has been reviewed by Hotz & Scholz (2003), Eissa & Hoynes (2006), Meyer (2010) and Nichols
& Rothstein (2015), while the welfare reform literature has been reviewed by Blank (2002) and Grogger & Karoly (2005).


                                                          6
reform and to the drop in welfare receipt through the 1990s.7
    A very different approach to estimating labor supply responses to the EITC has been proposed
by Chetty et al. (2013b). Based on the idea that responding to the EITC requires knowledge of the
EITC, they estimate behavioral responses by comparing zip-codes that vary by EITC knowledge.
Their proxy for knowledge is based on bunching by self-employed individuals around the first
kink of the EITC. They back out extensive margin responses by comparing event studies around
the birth of the first child in high- and low-bunching areas. Women are more likely to continue
working after child birth in high-bunching ("EITC") areas than in low-bunching ("no-EITC") areas.
This approach yields a modest extensive margin elasticity of 0.2 using data from after year 2000.
Since their proxy for knowledge is increasing over time, the elasticity obtained in this way should
be smaller in the 1980s and 1990s.
    In the experimental literature, there are relatively few examples of EITC-style policies. Card &
Hyslop (2005) study a temporary earnings subsidy to welfare recipients in Canada. Similar to the
EITC, the transfer was conditional on working. But the policy was otherwise different because it
was time-limited (available for maximum of 3 years) and because eligibility required finding work
within 12 months of random assignment, creating a very strong short-term incentive for working
in order to obtain the option of any future transfers. Such a program creates intertemporal substi-
tution incentives and is related to the Frisch elasticity (see Chetty et al. 2013a). Recently, Miller et al.
(2018) provides evidence from the Paycheck Plus demonstration in New York City, an EITC-style
policy for low-income workers without children. They find relatively modest employment effects.
    The paper is also related to the literature on welfare reform, including many observational and
experimental studies (see Blank 2002; Grogger & Karoly 2005). Because the federal government
required experimental evaluations of the state waiver programs that preceded nationwide TANF
reform, there is a substantial body of experimental work assessing programs that involve features
like time limits, work requirements, welfare-to-work training, and financial incentives. In general,
the literature has found significant extensive margin effects. For example, Grogger & Michalopou-
los (2003) provide evidence on the impact of time limits using Florida's Family Transition Program.
Leveraging the randomization of a bundle of policies (including time limits) combined with the
insight that the impact of time limits should be declining in the age of the youngest child, they find
   7
     Outside the EITC context, some papers show zero-responses in labor supply. A recent paper by Martinez et al. (2018)
use a large and salient two-year income tax holiday in Switzerland to estimate Frisch elasticities along the intensive and
extensive margins. They find a precisely estimated zero elasticity at the extensive margin, despite the fact that the Frisch
elasticity is an upper bound on the Hicksian elasticity in standard life-cycle models (e.g. Chetty 2012).




                                                             7
large effects of time limits on welfare use. Their findings are broadly consistent with results using
the age of the youngest child presented here. More recently, Kline & Tartari (2016) study the ex-
tensive margin impacts of Connecticut's Jobs First Program, a randomized waiver demonstration
that included a TANF-style bundle of changes such as time limits, work requirements, family caps
and earnings disregards (see also Bitler et al. 2006). They find substantial effects on women's labor
supply at the extensive margin.
   There are relatively few studies that directly compare the effects of EITC and welfare reform
in the nineties. Ellwood (2000) argued that the independent effects of the EITC, welfare reform,
and the strong economy are very difficult to separate due to their overlapping timing. While it
is hard to disagree with this general sentiment, I will argue that a number of patterns in the data
are strongly suggestive. Grogger (2003) estimates the separate effects of time limits, the remain-
ing waiver/TANF bundle, and the EITC. Using a specification that attributes variation by family
size to the EITC rather than to welfare, he argues that the EITC may have been the single most
important explanation for the rise in employment among single mothers. As I argue, by putting
constraints on a cash benefit that vary by family size, the treatment effect of waiver and TANF
initiatives should be allowed to vary by family size, and this changes the evaluation of the com-
parative effects of EITC and welfare reform. Finally, Fang & Keane (2004) provide a detailed study
of all the different policy parameters and macroeconomic variables that may have influenced the
behavior of single mothers. Their estimates imply that the rise in employment between 1993-2002
can be explained in roughly equal proportions by the EITC, welfare reform (work requirements
and time limits, respectively), and the macro economy.
   Of crucial importance to interpretation is the literature on EITC knowledge. In their study
of extensive margin responses to the 1986 EITC expansion, Eissa & Liebman (1996) cite evidence
from interviews conducted in 1993 showing "virtually no awareness" of the credit among potential
recipients (Eissa & Liebman 1993; Olson & Davis 1994). A number of subsequent studies have
documented the presence of substantial frictions related to the awareness, understanding, and
claiming of the EITC (Romich & Weisner 2000; Smeeding et al. 2000; Ross Phillips 2001; Berube
et al. 2002; Maag 2005; Kopczuk & Pop-Eleches 2007; Jones 2010; Chetty & Saez 2013; Mead 2014;
Bhargava & Manoli 2015). For example, Maag (2005) reports that only 58% of low-income families
"had heard about the EITC" in a nationally representative sample from 2002. What is more, the
understanding of how the schedule is designed is even weaker. Among the families interviewed
by Romich & Weisner (2000), most people had heard of the EITC, but virtually no one knew that


                                                 8
they needed to earn a certain amount to maximize the credit. Chetty et al. (2013b) show that their
proxy for knowledge -- the degree of bunching by the self-employed at the first EITC kink -- has
been increasing over time and was relatively limited in the mid-nineties.8
        While these informational and psychological frictions are widely acknowledged, they have
been used mostly to explain the absence of intensive margin responses. The presumption is, it
appears, that extensive margin responses can be based solely on knowing about the existence of
a tax refund, while intensive margin responses require detailed understanding of the schedule.
This view is not consistent with economic theory, nor with basic introspection. Theoretical models
predict that the extensive margin decision depends on taxes and transfers at the desired level of
earnings, i.e. the intensive and extensive margin decisions are inter-dependent (see e.g., Kleven
& Kreiner 2006; Eissa et al. 2006, 2008). This inter-dependence is particularly strong for nonlinear
incentives like the EITC. In a model with fixed costs of working (due to for example child care),
the EITC is an incentive to start working around the refund-maximizing earnings range (for the
relevant family size), not in any earnings range. Absent information about where the relevant
earnings range is located and the size of the credit in that range, the extensive margin response is
not credible.



3       Institutional Background and Data

3.1      The Earned Income Tax Credit

Since its inception in 1975, the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) has grown to become the largest
cash transfer program in the United States in terms of the number of recipients and revenue costs.
The EITC is a refundable tax credit and eligibility depends on having earned income, creating a
positive incentive at the extensive margin. As shown in Panel A of Figure 2, the credit amount is
a function of household earnings and the number of qualifying dependents (children).9 For each
family size, the credit schedule features a phase-in range, a refund-maximizing plateau range, and
a phase-out range. The generosity of the schedule is increasing in family size, with the largest
possible credit for families with three or more children. As of 2018, their maximum annual credit
    8
     From outside the economics literature, Mead (2014) argues that the EITC was not responsible for moving single
mothers into work in the 1990s. Besides the survey evidence on EITC knowledge, his argument is that the academic
consensus is inconsistent with the experiences of welfare officials and administrators "on the ground." Based on inter-
views with welfare officials in Wisconsin and New York, he concludes that those dealing directly with welfare recipients
did not think the EITC played any role in the initial decision by welfare mothers to start working.
   9
     An EITC qualifying dependent is a relative who is under the age of 19 (24 for full-time students) or permanently
disabled, and reside with the tax filer for at least half the year.


                                                           9
equals about $6,400 and is reached at annual earnings in the range of $14,300-18,700.
      The parameters of the EITC have been revised substantially over time. Table A.I in the online
appendix documents the full set of EITC parameters for each family size and each year between
1975-2018.10 To simplify, Panel B of Figure 2 focuses on the evolution of just one key parameter
-- the maximum possible credit -- across different family sizes. The credit amount in each year
is reported in 2018 US Dollars. As shown in the figure, there have been five federal reforms of
the EITC: the introduction in 1975 and the expansions enacted in 1986, 1990, 1993 and 2009.11 The
largest changes are the 1975 EITC introduction for all families with children and the 1993 EITC
expansions for families with two or more children. The figure highlights that the most natural
research design for studying the impacts of the EITC is to compare different family sizes around
the reform episodes. For the 1993 reform in particular, it is natural to compare those with two
or more children to those with one child or without any children. This comparison comes with
potential placebo checks, because there is relatively little variation between those with one vs zero
children and no variation between those with three or more vs two children.
      In addition to the federal EITC described above, many states have introduced their own EITC
supplements. A total of thirty states instituted EITC supplements between 1984-2018. The details
of these state programs are described in Table A.II in the appendix. With the exception of California
and Minnesota, state EITCs are specified as a percentage of the federal EITC. In some states the
supplement is small, while in others it is quite large. The majority of state EITCs are refundable,
just like the federal credit, but some of them are nonrefundable. Overall, when accounting for both
the state and federal EITC, there has been a very substantial and ongoing expansion of support to
the working poor through the last four decades. I will explore the potential impacts of all of these
EITC expansions in this paper.


3.2     Welfare Reform

It would be impossible to assess the EITC without considering the potentially confounding effects
from the rest of the welfare system. In particular, the EITC expansion enacted in 1993 and im-
plemented between 1994-96 -- the biggest expansion in the history of the program -- coincided
with dramatic changes to traditional cash welfare. The Personal Responsibility and Work Oppor-
  10
     The set of parameters includes the phase-in rate, the maximum credit, the phase-out rate, and the location of the
kink points.
  11
     These EITC changes were legislated as part of the Tax Reduction Act of 1975, the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA86),
the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Acts of 1990 and 1993 (OBRA90 and OBRA93), and the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA).


                                                         10
tunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PRWORA) implemented welfare reform at the national level,
replacing Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) with the more restrictive Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF). However, this welfare reform did not represent a sudden
and unanticipated departure from past policy. It was the culmination of state-led welfare reform
efforts starting in the late 1980s and accelerating through the first part of the 1990s. These state
reforms were implemented under the heading of welfare waivers, federal approvals for states to
change their welfare programs. While waiver-based reforms had been possible since the early
1960s, they became very popular in the 1990s and set the stage for national reform. I will highlight
the key features of state and federal welfare reform below, but refer to Grogger & Karoly (2005) for
an exhaustive description of the history and details of these policy changes.
    The state waivers involved all the key elements that would later be implemented on a national
scale through TANF reform, including time limits, work requirements, and financial incentives to
work. Some waivers were pilot programs that affected only a few counties or a subset of wel-
fare recipients, while other waivers were statewide welfare reforms. Between 1987-92, a total of
thirty waivers were approved by the federal government, although none of these were statewide
reforms. Between 1992-96, under the first term of the Clinton administration, another eighty-three
waivers were approved and many of these were statewide reforms. In total, thirty-five states re-
ceived approval for statewide legislation through waivers. Table A.III in the appendix documents
the approval and implementation dates of all statewide waivers.
    There were six main types of waiver policies (see e.g., Council of Economic Advisors 1997,
1999; Department of Health and Human Services 1999). Termination time limits introduced upper
bounds on the length of time that a family or its adult members could receive welfare benefits, even
if they were otherwise eligible. These time limits varied from state to state, but a number of places
set their limit to 24 months. Work requirement time limits imposed mandatory work requirements
that kicked in when recipients reached a certain time limit.12 Furthermore, building on the Job
Opportunities and Basic Skills Training Program (JOBS) instituted in 1988, JOBS waivers strength-
ened the rules regarding participation in education, training, and job search activities. There were
two such waivers. JOBS exemptions allowed states to eliminate or reduce the exemption of fam-
ilies with young children from JOBS. While previously parents with children under the age of 3
(or under the age of 6 if the state could not guarantee child care) had been exempt from JOBS,
  12
     Henceforth, I refer to termination time limits simply an "time limits" and to work requirement time limits as "work
requirements".




                                                          11
these waivers required parents with very young children (sometimes as young as 12 weeks) to
participate in the program. JOBS sanctions allowed states to impose harsher sanctions for failure to
comply with JOBS requirements. Many states introduced the possibility of suspending the entire
family's AFDC grant after a period of non-compliance. Motivated by a perception that welfare
benefits were contributing to single motherhood and out-of-wedlock births, family caps were used
to eliminate or reduce the benefit increase for existing AFDC recipients who had additional chil-
dren. Finally, earnings disregards provided stronger financial incentives to work by disregarding
earnings up to a level (such as the federal poverty line) in the calculation of benefit claw back.
      The era of waiver-based reform culminated in national reform through PRWORA, signed into
law in August 1996. This reform consolidated the AFDC and JOBS programs into the TANF pro-
gram, which included all the key waiver elements just described. States had considerable latitude
in designing their own TANF program under some federal guidelines. For example, it was a fed-
eral requirement that states impose a time limit of no more than 60 months, but they were free
to choose stricter limits. States that had implemented time limits through waivers could keep the
same limit (and many states did) or adjust it up or down. States without any time limit had to
introduce one. As a result, TANF extended the waiver-type elements that had already been imple-
mented in many states to the remaining states. There was, and still is, considerable variation in the
specific program parameters across states.13
      Most of the policy changes implemented under waivers and PRWORA did not directly reduce
statutory benefit levels, but they imposed much harsher constraints on receiving those benefits.
Table A.IV in the appendix shows the maximum monthly benefit by state and number of children
in 1993. The benefit is strictly increasing in the number of children in every state. By itself, this
implies that the treatment effect of welfare reform is increasing in the number of children. For
example, the cost of introducing a time limit on benefit receipt will be greater in a large family
than in a small family due to their different benefit levels. Regardless of benefit levels, there is
another more fundamental reason why the treatment effect of welfare reform is increasing in the
number of children. In a world with fixed costs of work per child (e.g. due to child care), single
mothers with more children are less likely to work are more likely to be on welfare, all else equal.
Hence, their welfare participation rates will be higher at baseline (a prediction borne out in the
data), making them more treated by welfare reform. This is important to keep in mind when
interpreting the empirical evidence by family size.
 13
      See Grogger & Karoly (2005) for a detailed documentation of TANF parameters in each state.



                                                          12
3.3    Data

The analysis is based on the Current Population Survey (CPS). I combine data from the basic
monthly files and from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC), or "March files".
Using the monthly and March files together give much more data than using the March files alone,
which is what previous papers in the literature have done.14 I restrict the dataset to include the
monthly files from 1989-2018 and the March files from 1968-2017. Even though the monthly files
go back to 1976, they do not allow for accurately identifying the presence or number of children
prior to 1989. I focus on the sample of single women aged 20-50.15 These restrictions result in
a sample of 4,674,064 individual-month observations across survey years 1968-2018. Appendix B
provides a detailed description of the CPS data, including the link between monthly and March
files, variable definitions and measurement.
      The CPS allows for different ways of measuring labor supply at the extensive margin. One
distinction is between employment and labor force participation, where the latter includes unem-
ployed people who are actively searching for work or only temporarily laid off. While employment
is the more relevant outcome for welfare calculations, participation has the advantage of not mov-
ing with transitions between employment and unemployment and is therefore less sensitive to the
business cycle. The other distinction is between annual and weekly measures of the extensive mar-
gin. Annual measures are preferred in principle due to fact the EITC is based on annual earnings.16
However, focusing on weekly measures offer three key advantages. First, the weekly measures are
available in both the monthly and the March files, whereas the annual measures are available only
in the March files. Hence, the weekly measures give much more statistical power. Second, ques-
tions about work activities during the previous week likely involve less measurement error than
questions about work or earnings during the previous year. Third, the weekly measures largely
avoid issues with nonresponses in the CPS. There are very few nonresponses in the weekly labor
market and demographic variables, whereas there is significant nonresponse in the annual income
variables in the March files. This issue has become more severe over time. As a result, a signifi-
cant fraction of earnings observations in the CPS are imputed based on a procedure described in
appendix section B. I refer to Bollinger et al. (2017) for a detailed analysis of this issue.
   14
      The main advantage of the March supplement is that it contains detailed information on annual income variables
during the previous year. I use the March files alone for analyses that requires annual income information.
   15
      The definition of "single" includes never married, separated, divorced, and widowed.
   16
      On the other hand, the AFDC/TANF program -- also very central for the analysis in this paper -- is administered
at the monthly level and thus depends on monthly earnings.




                                                         13
    Figure A.I in the online appendix shows the long-run evolution of all four extensive margin
measures. There are level differences between these measures -- annual measures are higher than
weekly measures and participation is higher than employment -- but the time trends are very
similar. The employment series fluctuate more than the participation series due to the business
cycle effects mentioned above. While this would be an argument for focusing on the participation
outcome, and I do start out by considering this outcome in the next section, the main analyses
that follow consider employment as the baseline outcome. This is consistent with the focus of
the existing literature. I will show results for weekly employment in the baseline specifications,
but present results for the three alternative measures in the appendix. None of the main results
I present vary fundamentally with the choice of extensive margin measure, but the annual-level
analyses are more noisy as they rely exclusively on the March files.
    Table 1 provides descriptive statistics in the estimation sample of single women aged 20-50,
pooled across all years. Single mothers are somewhat older, have less education, and employ-
ment/participation than single women without children. These level differences are unsurprising
and, of course, by themselves do not invalidate the difference-in-differences analyses presented
here. Figure A.II in the appendix shows the earnings distributions of single mothers, split between
low education (high school and below) and high education (some college and above). Earnings are
normalized using the first kink point of the EITC in each year (so that the kink is located at zero).
While the distribution of the highly-educated is shifted to the right, the graph shows that, in the
sample of single mothers, both those with low and high education tend to have earnings within the
EITC eligible range. I consider the full sample of single mothers as a baseline, but present results
for low-educated single mothers as a robustness check.



4    EITC and the Extensive Margin: The Long View

It is useful to start from a long-run perspective, describing the extensive margin changes for single
women over the last fifty years. Figure 3 shows the labor force participation rates of single women
with children (blue series) and single women without children (black series) between 1968-2018.
Given children is an eligibility requirement for the EITC, we can think of these series as treatment
and control groups for assessing the effects of the program.17 The patterns are very striking. Over
half a century, all of the action in the participation rate of single mothers relative to that of single
  17
     To clarify, childless families could not receive any EITC until 1993 and only a very modest credit thereafter (see
Figure 2).


                                                          14
childless women took place during a single spell in the mid-late 1990s. Outside this spell, the two
groups have evolved in parallel. At the beginning of the period, in 1968, the gap in labor force
participation between the two groups was equal to 14.3 percentage points. A quarter of a century
later, in the early 1990s, the gap was about the same. Then the labor force participation of single
mothers rose dramatically in the mid-late 1990s, closing the entire 14 percentage gap in just a few
years. After this, the two groups went back to parallel trends -- but now at the same levels -- and
have stayed that way to this day. The graph highlights just how extraordinary the late 1990s were
in the history of the U.S. labor market.
    What explains this long-run evolution? To think about the role of the EITC and other factors,
Figure 4 compares the long-run series to the timing of the five federal EITC reforms (Panel A) and
the confounders from welfare reform and the macroeconomy (Panel B). Starting with Panel A, it
shows that the EITCs claim to sizable extensive margin effects relies on two concurrent events: the
EITC expansion enacted in 1993 (which increased tax refunds between 1994-1996) and the historic
increase in the participation rate of single mothers in the mid-late 1990s. At the same time, the
figure brings out a major puzzle. If EITC expansion drove the extensive margin increases in the
late 1990s, then why do we not see any such effect around the other reforms? The three federal
EITC reforms prior to 1993 did not lead to any closing of the gap between single women with and
without children.18 In addition, thirty states introduced EITC supplements between 1984-2018,
adding to the puzzle of why there is no action outside the critical period in the 1990s.
    Any compelling EITC narrative must reconcile the starkly different patterns in the 1990s and
elsewhere. Did the EITC expansion in the mid-1990s have a different impact, because it was bigger
and perhaps better advertised than the other reforms? Or were the changes in the 1990s driven by
other confounding factors, or by an interaction between the EITC and these other factors? Panel
B highlights the two main confounders in the 1990s. First, there was welfare reform: the period
of waiver-based reform between 1992-96, culminating in national reform in 1996 (see section 3.2
for details). Second, there was the macroeconomy: the economy was booming during the Clinton
era, with the national unemployment rate (dashed series) falling from about eight to four percent
between 1992-2000.
    Why would the macroeconomy impact single women with and without children differently?
The figure shows that, outside the 1990s, there is no strong correlation between unemployment
  18
     The EITC expansion in 2009 did not lead to any visible effect either, but because this expansion applied only to
families with three or more children, its effect may be missed when considering all single mothers. I present long-run
series by different family sizes below.



                                                         15
fluctuations and the gap in labor force participation between the two groups. However, this is not
inconsistent with the business cycle having an effect in the 1990s, because of the interaction with
the policy shocks happening at that time. Regardless of which policy is primarily responsible for
the effects (EITC or welfare reform), the labor market dynamics around the time of the reforms
will depend on the tightness of the labor market. For example, when single mothers get pushed
off welfare, their ability to find work will depend on the availability of jobs at the time. Hence,
the short-term effects of welfare reform will almost surely interact with the business cycle. More-
over, in the presence of employment hysteresis (see e.g., Yagan 2019), the fact that welfare reform
happened in a strong economy may play a role even for the longer-term effects.
    The long-run series discussed above are based on a specific measure of the extensive margin --
weekly labor force participation -- and it is worth checking if the empirical patterns are different
for alternative measures of the extensive margin. Figure A.III in the online appendix compares all
four extensive margin measures available in the CPS data: participation and employment at either
the weekly or annual level.19 The difference between participation and employment is that the
former includes unemployed people who are actively searching for work or temporarily laid off.
The figure shows that the main insights are robust to the choice of extensive margin measure. If
anything, the employment gaps show even less sign of shrinking in the 25 years leading up to the
reforms in the 1990s. It is also worth noting that, in general, the employment series are bumpier
than the participation series. This is because employment is more sensitive to the business cycle as
it is directly affected by movements between employment and unemployment. Figure A.IV shows
the evolution of the same four outcomes, but restricted to the sample of those with low education
(high school or less). This is motivated by the idea that low-educated single mothers tend to have
lower earnings and are therefore more treated by the EITC. The broad patterns are again the same,
although there is some shrinking in the participation gaps -- but not in the employment gaps --
in the decades leading up to the 1990s.
    Further insight can be gained by splitting the sample of single mothers into different family
sizes. Figure 5 shows the long-run evolution in labor force participation for single women with
zero, one, two, and three or more children. The broad pattern is the same as before: the different
groups have trended similarly over half a century, except for the mid-late 1990s.20 However, while
  19
     See section 3.3 for details. The annual participation series is shorter than the others, because this measure was not
recorded in CPS data until the 1976 March files (i.e., pertaining to calendar year 1975).
  20
     These series are somewhat noisier than the aggregate series. This is partly because the long-run graphs -- but not
the analysis of the 1990s in the next section -- are based on the March files alone rather than the linked March and
monthly files. As mentioned in section 3.3 and described in the data appendix B, the monthly files are used only for


                                                           16
all groups of single mothers increase their labor force participation in the 1990s, the magnitude is
strongly increasing in family size. Consider those with three or more children: their participation
rate increases by a staggering 23 percentage points over six years, about twice as much as for those
with two children. This difference is puzzling under the EITC narrative, because the tax credit
expansion was the same for those with two and three children. It is of course possible that larger
families have larger extensive margin elasticities and therefore respond more strongly to the same
incentive, but this line of reasoning leads to other puzzles: if single women with three or more
children are much more elastic, then why do they not increase participation after the 2009 EITC
expansion (targeted specifically to them) or after the 1986 and 1990 expansions? Their baseline
level was higher in 2009 and there was the Great Recession -- both of which might explain the
lack of a response -- but such arguments do not apply to the 1986 or 1990 reforms. Overall, the
long-run evidence suggests that whatever happened to large female-headed families in the late
1990s was something unique to that time period.
    Another interesting aspect of the 1990s is that participation rose substantially even for those
with just one child. This runs counter to the argument that the EITC had larger effects in the 1990s
simply because the 1993 expansion was much larger than the other expansions. While this was true
for families with two or more children, it was not true for families with one child. As shown in
Figure 2, the increase in the maximum refund for one-child families was not exceptionally large on
its own, and it was actually quite modest relative to the concurrent increase for childless families.
As a result, the sizable extensive margin increases for single women with one child relative to those
without children during the 1990s provide prima facie evidence of confounders.
    Figures A.V-A.VI in the appendix investigate the robustness of these patterns to the alternative
extensive margin measures and to focusing on the low-educated. For each outcome and sample,
the stylized pattern is the same: what happened in the nineties was unique to this time period, it
happened across all groups of single mothers, and it was monotonically increasing in the number
of children. This points to a treatment that was both unique to the 1990s and strictly increasing
in family size. Welfare reform satisfies both of these, whereas the EITC satisfies neither. To dig
deeper, the next section moves from the long-run descriptive perspective to a detailed econometric
analysis of the 1990s.21
post-1989 analyses due to problems with accurately identifying the presence and number children in the CPS monthly
files before that time.
   21
      Although my main focus is on single mothers, I consider married women in Appendix Figure A.VII. This figure
shows labor force participation rates of married women between 1968-2018, considering comparison groups based
either on the presence of children or on spousal earnings (using that the EITC is based on family income). The patterns


                                                          17
5     EITC and the Extensive Margin: Making Sense of the 1990s

This section investigates the changes in the 1990s from different angles that will shed light on the
role of the EITC vs other factors. The 1990s can be analyzed using the linked March and monthly
CPS files, which give more data and precision than when using the March files alone.22 In par-
ticular, the larger dataset allows for flexible event study specifications and granular heterogeneity
analyses without loosing too much precision.


5.1     Event Studies: 1993 Reform vs Other Reforms

I start by putting the data into an event study framework, comparing the 1993 EITC expansion to
the other federal EITC reforms. This exercise is not very different from the descriptive evidence
presented above -- comparing those with and without children over time -- but a formal event
study approach has several advantages. It allows me to present graphs that highlight the dynamics
around each reform more clearly, and it allows me to control for changing demographics and to
provide standard errors. Consider the following specification:




            Pimt =        j · Y earj =t +  · Kidsi +                 j · Y earj =t · Kidsi + Xi  + imt ,              (1)
                          j                                  j =-1


where the outcome Pimt is an indicator for individual i working or participating in month m of year
t. The right-hand side includes dummies for each year, a dummy for having kids, the interaction
between year and kids dummies, and a vector of demographic controls Xi . The interaction term
omits the year just before the reform (denoted by j = -1), so that the difference-in-differences
coefficient t can be interpreted as the extensive margin effect in year t relative to the pre-reform
year. As a baseline, I consider effects on weekly employment without any demographic controls,
and then investigate the robustness of the results to alternative extensive margin measures and to
controlling for demographics.
      The first set of results is presented in Figure 6. This shows event studies around the 1975 EITC
introduction (Panel A), the 1986 and 1990 EITC expansions (Panel B), the 1993 EITC expansion
(Panel C), and the 2009 EITC expansion for families with three or more children (Panel D). These
do not point to any clear extensive margin responses for married women (even in the 1990s).
  22
     As discussed in section 3.3 and in the data appendix, the recording of children in the monthly files is accurate (and
consistent with the March files) only from 1989 onwards. As a result, all analyses using data prior to 1989 are based on
the March files alone, while those using data only from after 1989 are based on the linked March-monthly files.


                                                           18
are run separately and each graph shows the estimated DiD coefficients ^ t over time. While Panels
A-C compares single mothers with and without children, Panel D compares single mothers with
three or more children to those without children.23
    The figure highlights just how exceptional the patterns around the 1993 reform are. Taken
at face value, the 1993 event study looks very compelling: the trends are roughly parallel in the
years before the reform, the treatment group starts increasing relative to the control group after the
reform, and a large and statistically significant DiD effect builds up over time. No other reform is
associated with such patterns. The event studies are essentially flat around the 1975 introduction
(which was large) and around the 1986 and 1990 expansions. The event study around the 2009
expansion shows a sizable negative effect, which is presumably due to the confounding effects
of the Great Recession in 2008-09. The negative DiD effects obtained during this macroeconomic
downturn highlights the problems with interpreting the positive DiD effects during the upturn in
the 1990s.
    Figure A.VIII in the appendix repeats this analysis with demographic controls to see if the
patterns are driven partly by compositional changes in the group of single mothers over time.
Specifically, the controls include dummies for the age of the woman (six categories), the age of the
youngest child (seven categories), and education level (three categories).24 The resulting patterns
are very similar to those based on raw means. There is one exception worth highlighting, however.
Controlling for demographics in the 1993 event study strengthens a feature that was also present
(but subtle) in the baseline graph, namely that the inflection point in the DiD series happens a year
too early, in 1992. The year 1992 coincides with the turn of the business cycle and the beginning of
statewide welfare waivers (as shown in Figure 4), suggesting that the simple DiD estimates around
1993 may substantially overstate the effects of the EITC.
    Figure A.IX and A.X in the appendix reproduce the analysis with demographic controls for
the alternative extensive margin outcomes: weekly participation and annual employment. The
patterns are overall similar when considering these other outcomes, but annual employment is
noisier as it is based on the March files alone. The main difference relates to the DiD series of
annual employment around the 1986 and 1990 reforms. This series shows an increase between 1987
  23
     That is, Panel D is based on an extension of equation (1) that includes separate dummies for 1, 2, and 3+ children,
plotting the DiD coefficients on single mothers with 3+ children. Changing the control group to those with one or two
children (or their combination) does not affect the results qualitatively.
  24
     The binning of these dummy controls is as follows: age of woman (20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-50), age of
youngest child (0-1, 2-3, 4-6, 7-9, 10-13, 14-17, 18+), and education (below high school, high school degree, some college
and above). Unless otherwise specified, the same binning is used in subsequent analyses.



                                                           19
and 1989, consistent with finding positive effects when comparing years before the 1986 reform to
years in the late 1980s as in Eissa & Liebman (1996).25 While this could be an effect of the EITC,
the evidence is far from conclusive. Not only does the increase start a year too late (which might
be explained by frictions), but most of the effect goes away between 1990 and 1991, i.e. after the
1990 reform had enacted further EITC expansions. More broadly, and as discussed in the previous
section, there is no narrowing of the annual employment gap between single women with and
without children over the 25 years leading up to the 1993 reform, despite the substantial EITC
increases over this period.26 The employment series is quite bumpy from year to year (due to
business cycles and other time-varying factors), but there is no longer-run convergence.
   Table 2 presents DiD estimates for all five federal EITC reforms across different specifications.
The table shows results for employment and labor force participation (weekly measures), for all
single mothers and low-educated single mothers (high school and below), and for regressions
with and without demographic controls. The estimates represent the average effect over the first
three years after each reform. The three-year window is chosen because it avoids overlap between
the 1990 and 1993 EITC reforms, and between the 1993 EITC reform and PRWORA. The results
are very robust and consistent with the interpretations above. Apart from the 1993 reform, all
estimates are either small and statistically insignificant or they are negative. By contrast, the 1993
reform is associated with large and strongly significant DiD estimates that hardly vary across spec-
ifications. The estimates are virtually the same for the employment and participation outcomes,
and for specifications with and without demographic controls. The estimates are larger in the low-
educated sample than in the full sample, but the difference is small: a positive effect of roughly
3.5pp for low-educated single mothers versus roughly 3pp for all single mothers.
   To conclude, the empirical patterns that follow the 1993 EITC expansion represent a historic
anomaly independently of the outcome, sample, and specification. A natural interpretation, there-
fore, is that these patterns are driven by confounders that are unique to the 1990s: welfare reforms
at the state and federal level, perhaps interacted with the sharp upturn in the US macroeconomy.
The following sections investigate these confounders from a variety of angles.
  25
     The main specifications in Eissa & Liebman (1996) are based on comparing average annual employment between
1984-86 and 1988-90.
  26
     See Panel D of Figure A.III.




                                                      20
5.2      1993 Reform: Heterogeneity by Family Size

This section presents event studies by family size. The long-run descriptive analysis included this
dimension of heterogeneity, but using the linked March and monthly files allows me to produce
cleaner and more granular evidence for the 1993 reform. The results are based on an extension of
equation (1) in which the dummy for having any kids is replaced by separate dummies for having
                                                                                        n for each
one, two, three, or four or more kids. The graphs presented below plot DiD coefficients t
year t and each number of children n. These coefficients capture the effect in each year relative to
the pre-reform year, and for each family size relative to single women without children.
       Figure 7 shows results from specifications without demographic controls (Panel A) and with
demographic controls (Panel B). In both panels, there is a clear fanning-out of employment effects
by number of children. Consider first the raw patterns in Panel A. In the decade following the 1993
reform, the employment rate increased by about 10pp for single women with one child, 15pp for
single women with two children, 20pp for single women with three children, and close to 30pp for
those with four or more children. Because the baseline level of employment is declining in family
size, the fanning-out is even more dramatic in percentage terms. For example, single mothers with
four or more children almost doubled their employment rate, from about 30% to about 60%. Panel
B of the figure shows that some of the fanning-out can be explained by changes in the demographic
composition of single mothers. Including detailed demographic controls, reduces the effect for
each group, but by less for small families than for large families. The fanning-out is still strong,
however, with increases in the employment rate ranging from about 8pp to 25pp across the four
family sizes.27 , 28
       These patterns of heterogeneity are puzzling under the hypothesis that they are driven by the
EITC. As described in section 3.1, the 1993 EITC expansion was modest for families with one child
(relative to those without children), while it was very large for families with two or more chil-
dren. By itself, this implies that the divergence in the DiD series should occur primarily between
one and two children. The DiD series for one child should be relatively flat, while the series for
three and four plus children should feature little additional divergence. Conversely, the observed
  27
     Note that, while demographic controls reduce the fanning-out by number of children, they had virtually no impact
on the average employment effects discussed in the previous section. This is because demographic controls matter
mostly for single women with three or more children, who represent a small fraction of the sample: about 80% of single
mothers have one or two children, about 13% have three children, and the remaining 7% have four or more children.
These numbers have remained fairly constant for a long time.
  28
     Figure A.XI in the appendix repeats the analysis for labor force participation. If anything, the fanning-out by number
of children is even stronger in the participation outcome than in the employment outcome.



                                                            21
heterogeneity is natural if the effects are driven by welfare reform. As described in section 3.2,
AFDC benefits were increasing in family size -- each child triggered additional benefits -- and
pre-reform caseloads were strongly increasing in the number of children.29 Hence, the treatment
effect of welfare reform -- from both waivers and PRWORA -- is strictly increasing in family size.
       It is useful to zoom in on the years 1994-96, before national welfare reform. It is potentially eas-
ier to isolate the impact of the EITC during these years, although welfare waivers and the business
cycle still pose a threat to identification. If anything, the evidence is even more puzzling during
these years, because single mothers with two children do not begin increasing employment rel-
ative to those with one child until later.30 In other words, in the years prior to PRWORA, there
is divergence between each family size except where we should see it. This provides prima facie
evidence that waivers and the business cycle by themselves were sufficient to swamp any EITC-
related pattern.


5.3      1993 Reform: Elasticities and Simulated Responses

To better understand the magnitude of the extensive margin changes in the 1990s, I convert the
estimated DiD effects into extensive margin elasticities. The elasticities will be calculated under
the (extreme) assumption that the effects are driven solely by the EITC. This exercise will clarify
if it is conceivable that the observed effects, including their heterogeneity across family sizes, are
driven exclusively or primarily by the EITC.
       The extensive margin elasticity with respect to the net-of-tax rate on labor force participation is
defined as follows
                                                      P /P
                                                                    ,                                            (2)
                                                  (1 -  ) / (1 -  )

where P is the probability of employment or participation and  is the participation tax rate, i.e. the
average tax rate on earnings when accounting for taxes paid and benefits lost upon entry into the
labor market. This way of defining the elasticity corresponds to the literature on optimal taxation
and welfare measurement (Saez 2002; Kleven & Kreiner 2005; Eissa et al. 2006, 2008). Assuming
that the 1993 event study effects are driven by the EITC, I relate the total DiD effect P to the
change in the participation tax rate  implied by the EITC expansion alone. The baseline net-
  29
     Figure A.XII in the appendix shows AFDC/TANF participation rates over the 1990s by number of children. The
pre-reform participation rates -- and the ensuing drops in those rates -- are strongly increasing in family size.
  30
     This delay cannot be explained by the gradual phase-in of the EITC expansion for families with two or more chil-
dren, because even the 1994 expansion on its own was much larger than the total expansion for families with fewer
children (see Figure 2).



                                                         22
of-tax rate 1 -  , on the other hand, accounts for the combined implications of taxes and welfare
benefits. I calculate this tax rate by combining the CPS data with NBER's tax simulation model
(TAXSIM) and a welfare benefit calculator that accounts for AFDC and Food Stamp benefits. The
tax-benefit simulations are outlined below and the full technical details are provided in Appendix
C. While  and  vary at the individual level, the elasticity  will be calculated by relating the
average treatment effect in the numerator to an average incentive change in the denominator.
       Calculating the tax parameters in equation (2) requires information about earnings conditional
on working. While the earnings of those who are working are observed in the CPS March files,
the latent earnings of those who are not working are not directly observable. Therefore, the first
step of the analysis is to predict earnings for non-workers. This is done by running the following
regression on the sample of single women with positive (pre-reform) earnings:


                          Yi = a + n + y + e + r + s + ae + ne + ye + i ,                                              (3)

where Yi is earnings of worker i and the right-hand side includes fixed effects for the age of the
woman a (6 categories), the number of children n (7 categories), the age of the youngest child y (7
categories), education e (4 categories), race r (white, non-white), state s, as well as a set of second-
level interactions between education, age, number of children, and age of the youngest child. The
regression is estimated using pre-reform data (1991-93) for workers, and the estimated coefficients
are then used to predict earnings for non-workers. The measurement of tax parameters is based
on predicted earnings for non-workers and actual earnings for workers.
       Two conceptual issues come up in this type of exercise. First, while the earnings predictions ac-
count for selection on observables, they do not account for selection on unobservables. The results
are very robust to alternative specifications of the earnings regression, either more parsimonious
or richer specifications. The different specifications predict that the majority of single mothers en-
ter the labor market around the peak of the EITC schedule (where the subsidy is largest), which
is also what economic theory predicts.31 Second, I calculate the tax parameters in the denomina-
tor of equation (2) using the full sample of workers and non-workers. Both groups are included
because, in general, extensive margin effects may be driven either by higher entry rates among
  31
    Panel A of Figure A.XIII shows the predicted earnings distribution in the full sample of single mothers (working
and non-working) estimated from equation (3). The kink points of the 1993 EITC schedule are demarcated by the
vertical dashed lines. The mode of the earnings distribution is located between the first and second kink points of
the EITC (where the refund is maximized) and only a small fraction of workers are predicted to locate above the EITC
exhaustion point. Panel B of the figure shows the distribution of participation tax rates implied by the predicted earnings
distribution.


                                                            23
non-workers or by lower exit rates among workers. In theory, the elasticity should be based on
the tax parameters of the marginal workers, i.e. those close to the indifference margin of entry or
exit. By including inframarginal women among both workers and non-workers, there will be off-
setting selection effects. These issues related to unobserved earnings and selection are endemic to
estimations of extensive margin elasticities.
    The results are displayed in Table 3. The first three columns show predicted earnings and tax
parameters, the next three columns show employment effects, and the last three columns show
participation effects. Each statistic is shown for all single mothers in the first row and separately
by number of children in the following rows. The change in the net-of-tax rate ( (1 -  )) and
the changes in the employment and participation rates (P ) represent difference-in-differences
between the treatment and controls groups. For the tax rate changes, the DiDs are calculated at
full phase-in of the EITC expansion in 1996. For the extensive margin effects, the DiDs represent 10-
year effects as shown in the event studies in Figure 7 (employment) and Figure A.XI (participation).
    The following insights emerge from the table. First, the change in the net-of-tax rate is strictly
increasing in family size even though the EITC schedule itself does not vary after two children.
This is because single mothers with more children are predicted to enter at lower earnings levels
where the EITC subsidy is larger. Second, the elasticities are in general very large. Across all
single mothers, the elasticity of employment equals 2.0 while the elasticity of participation equals
1.7.32 Third, the elasticities are strongly heterogeneous across family sizes. The elasticities for large
families are huge, with employment elasticities of 2.7 for those with three children and 5.1 for those
with four or more children. That is, despite accounting for the larger EITC incentive among larger
families (due to variation in the schedule as well as in predicted earnings), the implied elasticities
are much larger for these families.33
    To summarize, assuming that all of the extensive margin increases after the 1993 reform were
driven by the EITC implies elasticities that are extremely large. Although extensive margin elas-
ticities are not structural parameters, we do have a sense of a reasonable range from the vast labor
supply literature. The elasticities reported here fall outside any reasonable range. Hence, the view
   32
      As described in Appendix C, the EITC-induced tax change  (1 -  ) is calculated assuming 100% take-up of the
EITC conditional on eligibility. Given incomplete take-up,  (1 -  ) is upward biased and, as a result, the large elas-
ticities presented here tend to be conservative (i.e., conservative given the thought experiment whereby the EITC is
assumed to drive the entire extensive margin effect).
   33
      The estimates in Table 3 are based on the raw event study specification without demographic controls. Table A.V
in the appendix repeats the exercise based on specifications with demographic controls. Adjusting for demographics
produces elasticities that are somewhat smaller -- especially for the largest family sizes -- but the broad findings are
the same.



                                                          24
that the EITC was exclusively or mostly responsible for the changes in the 1990s must be very far
off.
       Instead of calculating elasticities, a related approach is to simulate how much can be explained
by the EITC assuming a (potentially) reasonable elasticity. In a static labor supply model where
single mothers respond according to the constant extensive margin elasticity , we have

                                                           (1 - t )
                                              Pt =  ·               · P93 ,                                            (4)
                                                          1 - 93

where Pt is the extensive margin response in year t relative to the pre-reform year 1993, t is the
reform-induced tax rate in change in year t relative to 1993 (which features some time variation due
to the gradual phase-in of the reform), while 93 and P93 are baseline values in 1993.34 Calculating
the net-of-tax rate change  (1 - t ) as the reform-induced change for the treatment group relative
to the control group, the implied time path of Pt from (4) can be compared to the observed DiD
impacts from the event studies.
       This exercise is presented in Figure 8.35 The figure assumes an extensive margin elasticity of 0.3,
corresponding roughly to the preferred estimate in the meta study by Chetty et al. (2013a).36 Even
under a sizable elasticity of 0.3, only a small fraction of the observed changes in the nineties would
be driven by the EITC: 13% for single women with one child, 19% for single mothers with two
children, 11% for single mothers with three children, and 6% for those with four or more children.
I am not arguing for using an elasticity of 0.3 -- in fact, I will argue that the elasticity with respect
to EITC-induced changes is closer to zero -- but these simulations give a clear sense of how large
the changes in the nineties were. Any statement that the EITC was a major component of what
happened in the nineties is implicitly based on unrealistically large elasticities.


5.4      1993 Reform: Heterogeneity by Welfare Treatment Intensity

The next two sections investigate the impact of welfare reform (waivers and PRWORA) on the
extensive margin patterns in the 1990s. Such an investigation requires variation in welfare reform
treatment across individuals. I start by considering two different proxies for welfare treatment
  34
      Of course, the simple static model underlying equation (4) may not be realistic. The point of this exercise, however,
is to provide a sanity check on the magnitudes in the data, and for such an exercise, the static, iso-elastic model is a
natural benchmark to consider.
   35
      This figure is based on event study specifications without demographic controls. The corresponding figure with
demographic controls is presented in Figure A.XIV in the appendix.
   36
      They show that the average extensive margin elasticity across nine studies is equal to 0.25.




                                                            25
intensity. The first proxy is the age of the youngest child. It turns out that the level of welfare
participation prior to waivers and PRWORA and the ensuing drop in welfare participation are
strongly related to the age of the youngest child. The second proxy is a predicted probability of
pre-reform welfare participation using the age of the youngest child, the number of children, and
other demographic variables. Both of these analyses will show that the extensive margin effects in
the 1990s are closely aligned with the strength of welfare treatment.
       Due to the granularity of the analysis in this section, rather than showing event studies in each
cut of the data, I summarize the effects using a standard DiD specification with a post-reform
dummy. Specifically, I consider specifications of the following form


                  Pimt =  · P ostt +  j · W elf arej =c +  j · P ostt · W elf arej =c
                                             j                          j
                               + · Ust +  · Ust · Kidsi + s + Xi  + imt ,                                            (5)


where Pimt is an indicator equal to one if individual i is employed in month m of year t, P ostt is
an indicator equal to one in the years after the 1993 reform, and W elf arej =c is an indicator equal
to one if the individual belongs to welfare treatment category c. The welfare treatment categories
are based either on the age of the youngest child (7 bins) or on a predicted AFDC probability (10
deciles) as described below. In either case, the omitted category is having no children, so that the
welfare category variable subsumes the kids dummy in the previous specifications. The coefficient
c represents the average DiD effect (over the post period) for single mothers in welfare category
c relative to single women without children. I consider effects over two post-periods: a three-year
period (avoiding years after PRWORA) and a ten-year period. I start from the raw DiD effects c
obtained from the first line of equation (5), and then consider the implications of the controls in
the second line. These controls absorb the effects of state-level business cycles and demographics.
Specifically, Ust is the aggregate unemployment rate in state s and year t, the effect of which is
allowed to vary by children, and s is a state fixed effect.
       The results are presented in Figure 9. The left panels show heterogeneity by age of the youngest
child, while the right panels show heterogeneity by probability of AFDC participation. Consider
first the results for age of the youngest child.37 The top panel shows that this variable is a very
strong predictor of welfare participation before the reform -- the younger is the child, the higher
  37
    As elsewhere, I include only EITC-eligible children and consider the following categories for the age of the youngest
child: 0-1, 2-3, 4-6, 7-9, 10-13, 14-17, and 18+. Consistent with the EITC rules, the 18+ category includes children aged
18-23, who are living at home and are still in full-time education.



                                                           26
is participation -- which in turn predicts the drop in welfare participation after the reform. The
relationship between pre-reform participation levels and post-reform participation drops across
bins of the age of the youngest child is almost perfectly linear and has a slope of 0.69. Among
single mothers with children aged 0-1, pre-reform AFDC participation was about 50 precent and
the subsequent fall was close to 40 percentage points. By contrast, single mothers with older chil-
dren had very low AFDC participation rates and, as a result, were virtually unaffected by welfare
reform.
   The middle panel shows raw DiD estimates by age of the youngest child over three years
(solid black) and over ten years (dashed black) together with pre-reform AFDC participation rates
(solid red). The extensive margin effects are strongly and monotonically declining in the age of the
youngest child. The three-year effects fall to about zero (and become statistically insignificant) for
those whose youngest child is older than 13 years, while the ten-year effects fall to zero when the
youngest child is older than 17. These estimates include any confounding effects of the business
cycle and changing demographics. As shown in the bottom panel, controlling for these factors
reduces the treatment effect at each age and therefore strengthens the results. The three-year effects
are non-positive above age 9 and the ten-year effects are non-positive above age 13.
   Table 4 shows estimated impacts in two age groups (0-13 years and 14+ years) across different
specifications and outcomes. The main insight is very robust: while the extensive margin effects
are very large for single women with younger children, there are no effects for those with older
children. Among those with children above age 13, the three-year effects are either small and
statistically insignificant or they are negative. The ten-year effects are significant only when no
controls are included. Once unemployment controls are added, there is no longer any effect.
   Because the analysis is based on EITC eligible children -- that is, children living at home who
are below age 18 or below age 24 if still in education -- the age of the youngest child is correlated
with the number of children. Having more children implies that the last-born tends to be younger.
As a result, the analysis using the age of the youngest child overlaps with the previous analysis
using the number of children. I now move to a multivariate analysis using the joint predictive
power of the age of the youngest child, the number of children, and other demographic variables.
Specifically, I estimate the probability of pre-reform welfare participation based on the following
specification
                              AF DCi = a + n + y + r + s + i ,                                     (6)




                                                 27
where an indicator for receiving welfare benefits, AF DCi , is regressed on fixed effects for the age
of the mother a, the number of children n, the age of the youngest child y , race r, and state s.38 The
binning of these demographic variables is the same as before. The regression is run on the CPS
March files (which contains information on welfare receipt) in the pre-reform year, 1993. From this
regression, I predict the probability of AFDC participation for each single mother in the estimation
sample, and define an indicator for being in different deciles of the distribution of these AFDC
probabilities.
    The results are shown in the right panels of Figure 9. The top panel shows that pre-reform wel-
fare participation varies widely across the distribution, from 8% to more than 60%, and is strongly
related to the post-reform welfare participation drop. The relationship between pre-reform lev-
els and post-reform drops is stronger in this specification than when using only the age of the
youngest child. The next panels show DiD impacts on employment over three years and ten years
by deciles of the predicted AFDC probability. The employment impacts are strongly increasing in
the AFDC probability. In the raw data, the ten-year effect is about 20pp in the top decile, but only
2pp in the bottom decile. Adding controls for business cycle effects and demographic changes
makes the estimates smaller: the ten-year effect is now 13pp in the top decile and virtually zero
in the bottom decile. In fact, there are no significant ten-year effects in the bottom two deciles
and no significant three-year effects in the bottom four deciles. Table 5 shows average effects in
the bottom two deciles and in the top eight deciles of welfare treatment intensity across different
specifications. In the bottom deciles, there are no significant three-year effects in any specification
and no significant ten-year effects once controls are added.
    To summarize, the large extensive margin increases in nineties were driven by single mothers
who had high AFDC participation prior to welfare reform and were therefore strongly treated by
waivers and PRWORA. Single mothers with low pre-reform AFDC participation did not respond.
These results are consistent with welfare reform, but harder to reconcile with EITC reform.
    Building on these insights, it is useful to consider a different outcome variable: the fraction
of single mothers who are either employed or on AFDC/TANF (henceforth referred to as the
"employment-welfare rate"). This is useful because the EITC and welfare reform are expected
to affect this outcome differently. Cutting welfare pushes people from welfare into work or into
   38
      Equation (6) does not include education even though this variable would help with predicting AFDC participation.
Education is excluded because it is a relatively direct proxy for earnings conditional on working and therefore for EITC
eligibility. As a result, while using education information would strengthen my results, this is misleading as highly-
educated single mothers who did not participate in welfare (thus being untreated by welfare reform) were also less
likely to be eligible for the EITC (thus being untreated by EITC reform as well).


                                                          28
searching for work. If everyone finds jobs, the employment-welfare rate will be unaffected. Oth-
erwise, it will decrease. By contrast, expanding the EITC provides work incentives to people from
all non-working states, including those in the AFDC/TANF program, those in other social as-
sistance programs, and those receiving no social assistance. If people respond to the EITC, the
employment-welfare rate will increase.
       The results are presented in the online appendix. Figure A.XV illustrates the approach in
the full sample of single women. Panel A shows the basic DiD comparing the employment se-
ries for single women with and without children around the 1993 reform, while Panel B adds
AFDC/TANF participants to the employment series for single mothers.39 Strikingly, once welfare
recipients are included, there is no visible treatment effect in the 1990s. That is, the employment
effects are fully accounted for by movements from welfare to employment, with no additional ef-
fects coming from any other non-employed state. Figure A.XVI-A.XVIII shows that this is true
in subsamples that vary by number of children, age of the youngest child, and states with high
and low welfare caseload drops. While the employment increase varies greatly across subsamples,
the employment-welfare rate series is always flat (or slightly falling) across time. In each sub-
sample and year, the extensive margin increase corresponds essentially to a movement between
AFDC/TANF and employment. These patterns are again consistent with welfare reform, but puz-
zling under the EITC narrative. This narrative requires that, while the EITC had sizable effects
on people inside the AFDC program, people outside the program were unresponsive to the EITC.
This would be an unusual pattern of heterogeneity, even if not inconceivable.40


5.5     1993 Reform: Controlling for Waivers and the Business Cycle

The confounding factors that make it difficult to identify the impact of the 1993 EITC expansion op-
erate at both the state and national levels. This section focuses specifically on state-level factors --
welfare waivers and state business cycles -- as these can be estimated. Waivers were introduced in
some states but not others, and the timing of their approval and implementation varied from place
to place (see section 3.2 for details). Similarly, while the economy was strong across the country,
the labor market implications of the booming economy varied spatially. Exploiting the variation in
these factors across time and space, I investigate how much of the 1990s employment increase for
  39
    To avoid double counting, I add only AFDC/TANF participants who are not also employed.
  40
    The reason why the pattern is not inconceivable is selection. It is possible that single women in other social assis-
tance programs -- in particular, Disability Insurance (DI) and Supplemental Security Income (SSI) -- and those receiving
no social assistance are a selected sample of people who are unresponsive to taxes.



                                                           29
single mothers can be explained by waiver-based reform along with falling unemployment. I fo-
cus primarily on the years 1994-96, i.e. after the EITC reform but before nationwide TANF reform
took full effect in 1997. After the implementation of TANF, welfare confounders are operating at a
national scale and there is no quasi-experimental approach to separate welfare from the EITC. We
still have the cross-sectional variation in welfare treatment intensity analyzed above, but there is
no separate event study approach for the EITC and TANF reforms.
   The results in this section are based on variants of the following specification:


            Pimt =      j · Y earj =t +  · Kidsi +            j · Y earj =t · Kidsi
                        j                             j =-1

                       +  j · Y earj =t · W aiversj +  j · Y earj =t · Kidsi · W aiversj           (7)
                            j                           j
                       + · Ust +  · Ust · Kidsi + s + Xi  + imt ,


where the first line is the basic DiD event study of the 1993 reform, while the second and third
lines control for welfare waivers, the business cycle, and demographics. Specifically, W aiverst
is an indicator equal to one if state s has approved a statewide waiver in year t. The waiver
indicator is interacted with a kids dummy and a full set of year dummies. That is, the impact
of waivers is allowed to vary between those with and without children (as only the former are
eligible for welfare) and from year to year. To the extent that waiver states saw larger employment
increases for single mothers after the introduction of waivers than non-waiver states, this effect
gets absorbed in the waiver controls and reduces the DiD coefficients t . Similarly, if states with
larger drops in (aggregate) unemployment saw larger employment increases for single mothers,
this gets absorbed in the unemployment controls and further reduces the DiD coefficients.
   It is useful to highlight a few conceptual points about the specification. First, since it controls
only for state variation, any national confounders are still absorbed in the DiD coefficients. The
strong macroeconomy of the mid-late 1990s was a national phenomenon, and PRWORA affected
all states after its enactment in August 1996. Moreover, most states without any major waiver
reform introduced smaller pilot programs, and it is therefore conceivable that both treatment and
control states were affected by welfare reform prior to PRWORA. For these reasons, even if the
state-level controls in (7) had no impact on the estimates, this would not necessarily imply that
confounders are not affecting the estimates. Second, while there were six main types of waiver
policies, these are lumped together in a single any-waiver dummy. Below I consider an extension
that allows for separate coefficients on different types of waivers. Third, the waiver indicator may


                                                 30
switch on either at the time of waiver approval or at the time of waiver implementation (see Table
A.III for for approval and implementation dates of each state waiver). The baseline specification is
based on approval dates, but I consider a robustness check based on implementation dates. Finally,
the impact of waivers is allowed to vary over time through the interaction with year dummies.
This specification choice reflects that waivers are unlikely to have the same impact after 1996 when
TANF introduced waiver-style policies across the country. That is, because the waiver dummies
capture the impact of having a waiver relative to not having one, their impact is likely to be smaller
(or zero) after the implementation of TANF.41
    The first set of results is presented in Figure 10. Panel A compares the raw DiD series to a
specification that includes unemployment controls, but no other controls.42 Panel B compares the
raw DiD series to a specification with both unemployment and waiver controls. The figure shows
that both of these controls reduce the extensive margin effects after 1993. While the unemployment
controls reduce the estimates throughout the mid-late 1990s, waivers reduce the estimates just
before TANF reform in 1997. This is natural given that most statewide waivers were approved
in 1995 and 1996, just before TANF reform. The striking feature of Panel B is that the state-level
controls change the DiD series from what looks like a compelling event study of the 1993 EITC
reform to what looks like an event study of the 1996 TANF reform. This finding is consistent with
welfare reform (in combination with the macroeconomy) being the main driver of the extensive
margin effects.
    The appendix provides a number of robustness checks. Figure A.XIX repeats the analysis
for different outcomes (employment vs participation) and samples (all women vs low-educated
women). None of these aspects affect the results in any significant way. Figure A.XX investigates
heterogeneity by number of children. The results are particularly strong for families with two
children, where the event study adjusted for business cycle and waiver effects is completely flat
until 1996, the year before PRWORA takes full effect. The results are a little less strong for families
with three or more children, but qualitatively similar. Figures A.XXI and A.XXII vary the specifi-
cation of waivers. The two figures consider the same waiver specifications, but the first includes
both waiver and unemployment controls while the other includes only waiver controls. In each
  41
     As described in section 3.2, there is variation in the setting of TANF parameters across states (such as in the length
of time limits). To the extent that the stringency of TANF parameters is correlated with pre-TANF waivers, the waiver
dummies may still have explanatory power after the implementation of TANF. It remains the case, however, that their
impact is unlikely to be the same before and after national welfare reform.
  42
     To clarify, I always introduce unemployment controls together with state fixed effects. This ensures that the business
cycle controls capture only within-state variation in unemployment over time as opposed to also cross-state variation
in structural unemployment levels.


                                                            31
figure, the baseline specification of waivers (in Panel A) is compared to specifications where the
any-waiver indicator is replaced by indicators for each waiver type (Panel B), where the date of
implementation is used instead of the date of approval (Panel C), and where the time-varying
waiver controls are replaced by basic before-after waiver controls (Panel D). The graphs produce
two main insights. The first is that waivers on their own reduce the estimates mainly in 1996;
the other is that the estimates are very robust to specification, except for the before-after waiver
dummy. The second insight is related to the first: because the impact of waivers has a very spe-
cific timing, introducing a basic before-after dummy has little impact.43 For the reasons discussed
above, a before-after waiver dummy is likely to be attenuated due to the introduction of TANF.
    Table 6 summarizes the estimated effects of the 1993 reform after three years (before PRWORA)
and after ten years (after PRWORA) with waiver and business cycle controls under different spec-
ifications. The table consider different extensive margin outcomes, different education levels, and
different sets of controls. The table demonstrates the robustness of the main message: while the
raw estimates are very large, the three-year effects become small and statistically insignificant as
soon as unemployment and waivers controls are added. Of course, the ten-year effects remain
significant as these include the impact of national welfare reform.
    Like the results in the previous section, the analysis presented here points to the crucial role of
welfare reform and the macroeconomy in the 1990s. The results show that the extensive margin
effects between 1994-96 -- the years that offer the best chance of separately identifying any EITC
effects -- can be explained by a combination of waiver-based reform and the business cycle. These
results highlight the fragility of EITC estimates that rely on variation in the 1990s.



6    EITC and the Extensive Margin: Putting Everything Together

Having analyzed the 1993 reform in detail, I consider all EITC reforms at the state and federal level
together in a stacked event study. Combining all the reforms increases precision and is arguably
better identified than an event study of any individual reform. In particular, because the time
series of employment is bumpy from year to year (due to business cycles and other time-varying
factors), event studies of individual reforms may easily create the illusion of either positive or
negative effects depending on the timing of the reform. Combining reforms with different timing
alleviates this problem.
 43
    The small impact of a before-after waiver dummy is consistent with results presented in an online appendix to
Hoynes & Patel (2018). They include a post-waiver indicator and find that it does not significantly impact their results.


                                                           32
6.1      State EITC Supplements

This section presents evidence from state introductions of EITC supplements. The roll-out of these
supplements is illustrated in Figure 11 and the details of each program are provided Table A.II.
A total of 30 states instituted EITC supplements between 1986-2018, and I restrict attention to the
27 states that have maintained their supplement for at least 3 years.44 Except for California and
Minnesota, the state EITCs are specified as percentages of the federal EITC. They are refundable
credits in most states, but non-refundable in some. An empirical advantage of these policies is
that they generate variation across space, in addition to the variation across family size considered
above.
       The analysis is implemented by creating a synthetic control state for each state with an EITC
supplement, and then running a stacked event study comparing treatment and synthetic control
states around the time of EITC introductions. The synthetic control states are constructed from the
states that never had a supplement, matching on the level of the employment rate in each of the
five pre-reform years. Table A.VI shows the composition of each synthetic state, and the details of
the approach and implementation are provided in section D of the online appendix.
       In the first specification, the estimation is implemented in the sample of single women with
children. Here the empirical strategy is a difference-in-differences estimation that compares dif-
ferent states over time, conditioning on children. The results are shown in Figure 12. Panel A
of the figure includes all 27 reforms and shows no effect of the EITC. The treatment and control
states track each other in the pre-reform years (by construction) and continue to do so in the post-
reform years. A concern with the analysis in Panel A is that many of the state supplements are
quite small, making it difficult to detect any effect. Panel B therefore restricts attention to 12 "large
reforms", specifically reforms that introduced refundable supplements equal to at least 10% of the
federal EITC.45 Focusing on large EITC reforms does not alter the main result: states that introduce
EITC supplements do not see employment increases relative to states without such supplements.
       As a robustness check, Figure A.XXIII in the appendix shows results from a specification that
exploits the variation both across states and across single women with and without children within
  44
     I drop Hawaii and South Carolina as they introduced their EITC supplements too recently (in 2018). I drop Wash-
ington as they enacted, but de facto never implemented their EITC supplement.
  45
     To obtain a set of relatively sharp policy experiments, I also require that the state EITC reached 10% within three
years of enactment. This excludes states that have sizable and refundable credits, but where this level has been reached
too incrementally for a compelling event study design. The 12 states with large EITC reforms are California (2015),
Connecticut (2011), Dist. of Columbia (2000), Kansas (1998), Massachusetts (1997), Michigan (2008), Minnesota (1991),
New Jersey (2000), New Mexico (2007), New York (1994), Vermont (1988), and Wisconsin (1989).



                                                          33
states. Here the empirical strategy is a triple-differences estimation that compares treatment and
control states conditional on children relative to those same states conditional on no children. The
figure shows that this refinement has no substantive impact on the empirical patterns. There is still
no effect of state EITC supplements on employment.


6.2     Stacked Event Study: All State and Federal Reforms

The final piece of the investigation combines the state and federal reforms in a stacked event study
framework. I include 31 reforms in the analysis: the 27 state reforms analyzed in the previous
section along with the 4 federal reforms enacted in 1975, 1986, 1993, and 2009. The 1990 reform
is not included as a separate event due to its close proximity in time to the (larger) 1986 and 1993
reforms. All federal reforms are weighted equally, while state reforms are weighted according
to the state's share of the national population in 2016. Therefore, although there are many more
state reforms than federal reforms, all of the state reforms together weigh less than a single federal
reform. The qualitative results are robust to alternative weighting schemes (e.g, equal weights for
all reforms).
      Normalizing the first year after each reform to zero, I consider an event time window that
runs from -5 to +5. There are two exceptions to this: California's 2015 reform allows for an event
time window running only to +2, while the federal 1993 reform is truncated at event time +2
for identification reasons. The latter specification choice is done to avoid overlap between the
1993 EITC reform and the 1996 TANF reform, which would otherwise confound the estimates. I
include controls for welfare waivers and the business cycle (specified as in equation 7) to deal with
the confounders already at play during event times 0 to +2 for the 1993 reform.
      Two additional specification points are worth noting. First, the estimates are based on com-
paring single women with and without children, except for the 2009 federal reform targeted to
families with three or more children. For this reform, the treatment indicator is based on having at
least three children (relative to zero children). Second, in order to combine the state and federal re-
forms within one event model, the effect of the state reforms is based on comparing single women
with and without children within each state. That is, in contrast to the synthetic control approach
considered above, the spatial variation in EITC supplements is not used. The full details regarding
the specification are provided in section E of the appendix.
      The results are presented in Figure 13. Panel A shows the federal reforms alone, Panel B shows
the state reforms alone, while Panel C combines the federal and state reforms. The federal reforms


                                                  34
-- and by implication the federal and state reforms combined -- feature small positive post-reform
coefficients, but at the same time there is a pre-trend. There is no inflection point in the series after
the reforms and therefore no visible EITC effect. To make this clearer, Panel D adjusts for linear,
group-specific trends estimated on the pre-reform data. This pre-trend adjustment makes the DiD
series completely flat. Each panel provides an estimate of the average EITC effect over the post-
reform period (event times 0 to 5) along with the confidence band in parenthesis. The estimates
are close to zero and precisely estimated: in Panel D, we can rule out effects on employment larger
than 0.8 percentage points across all 31 reforms. Finally, Figure A.XXIV in the appendix repeats
the analysis in the sample of single women with low education (high school degree or less). The
main finding is the same: the EITC effect is a tightly estimated zero.



7    Conclusions

In this paper I have analyzed every EITC reform at the state and federal level within one modern
empirical framework. From this comprehensive and long-run perspective, the EITC has not had
any clear effects on labor supply at the extensive margin. Apart from the expansion enacted in
1993, EITC reforms are not associated with increases in the employment of single mothers rela-
tive to single women without children. The 1993 reform, on the other hand, is associated with
very large employment increases, but these increases align closely with the confounding effects of
welfare reform and a booming macroeconomy. Exploiting variation in these confounders across
household type, space and time, I have shown that the effects are driven exactly by those affected
most strongly by welfare reform and the business cycle. A stacked event study of all EITC reforms,
controlling for welfare reform and the business cycle, produces a precisely estimated zero.
    There are two interpretations of this null result. One is that the extensive margin elasticity with
respect to taxes is small, and perhaps especially the elasticity with respect to a highly nonlinear tax
refund like the EITC. The other is that, even if the elasticity is not zero in general, the informational
and psychological frictions specific to the EITC have reduced its impact. These frictions may be
related to the complex nonlinear schedule or to the procedures for filing taxes and claiming the
credit. As reviewed above, a number of studies have documented that most potential recipients
are either unaware of the EITC or have a limited understanding of the schedule and eligibility
requirements.46 Given these frictions, the EITC is not an a priori likely candidate for finding large
  46
     See e.g., Romich & Weisner (2000), Smeeding et al. (2000), Ross Phillips (2001), Maag (2005), Chetty & Saez (2013),
and Bhargava & Manoli (2015).


                                                          35
labor supply impacts.
    While these frictions are widely acknowledged in the literature, they have been used mainly
to explain the absence of intensive margin responses. The reasoning seems to be that extensive
margin responses can be based solely on knowing about the existence of a tax refund without
understanding the specifics of the schedule and eligibility rules. Even ignoring the fact that many
potential recipients are unaware of the EITC, this argument is surprising. Economic theory predicts
that intensive and extensive margin decisions are interdependent, and this interdependence is
particularly strong for nonlinear incentives (see Kleven & Kreiner 2006; Eissa et al. 2006, 2008).
The EITC is an incentive to enter the labor market around the refund-maximizing earnings range,
which is relatively narrow and vary by family size. Without precise information about the location
of the refund-maximizing earnings range and the size of the credit in that range, the extensive
margin response is not very credible.
    By contrast, welfare reform is not subject to these concerns about salience and information.
The debate about welfare reform and welfare culture was extremely prominent in the nineties,
as exemplified by Bill Clinton's famous campaign pledge to "end welfare as we know it." State
waivers and national TANF reform imposed drastic changes on existing program participants, so
information was essentially automatic. What is more, the changes to welfare were largely related to
ordeals and enforcement, the impact of which is more mechanical than financial incentives. They
included lifetime limits on welfare receipt, work requirements, community service and training,
and those who did not satisfy these requirements could get kicked off the welfare rolls. These
initiatives stand in sharp contrast to the complex tax refund incentives introduced by the relatively
unknown EITC program.
    These findings do not necessarily imply that the EITC is a bad policy. Absent labor supply
responses at either the extensive or intensive margins, the EITC is a non-distortionary transfer to
the working poor.47 The optimality of such a transfer depends on the social welfare function and
on who pays for it. For example, if the EITC is financed by a lump-sum tax on all individuals
and if the government puts a larger weight on the working poor than on the average individual,
then the policy is socially optimal. This is the reasoning underlying the results in Saez (2002).48
   47
      Of course, this paper has not shown the absence of intensive margin responses to the EITC. The literature has
struggled to find any clear evidence of intensive margin responses to the policy, perhaps because of the frictions just
discussed. Chetty et al. (2013b) estimate significant intensive margin responses to the EITC conditional on knowledge,
which is still consistent with small average responses across informed and uninformed taxpayers.
   48
      In Saez (2002), the optimal EITC (defined as a negative tax rate on participation) reflects a trade-off between the
equity gain just described and the efficiency loss from extensive margin responses to an EITC that make people work
too much.


                                                           36
Conversely, if transfers to the working poor are financed by reducing welfare benefits to the poor,
then the equity effect is negative under standard social preferences. In this case, the desirability
of the EITC requires social preferences that put more weight on the working poor than on the
non-working poor, even if the latter are worse off. Leaving aside these optimal tax considerations,
the political argument for the EITC has relied heavily on its supposed employment effects. The
empirical findings presented here do not lend support to this argument.




                                                37
References

B ASTIAN , J ACOB E. 2018. The Rise of Working Mothers and the 1975 Earned Income Tax Credit.
  Working Paper. 6

B ERUBE , A LAN , K IM , A NNE , F ORMAN , B ENJAMIN , & B URNS , M EGAN. 2002. The Price of Paying
  Taxes: How Tax Preparation and Refund Loans Erode the Benefits of the EITC. 8

B HARGAVA , S AURABH , & M ANOLI , D AYANAND. 2015. Psychological Frictions and the Incomplete
  Take-Up of Social Benefits: Evidence from an IRS Field Experiment. American Economic Review,
  105(11), 1­42. 5, 8, 35

B ITLER , M ARIANNE , G ELBACH , J ONAH , & H OYNES , H ILARY. 2006. What Mean Impacts Miss:
  Distributional Effects of Welfare Reform Experiments. American Economic Review, 96(4), 988­
  1012. 8

B LANK , R EBECCA. 2001. What Causes Public Assistance Caseloads to Grow? Journal of Human
  Resources, 36(1), 85­118. 112

B LANK , R EBECCA M. 2002. Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States. Journal of Economic
  Literature, 40(4), 1105­1166. 2, 6, 7

B LANK , R EBECCA M., & R UGGLES , PATRICIA. 1996. When Do Women Use Aid to Families with
  Dependent Children and Food Stamps? The Dynamics of Eligibility Versus Participation. Journal
  of Human Resources, 31(1), 57­89. 112

B LUNDELL , R ICHARD , & M A C URDY, T HOMAS. 1999. Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
  Approaches. In: A SHEN J ELTER , O., & C ARD , D. (eds), Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3A.
  Elsevier. 1

B OLLINGER , C HRISTOPHER , H IRSCH , B ARRY, H OKAYEM , C HARLES , & Z ILIAK , J AMES. 2017. Trou-
  ble in the Tails? What We Know about Earnings Nonresponse Thirty Years after Lillard, Smith,
  and Welch. Working Paper. 13, 102

C ANCIAN , M ARIA , & L EVINSON , A RIK. 2005. Labor Supply Effects of the Earned Income Tax
  Credit: Evidence from Wisconsin Supplemental Benefit for Families with Three Children. NBER
  Working Paper No. 11454. 6



                                                38
C ARD , D AVID , & H YSLOP, D EAN R. 2005. Estimating the Effects of a Time-Limited Earnings
  Subsidy for Welfare-Leavers. Econometrica, 73(6), 1723­1770. 5, 7

C HETTY, R AJ. 2012. Bounds on Elasticities With Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of Micro and
  Macro Evidence on Labor Supply. Econometrica, 80(3), 969­1018. 2, 7

C HETTY, R AJ , & S AEZ , E MMANUEL. 2013. Teaching the Tax Code: Earnings Responses to an
  Experiment with EITC Recipients. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(1), 1­31. 8, 35

C HETTY, R AJ , F RIEDMAN , J OHN N., O LSEN , T ORE , & P ISTAFERRI , L UIGI. 2011. Adjustment Costs,
  Firm Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish Tax
  Records. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2), 749­804. 2

C HETTY, R AJ , G UREN , A DAM , M ANOLI , D AY, & W EBER , A NDREA. 2013a. Does Indivisible Labor
  Explain the Difference between Micro and Macro Elasticities? A Meta-Analysis of Extensive
  Margin Elasticities. NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 27(1), 1­56. 1, 7, 25

C HETTY, R AJ , F RIEDMAN , J OHN N., & S AEZ , E MMANUEL. 2013b. Using Differences in Knowledge
  across Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings. American Economic
  Review, 103(7), 2683­2721. 7, 9, 36

C OHANY, S HARON , P OLIVKA , A NNE , & R OTHGEB , J ENNEFER. 1994. Revisions in the Current
  Population Survey Effective January 1994. Employment & Earnings, 41. 101

C OUNCIL OF E CONOMIC A DVISORS. 1997.          Explaining the Decline in Welfare Receipt, 1993-
  1996. Washington: Executive Office of the President. Retrived at https://clintonwhitehouse4.
  archives.gov/WH/EOP/CEA/Welfare/Report.html. 11

C OUNCIL OF E CONOMIC A DVISORS. 1999. The Effects of Welfare Policy and the Economic Expan-
  sion on Welfare Caseloads: An Update. Washington: Executive Office of the President. Retrived
  at https://clintonwhitehouse4.archives.gov/WH/EOP/CEA/html/welfare/. 11

C URRIE , J ANET. 2006. The Take-up of Social Benefits. Pages 80­148 of: A UERBACH , A LAN J., C ARD ,
  D AVID , & Q UIGLEY, J OHN M. (eds), Public Policy and the Income Distribution. New York: Russell
  Sage Foundation. 112

D EPARTMENT OF H EALTH AND H UMAN S ERVICES. 1999. State Implementation of Major Changes
  to Welfare Policies, 1992-1998. Washington: US Department of Health and Human Services.

                                                 39
  Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. Retrieved at https://aspe.hhs.gov/report/
  state-implementation-major-changes-welfare-policies-1992-1998. 11

E ISSA , N ADA , & H OYNES , H ILARY. 2006. Behavioral Responses to Taxes: Lessons from the EITC
  and Labor Supply. Tax Policy and the Economy, 20, 73­110. 6

E ISSA , N ADA , & L IEBMAN , J EFFREY. 1993. The End of Welfare as We Know It? Behavioral Re-
  sponses to the Earned Income Tax Credit. Department of Economics, Harvard University, mimeo.
  8

E ISSA , N ADA , & L IEBMAN , J EFFREY B. 1996. Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax
  Credit. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2), 605­637. 1, 6, 8, 20

E ISSA , N ADA , K LEVEN , H ENRIK , & K REINER , C LAUS. 2006. Welfare Effects of Tax Reform and
  Labor Supply at the Intensive and Extensive Margins. In: A GELL , J ONAS , & S ORENSEN , P ETER
  (eds), Tax Policy and Labor Market Performance. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA. 9, 22, 36

E ISSA , N ADA , K LEVEN , H ENRIK , & K REINER , C LAUS. 2008. Evaluation of Four Tax Reforms in the
  United States: Labor Supply and Welfare Effects for Single Mothers. Journal of Public Economics,
  92(3­4), 795­816. 9, 22, 36

E LLWOOD , D AVID T. 2000. The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Social Policy Reforms
  on Work, Marriage, and Living Arrangements. National Tax Journal, 1063­1105. 2, 8

FAJGELBAUM , PABLO , M ORALES , E DUARDO , R UGGIERI , F RANCESCO , & Z IDAR , O WEN. 2020.
  Social Insusrance and Labor Market Shocks. Working Paper. 111

FANG , H ANMING , & K EANE , M ICHAEL P. 2004. Assessing the Impact of Welfare Reform on Single
  Mothers. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2004(1), 1­116. 2, 8

F LOOD , S ARAH , & PACAS , J OSÉ. 2016. Using the Annual Social and Economic Supplement with
  Current Population Survey Panels. University of Minnesota Working Paper No. 2016­4. 99

G ELBER , A LEXANDER , & M ITCHELL , J OSHUA. 2011. Taxes and Time Allocation: Evidence from
  Single Women and Men. The Review of Economic Studies, 79(3), 863­897. 6

G ROGGER , J EFF , & K AROLY, LYNN A. 2005. Welfare Reform: Effects of a Decade of Change. Harvard
  University Press: Cambridge, MA. 5, 6, 7, 11, 12


                                                  40
G ROGGER , J EFFREY. 2002. The Behavioral Effects of Welfare Time Limits. American Economic Review
  Papers and Proceedings, 92(2), 385­389. 4

G ROGGER , J EFFREY. 2003. The Effects of Time Limits, the EITC, and Other Policy Changes on Wel-
  fare Use, Work, and Income Among Female-Headed Families. Review of Economics and Statistics,
  85(2), 394­408. 2, 4, 8

G ROGGER , J EFFREY, & M ICHALOPOULOS , C HARLES. 2003. Welfare Dynamics Under Time Limits.
  Journal of Political Economy, 111(3), 530­554. 7

H OTZ , V. J OSEPH , & S CHOLZ , J OHN K ARL. 2003. The Earned Income Tax Credit. In: M OF -
  FITT,   R OBERT A. (ed), Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States. Chicago: University of
  Chicago Press. 6

H OTZ , V. J OSEPH , M ULLIN , C HARLES H., & S CHOLZ , J OHN K ARL. 2006. Examining the Effect of
  the Earned Income Tax Credit on the Labor Market Participation of Families on Welfare. NBER
  Working Paper No. 11968. 1, 6

H OYNES , H ILARY, & PATEL , A NKUR. 2018. Effective Policy for Reducing Poverty and Inequality?
  The Earned Income Tax Credit and the Distribution of Income. Journal of Human Resources, 53(4),
  859­890. 6, 32

J ONES , D AMON. 2010. Information, Preferences and Public Benefit Participation: Experimental
  Evidence from the Advance EITC and 401(k) Savings. American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics, 2(2), 147­63. 8

J ONES , M AGGIE , & Z ILIAK , J AMES. 2019. The Antipoverty Impact of the EITC: New Estimates
  from Survey and Administrative Tax Records. Working Paper. 102

K LEVEN , H ENRIK J., & K REINER , C LAUS T. 2005. Labor Supply Behavior and the Design of Tax
  and Transfer Policy. Danish Journal of Economics, 143(2005), 321­358. 22

K LEVEN , H ENRIK J., & K REINER , C LAUS T. 2006. The Marginal Cost of Public Funds: Hours of
  Work Versus Labor Force Participation. Journal of Public Economics, 90(10­11), 1955­1973. 5, 9, 36

K LINE , PATRICK , & TARTARI , M ELISSA. 2016. Bounding the Labor Supply Responses to a Ran-
  domized Welfare Experiment: A Revealed Preference Approach. American Economic Review,
  106(4), 972­1014. 5, 8

                                                     41
K OPCZUK , W OJCIECH , & P OP -E LECHES , C RISTIAN. 2007. Electronic Filing, Tax Preparers and
  Participation in the Earned Income Tax Credit. Journal of Public Economics, 91(7­8), 1351­1367. 8

L OONEY, A DAM , & M ANOLI , D AY. 2016. Are There Returns to Experience at Low-Skill Jobs?
  Evidence from Single Mothers in the United States over the 1990s. Upjohn Institute Working
  Paper No. 16­255. 4, 6

M AAG , E LAINE. 2005. Paying the Price? Low-Income Parents and the Use of Paid Tax Preparers.
  New Federalism: National Survey of America's Families, Series B, No. 64. 8, 35

M ARTINEZ , I SABEL , S AEZ , E MMANUEL , & S IEGENTHALER , M ICHAEL. 2018. Intertemporal Labor
  Supply Substitution? Evidence from the Swiss Income Tax Holidays. NBER Working Paper No.
  24634. 7

M EAD , L AWRENCE. 2014. Overselling the Earned Income Tax Credit. National Affairs, 21, 20­33. 8,
  9

M EYER , B RUCE. 2010. The Effects of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Recent Reforms. In:
  B ROWN , J EFFREY R. (ed), Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 24. Chicago: University of Chicago
  Press. 1, 6

M EYER , B RUCE , & M ITTAG , N IKOLAS. 2019. Using Linked Survey and Administrative Data to
  Better Measure Income: Implications for Poverty, Program Effectiveness, and Holes in the Safety
  Net. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11(2), 176­204. 103

M EYER , B RUCE , & R OSENBAUM , D AN. 2001. Welfare, The Earned Income Tax Credit, and the
  Labor Supply of Single Mothers. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3), 1063­1114. 1, 2, 6

M EYER , B RUCE , M OK , WALLACE , & S ULLIVAN , J AMES. 2015. Household Surveys in Crisis. Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 29(4), 199­226. 102, 103

M ILLER , C YNTHIA , K ATZ , L AWRENCE F., A ZURDIA , G ILDA , I SEN , A DAM , S CHULTZ , C ARO -
  LINE   B., & A LOISI , K ALI. 2018. Boosting the Earned Income Tax Credit for Singles: Final Impact
  Findings From the Paycheck Plus Demonstration in New York City. New York: MDRC. 5, 7

M URRAY, C HARLES. 1984. Losing Ground : American Social Policy, 1950-1980. Basic Books: New
  York, NY. 1



                                                  42
N ICHOLS , A USTIN , & R OTHSTEIN , J ESSE. 2015. The Earned Income Tax Credit. In: M OFFITT,
  R OBERT A. (ed), The Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, Volume 1.
  Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 6

O LSON , LYNN M., & D AVIS , A UDREY. 1994. The Earned Income Tax Credit: Views from the Street
  Level. Center for Urban Affairs and Policy Research. 8

R OMICH , J ENNIFER L, & W EISNER , T HOMAS. 2000. How Families View and Use the EITC: Ad-
  vance Payment versus Lump Sum Delivery. National Tax Journal, 1245­1265. 8, 35

R OSS P HILLIPS , K ATHERIN. 2001. Who Knows About the Earned Income Tax Credit? New Feder-
  alism: National Survey of America's Families, Series B, No. 64. 8, 35

S AEZ , E MMANUEL. 2002. Optimal Income Transfer Programs: Intensive Versus Extensive Labor
  Supply Responses. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(3), 1039­1073. 22, 36

S MEEDING , T IMOTHY, R OSS P HILLIPS , K ATHERIN , & O'C ONNOR , M ICHAEL. 2000. The EITC:
  Expectation, Knowledge, Use, and Economic and Social Mobility. National Tax Journal, 53(4),
  1187­1209. 8, 35

YAGAN , D ANNY. 2019. Employment Hysteresis from the Great Recession. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 127(5), forthcoming. 16




                                                  43
                                     TABLE 1: D ESCRIPTIVE S TATISTICS

                                                                         Single Women

                                                                            With         Without
                                                                 All       Children      Children
                                                                 (1)          (2)            (3)

                   Age                                           32.05       34.34         30.68
                   Age of Youngest Child                          7.51        7.51            .
                   Number of Children                             0.67        1.79          0.00
                   High School & Below                           0.41        0.55           0.33
                   Some College                                   0.34        0.32          0.36
                   College Degree                                 0.24        0.13          0.31
                   Employment Rate                                0.73        0.68          0.75
                   Labor Force Participation Rate                 0.78        0.76          0.80
                   Welfare Participation Rate                    0.20        0.39           0.03
                   Earnings                                     23,519      21,365        24,984

                   Observations                             4,674,064      1,746,591     2,927,473

Notes: This table shows means of demographics, labor market variables, and earnings (in 2018 USD) for single women.
Column (1) shows all single women, column (2) shows single women with EITC-eligible children, while column (3)
shows single women without EITC-eligible children. EITC-eligible children are defined as children under 19 (24 if in
full-time education) and living at home for at least half of the year. Employment and labor force participation rates are
based on respondents' activities last week. The sample includes single women aged 20-50 using the March and monthly
CPS files combined, pooling all years from 1968 to 2018.




                                                           44
      TABLE 2: T HREE -Y EAR E FFECTS OF F EDERAL EITC R EFORMS ON S INGLE M OTHERS

                                              Employment Rate (pp)            Participation Rate (pp)

                                                  (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)

                                              Panel A: 1975 Reform

             All Educations                    -0.713            -0.678         0.708           0.706
                                               (1.377)           (1.338)       (1.330)         (1.297)
             Low-Education                     -0.118            -0.248         1.087           0.991
                                               (1.687)           (1.654)       (1.617)         (1.582)

                                              Panel B: 1986 Reform

             All Educations                    -1.028            -0.178         -1.571         -0.877
                                               (1.084)           (1.036)       (1.002)         (0.969)
             Low-Education                     -0.411             0.293         -0.879         -0.339
                                               (1.439)           (1.405)       (1.334)         (1.309)

                                              Panel C: 1990 Reform

             All Educations                    -0.347            -1.608         -1.115         -2.330**
                                               (1.068)           (1.005)       (0.998)          (0.947)
             Low-Education                     -0.170             0.925         -0.804           0.075
                                               (1.479)           (1.430)       (1.391)          (1.347)

                                              Panel D: 1993 Reform

             All Educations                   3.060***          2.949***      3.055***         2.965***
                                               (0.508)           (0.475)      (0.467)          (0.440)
             Low-Education                    3.538***          3.627***      3.604***         3.592***
                                               (0.758)           (0.716)      (0.711)          (0.674)

                                               Panel E: 2009 Reform

             All Educations                   -3.554***         -3.920***     -2.162**        -2.490***
                                               (1.074)           (1.030)       (0.966)         (0.932)
             Low-Education                     -2.170            -2.786*        -2.001         -2.476*
                                               (1.486)           (1.443)       (1.374)         (1.337)

             Demographic Controls:                                 X                              X

Notes: This table shows DiD estimates of the effects of the five federal EITC reforms after three years. The estimates are
obtained from a modified version of equation (1) in which the year dummies are collapsed into a post dummy, equal
to one for the three years after each reform. Panels A-D are based on comparing single women with children to those
without children, while Panel E is based on comparing single women with 3+ children to those without children. The
columns show results for different outcomes (weekly employment and weekly participation) and different controls,
while the rows show results for the full sample and for those with low education (defined as having a high school
degree or less). The sample includes single women aged 20-50. Panels A-C use the March CPS files alone, while Panels
D-E use the March and monthly files combined. Robust standard errors are clustered at the individual level.

                                                           45
         TABLE 3: E XTENSIVE M ARGIN E LASTICITIES W HEN I GNORING C ONFOUNDERS


                                Earnings and Tax                      Employment                   Participation
                                   Parameters                           Effects                       Effects

                          Earnings                 (1 -  )           P        P                   P        P         
                              (1)         (2)         (3)            (4)      (5)      (6)        (7)      (8)      (9)

    Any Children:           14,685      0.283       0.077          0.606     0.130    2.0       0.690     0.129     1.7

            1 Child:        16,197      0.338       0.034          0.680     0.085    2.4       0.756     0.083     2.1

         2 Children         14,703      0.280       0.105          0.610     0.138    1.6       0.697     0.137     1.4

        3 Children:         12,110      0.192       0.124          0.474     0.196    2.7       0.570     0.202     2.3

      4+ Children:          8,327       0.067       0.159          0.300     0.262    5.1       0.400     0.252     3.7


Notes: This table shows estimates of the extensive margin elasticities based on the 1993 reform, assuming that the
entire DiD effect between 1993-2003 can be attributed to the EITC. Columns (1)-(3) show predicted earnings and tax
parameters, columns (4)-(6) show employment effects, and columns (7)-(9) show participation effects. Each statistic is
shown for all single mothers in the first row and separately by number of children in the following rows. The earnings
measure in column (1) is based on predicted earnings for non-workers (estimated using equation 3) and actual earnings
for workers. The changes in employment and participation rates (P ) as well as the EITC-induced change in the
net-of-tax rate ( (1 -  )) represent difference-in-differences comparing single women with and without children. The
elasticities in columns (6) and (9) are calculated using equation (2). See section C in the appendix for additional details.




                                                            46
                                      TABLE 4: E FFECTS OF THE 1993 EITC R EFORM BY A GE OF Y OUNGEST C HILD


                                                                     Employment Rate (pp)                   Participation Rate (pp)

                                                                     (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)

                                                       Panel A: Average 3-Year Effects (Before PRWORA)

                                 Youngest Aged 0-13               4.516***     3.771***     2.161***     4.335***     3.723***     2.259***
                                                                  (0.396)       (0.403)      (0.383)      (0.365)     (0.371)       (0.355)
                                 Youngest Aged 14+                 0.557        -0.032      -1.580**       0.176       -0.327      -1.718***
                                                                  (0.662)       (0.662)      (0.638)      (0.599)     (0.599)       (0.579)

                                                       Panel B: Average 10-Year Effects (After PRWORA)
47




                                 Youngest Aged 0-13              11.595***     9.523***     7.611***    11.072***     9.210***     7.492***
                                                                  (0.322)       (0.346)      (0.330)      (0.296)     (0.318)       (0.307)
                                 Youngest Aged 14+               2.533***        0.560      -1.151**     2.316***      0.514       -1.017**
                                                                  (0.531)       (0.542)      (0.527)      (0.479)     (0.490)       (0.478)

                                 Controls:
                                 State Fixed Effects                               X           X                          X            X
                                 Unemployment × Kids                               X           X                          X            X
                                 Demographics                                                  X                                       X

     Notes: This table shows effects of the 1993 reform by the age of youngest child across different specifications and outcomes. The estimates are obtained from versions
     of equation (5) where the welfare category variable corresponds to bins of the age of the youngest child. Panel A shows 3-year effects (before PRWORA) while
     Panel B shows 10-year effects (after PRWORA). Each panel shows the effects among mothers with youngest children aged 0-13 and youngest children aged 14+. The
     different columns show different outcomes (weekly employment and weekly participation) and specifications with different controls: no controls in columns (1) and
     (4), adding unemployment-by-kids and state fixed effects in columns (2) and (5), and finally adding demographics in columns (3) and (6). The sample includes single
     women aged 20-50 using the March and monthly CPS files combined. Robust standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
                             TABLE 5: E FFECTS OF THE 1993 EITC R EFORM BY P ROBABILITY OF AFDC PARTICIPATION


                                                                      Employment Rate (pp)                   Participation Rate (pp)

                                                                      (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)

                                                      Panel A: Average 3-Year Effects (Before PRWORA)

                               Deciles 3-10 of AFDC Prob.          4.375***     3.826***     2.137***     4.188***     3.728***    2.191***
                                                                    (0.398)      (0.405)      (0.379)      (0.366)      (0.373)     (0.352)
                               Deciles 1-2 of AFDC Prob.             0.505        -0.114     -1.074*        0.339        -0.170    -1.078*
                                                                    (0.645)      (0.647)      (0.624)      (0.586)      (0.589)     (0.569)

                                                       Panel B: Average 10-Year Effects (After PRWORA)
48




                               Deciles 3-10 of AFDC Prob.          11.484***    9.598***     7.445***    10.972***     9.264***    7.325***
                                                                    (0.323)      (0.348)      (0.329)      (0.298)      (0.321)     (0.305)
                               Deciles 1-2 of AFDC Prob.           2.340***       0.790       -0.012      2.325***      0.827*       0.088
                                                                    (0.519)      (0.531)      (0.514)      (0.470)      (0.481)     (0.468)

                               Controls:
                               State Fixed Effects                                  X            X                         X           X
                               Unemployment × Kids                                  X            X                         X           X
                               Demographics                                                      X                                     X

     Notes: This table shows effects of the 1993 reform by probability of AFDC participation across different specifications and outcomes. The estimates are obtained
     from versions of equation (5) where the welfare category variable is estimated from (6). Panel A shows 3-year effects (before PRWORA) while Panel B shows 10-year
     effects (after PRWORA). Each panel shows the effects in the bottom two deciles and in the top eight deciles of the predicted probability of AFDC participation. The
     different columns show different outcomes (weekly employment and weekly participation) and specifications with different controls: no controls in columns (1) and
     (4), adding unemployment-by-kids and state fixed effects in columns (2) and (5), and finally adding demographics in columns (3) and (6). The sample includes single
     women aged 20-50 using the March and monthly CPS files combined. Robust standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
                          TABLE 6: E FFECTS OF THE 1993 EITC R EFORM WITH WAIVER AND B USINESS C YCLE C ONTROLS


                                                                    Employment Rate (pp)                     Participation Rate (pp)

                                                                  (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)

                                                            Panel A: Year-3 Effects (Before PRWORA)

                              All Educations                   4.684***       -0.053         0.836       5.074***       -0.027        0.795
                                                                (0.671)       (1.076)       (0.996)       (0.614)      (0.996)       (0.930)
                              Low-Education                    5.494***       -0.105         1.060       5.923***       -0.205        0.893
                                                                (1.017)       (1.614)       (1.511)       (0.950)      (1.527)       (1.431)

                                                             Panel B: Year-10 Effects (After PRWORA)
49




                              All Educations                   13.009***     9.753***      9.017***     12.877***      9.550***     9.005***
                                                                (0.648)       (1.036)       (0.982)      (0.590)        (0.945)      (0.904)
                              Low-Education                    16.050***    12.976***     12.021***     16.120***     13.501***     12.837***
                                                                (1.003)       (1.633)       (1.563)      (0.935)        (1.527)      (1.468)

                              Controls:
                              State Fixed Effects                                X             X                           X            X
                              Unemployment × Kids                                X             X                           X            X
                              Welfare Waivers × Kids                             X             X                           X            X
                              Demographics                                                     X                                        X

     Notes: This table shows effects of the 1993 reform across different samples, specifications, and outcomes. The estimates are obtained from versions of equation
     (7). Panel A shows 3-year effects (before PRWORA) while Panel B shows 10-year effects (after PRWORA). Each panel shows the effect among single women of
     all education levels and single women with a high school education or below. The different columns show different outcomes (weekly employment and weekly
     participation) and specifications with different controls: no controls in columns (1) and (4), adding unemployment-by-kids and state fixed effects in columns (2) and
     (5), and finally adding demographics in columns (3) and (6). The sample includes single women aged 20-50 using the March and monthly CPS files combined. Robust
     standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
                                F IGURE 1: L ONG -R UN E VOLUTION OF EITC AND C ASH W ELFARE
                      30
                      25
  Recipients (Millions)
                      20
                      15
                      10
                      5
                      0




                           66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
                                                                   Year
                                                EITC Recipients           AFDC/TANF Recipients


Source: Internal Revenue Service (EITC) and Department of Health and Human Services (AFDC/TANF).
Notes: The red series show the annual number of federal EITC recipients between 1966-2016. The blue series show the
average monthly number of Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) recipients between 1966-1996, and the
average monthly number of Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) recipients between 1997-2016.




                                                                  50
                                                                               F IGURE 2: EITC PARAMETERS


                                                                                       A: EITC Schedule in 2018

                                                                          3+ children
                                     6,000




                                                                          2 children
      Annual Credit (USD)
                                     4,000




                                                                1 child
                                     2,000




                                                        0 children
                                     0




                                             0             10000                 20000                30000      40000     50000   60000
                                                                                                Earnings (USD)


                                                                          B: EITC Maximum Credit Over Time
                                                     Tax Reduction
                                                      Act of 1975
                                                                                        TRA86   OBRA90 OBRA93            ARRA




                                                                                                                                    3+ children
                                     6,000
      Maximum Annual Credit (2018 USD)




                                                                                                                                    2 children
                                     4,000




                                                                                                                                    1 child
                                     2,000




                                                                                                                                    0 children
                                     0




                                             68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18
                                                                                                     Year

Notes: This figure shows federal EITC parameters for different family sizes. Panel A shows the 2018 EITC schedule as
a function of total family earnings for families with 0, 1, 2, and 3+ EITC-eligible children. Panel B shows the maximum
annual credit for families with 0, 1, 2, and 3+ EITC-eligible children between 1968 and 2018, in 2018 USD.




                                                                                                        51
                      F IGURE 3: F IFTY Y EARS OF L ABOR F ORCE PARTICIPATION FOR S INGLE W OMEN
                100
                90
Participation (%)
                80




                                                      14.1pp

                       14.3pp
                70
                60
                50




                      68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18
                                                                Year
                                                With Children           Without Children

Notes: This figure shows the weekly labor force participation rate of single women with and without children between
1968 and 2018. The sample includes single women aged 20-50 using the March CPS files.




                                                          52
                                    F IGURE 4: W HAT E XPLAINS THE L ONG -R UN E VOLUTION ?


                                                                               A: EITC
                                  Tax Reduction
                                   Act of 1975                     TRA86     OBRA90 OBRA93                             ARRA
                     100




                                                                                                                                   4.6
                     90




                                                                                                                                           Unemployment Rate
     Participation (%)
                     80
                     70
                     60




                                                                                                                                   2.6
                     50




                           68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18
                                                                                  Year
                                                                  With Children                 Without Children



                                                                           B: Confounders
                                  Tax Reduction
                                   Act of 1975                     TRA86     OBRA90 OBRA93 PRWORA                      ARRA
                     100




                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                    State Welfare
                                                                                                       Waivers
                     90




                                                                                                                                   Unemployment Rate
     Participation (%)




                                                                                                                                                  8
                     80
                     70




                                                                                                                                      6
                     60




                                                                                                                                   4
                     50




                           68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18
                                                                                  Year
                                                  With Children                 Without Children                    Unemployment


Notes: This figure shows the weekly labor force participation rate of single women with and without children between
1968 and 2018. Panel A marks the timing of the five federal EITC reforms by vertical black lines. Panel B adds the timing
of statewide welfare waivers (red shaded area), federal welfare reform (red line), and the national unemployment rate
(green dashed line). The sample includes single women aged 20-50 using the March CPS files.




                                                                                   53
                     F IGURE 5: F IFTY Y EARS OF PARTICIPATION FOR S INGLE W OMEN , BY FAMILY S IZE


                             Tax Reduction
                              Act of 1975           TRA86   OBRA90 OBRA93                       ARRA
                90
                80
Participation (%)
                70
                60
                50
                40




                     68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18
                                                                   Year
                                       0 Children       1 Child             2 Children              3+ Children

Notes: This figure shows the weekly labor force participation rate of single women with 0, 1, 2, and 3+ children between
1968 and 2018. The timing of the five federal EITC reforms are marked by vertical black lines. The sample includes
single women aged 20-50 using the March CPS files.




                                                              54
                                                                         F IGURE 6: D I D E VENT S TUDIES OF A LL F EDERAL EITC R EFORMS

                                              A: 1975 Reform, With vs Without Children                                                                         B: 1986 and 1990 Reforms, With vs Without Children
                                                               TRA1975                                                                                                                TRA1986                              OBRA90
                              20




                                                                                                                                                    20
                              15




                                                                                                                                                    15
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                            Impact on Employment (pp)
                              10




                                                                                                                                                    10
                              5




                                                                                                                                                    5
                              0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                    -5
                              -10




                                                                                                                                                    -10
                                    70   71     72   73   74             75          76   77            78   79   80   81                                 82     83    84   85   86             87          88   89   90            91   92   93
                                                                              Year                                                                                                                   Year




                                              C: 1993 Reform, With vs Without Children                                                                                D: 2009 Reform, 3+ vs Without Children
55




                                                           OBRA1993                            PRWORA                                                                                  ARRA
                              20




                                                                                                                                                    20
                              15




                                                                                                                                                    15
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                            Impact on Employment (pp)
                              10




                                                                                                                                                    10
                              5




                                                                                                                                                    5
                              0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                    -5
                              -10




                                                                                                                                                    -10




                                    89   90     91   92   93             94          95   96            97   98   99   00                                 04     05    06   07   08             09          10   11   12            13   14   15
                                                                              Year                                                                                                                   Year


     Notes: This figure shows DiD event studies for the five federal EITC reforms. The graphs plot estimates of t based on specification (1) without demographic controls.
     Panels A-C are based on comparing single women with and without children, while Panel D is based on comparing single women with 3+ children to those without
     children. In each panel, the difference in the pre-reform year is normalized to zero. The dependent variable is weekly employment. The sample includes single
     women aged 20-50. Panels A-B use the March CPS files alone, while Panels C-D use the March and monthly files combined. The 95% confidence intervals are based
     on robust standard errors clustered at the individual level.
                                             F IGURE 7: A FANNING -O UT B Y N UMBER OF C HILDREN


                                                                   A: Raw Data
                                                         OBRA93           PRWORA
                             30




                                                                                                                  4+ Kids
     Impact on Employment (pp)
                             20




                                                                                                                  3 Kids




                                                                                                                  2 Kids
                             10




                                                                                                                  1 Kid
                             0
                             -10




                                   89   90   91   92   93     94   95    96    97   98   99   00   01   02   03
                                                                        Year


                                                       B: Controlling for Demographics
                                                         OBRA93           PRWORA
                             30




                                                                                                                  4+ Kids
     Impact on Employment (pp)
                             20




                                                                                                                  3 Kids


                                                                                                                  2 Kids
                             10




                                                                                                                  1 Kid
                             0
                             -10




                                   89   90   91   92   93     94   95    96    97   98   99   00   01   02   03
                                                                        Year

Notes: This figure shows DiD event studies for the 1993 reform by number of EITC-eligible children (1, 2, 3, 4+). The
graphs plot DiD coefficients t based on an extension of specification (1) that includes dummies for each family size.
Hence, each series shows the difference between single mothers with a given number of children and single women
without children, normalized to zero in 1993. Panel A shows raw estimates, while panel B controls for demographic
composition: dummies for the age of the woman (six categories), dummies for the age of the youngest child (seven
categories), and dummies for education (three categories). The dependent variable is weekly employment. The sample
includes single women aged 20-50 using the March and monthly CPS files combined.



                                                                        56
                                                                                   F IGURE 8: A CTUAL VS S IMULATED R ESPONSES TO THE 1993 R EFORM

                                                                           A: 1 vs 0 Children                                                                                                                    B: 2 vs 0 Children
                                                                  OBRA93              PRWORA                                                                                                            OBRA93             PRWORA
                              35




                                                                                                                                                                    35
                                    Explained by the EITC: 13%                                                                                                            Explained by the EITC: 19%
                              30




                                                                                                                                                                    30
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                                            Impact on Employment (pp)
                              25




                                                                                                                                                                    25
                              20




                                                                                                                                                                    20
                              15




                                                                                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Actual DiD
                              10




                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                               Actual DiD
                              5




                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 = .3
                                                                                                                            = .3
                              0




                                                                                                                                                                    0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                                    -5
                                   89    90      91      92      93    94     95     96     97   98   99   00   01   02   03                                             89    90      91      92      93    94     95    96     97   98   99   00   01   02   03
                                                                                    Year                                                                                                                                 Year
                                                                                    place                                                                                                                                place
57




                                                                           C: 3 vs 0 Children                                                                                                                D: 4+ vs 0 Children
                                                                  OBRA93              PRWORA                                                                                                            OBRA93             PRWORA
                              35




                                                                                                                                                                    35
                                    Explained by the EITC: 11%                                                                                                            Explained by the EITC: 6%
                              30




                                                                                                                                                                    30
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                                            Impact on Employment (pp)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Actual DiD
                              25




                                                                                                                                                                    25
                              20




                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                               Actual DiD
                              15




                                                                                                                                                                    15
                              10




                                                                                                                                                                    10
                              5




                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                            = .3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 = .3
                              0




                                                                                                                                                                    0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                                    -5




                                   89    90      91      92      93    94     95     96     97   98   99   00   01   02   03                                             89    90      91      92      93    94     95    96     97   98   99   00   01   02   03
                                                                                    Year                                                                                                                                 Year
                                                                                    place                                                                                                                                place


     Notes: This figure shows actual and simulated DiD event studies for the 1993 reform, by number of EITC-eligible children. The actual DiD series plot DiD coefficients
     t based on an extension of specification (1) with separate dummies for each family size. The specification does not include demographic controls and the dependent
     variable is weekly employment. The simulated DiD series (black dashed lines) plot Pt calculated from equation (4), assuming an elasticity of 0.3. See section C
     in the appendix for additional details. The fraction explained by the EITC equals the simulated DiD estimate in 2003 divided by the actual DiD estimate in 2003.
     The sample includes single women aged 20-50 using the March and monthly CPS files combined. The 95% confidence intervals are based on robust standard errors
     clustered at the individual level.
                                             F IGURE 9: E FFECTS OF THE 1993 EITC R EFORM BY W ELFARE T REATMENT I NTENSITY

                                                                                       B Y A GE OF Y OUNGEST C HILD                                                                                                                                                     B Y P ROBABILITY OF AFDC PARTICIPATION

                                                                                         A: Pre-Reform AFDC                                                                                                                                                                               B: Pre-Reform AFDC
                                                                                      Participation Predicts Drop                                                                                                                                                                       Participation Predicts Drop
                                                                    50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        50
                                                                              Slope = 0.69                                                                                                                                                                                       Slope = 0.75
                               Drop in Welfare Participation (pp)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Drop in Welfare Participation (pp)
                                                                    40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        40
                                                                                                                                                                     0-1

                                                                                                                                                        2-3
                                                                    30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        30
                                                                                                                                 4-6
                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                   7-9


                                                                                                                 10-13
                                                                    10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                              18+            14-17
                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                          5           10        15          20           25     30        35       40         45     50                                                                                                      5       10         15    20       25       30          35   40    45     50       55        60
                                                                                                      Pre-Reform Welfare Participation (%)                                                                                                                                                             Pre-Reform Welfare Participation (%)



                                                                                                       C: Raw Data                                                                                                                                                                                         D: Raw Data
                        20




                                                                                                                                                                         60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60
                                                                                                                                                                         50
   Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50
                        15




                                                                                                                                                                              AFDC Participation (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AFDC Participation (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                         40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         40
                        10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                                         30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         30
                                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                        5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                                                                                                         10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                    0-1                2-3            4-6                 7-9          10-13       14-17           18+                                                                                                  1           2           3          4        5           6        7       8         9        10
                                                                                                            Age of Youngest Child                                                                                                                                                                Decile of Predicted Prob. of AFDC Reciept

                                                                                    3-Year Effect            10-Year Effect              Pre-Reform AFDC Participation                                                                                                              3-Year Effect              10-Year Effect            Pre-Reform AFDC Participation




                                                                                                     E: With Controls                                                                                                                                                                                F: With Controls
                        20




                                                                                                                                                                         60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60
                                                                                                                                                                         50
   Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50
                        15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                              AFDC Participation (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AFDC Participation (%)
                                                                                                                                                                         40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         40
                        10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                                         30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         30
                        5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                        0




                                                                                                                                                                         10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                    0-1                2-3            4-6                 7-9          10-13       14-17           18+                                                                                                  1           2           3          4        5           6        7       8         9        10
                                                                                                            Age of Youngest Child                                                                                                                                                                Decile of Predicted Prob. of AFDC Reciept

                                                                                    3-Year Effect            10-Year Effect              Pre-Reform AFDC Participation                                                                                                              3-Year Effect              10-Year Effect            Pre-Reform AFDC Participation




Notes: This figure shows DiD effects of the 1993 reform by welfare treatment intensity, estimated from equation (5).
The left panels use the age of youngest child as a proxy for welfare treatment, while the right panels use deciles of a
predicted probability of AFDC receipt (estimated from eq. 6) as the proxy for welfare treatment. The top row plots the
level of AFDC participation before the reform (1993) against the drop in welfare participation after the reform (1993-
2003) across bins of the welfare treatment proxy. The next rows plot the 3-year effects (solid black) and 10-year effects
(dashed black) by welfare treatment intensity in the raw data (middle row) and after controlling for business cycle
effects and demographics (bottom row). The 3-year and 10-year effects correspond to the coefficient on a 1994-1996
dummy and a 1994-20003 dummy, respectively, The dependent variable is weekly employment. The sample includes
single women aged 20-50 using the March and monthly CPS files combined. The 95% confidence intervals are based on
robust standard errors clustered at the individual level.

                                                                                                                                                                                      58
     F IGURE 10: H OW M UCH CAN BE E XPLAINED BY THE B USINESS C YCLE AND WAIVERS ?


                                                          A: Controlling for Unemployment
                                                            OBRA1993            PRWORA
                             20
                             15
     Impact on Employment (pp)
                             10
                             5
                             0
                             -5
                             -10




                                   89   90   91    92      93      94   95     96       97    98     99    00    01   02   03
                                                                              Year
                                                            Raw Data                With Unemployment Controls



                                                  B: Controlling for Unemployment and Waivers
                                                            OBRA1993            PRWORA
                             20
                             15
     Impact on Employment (pp)
                             10
                             5
                             0
                             -5
                             -10




                                   89   90   91    92      93      94   95     96       97    98     99    00    01   02   03
                                                                              Year
                                                        Raw Data             With Unemployment & Waiver Controls


Notes: This figure shows DiD event studies for the 1993 reform with controls for unemployment and waivers. The
graphs plot DiD coefficients t based on equation (7). In both panels, the black series show the raw DiD without
controls. In panel A, the blue series includes controls for state unemployment by kids and state fixed effects. In panel B
the blue series adds controls for waivers by kids. The dependent variable is weekly employment. The sample includes
single women aged 20-50 using the March and monthly CPS files combined. The 95% confidence intervals are based on
robust standard errors clustered at the individual level.




                                                                              59
                                                        F IGURE 11: S TATES WITH EITC S UPPLEMENTS

                                     A: 1990                                                                             B: 2000




                                                                Any Supplement                                                                      Any Supplement
                                                                No Supplement                                                                       No Supplement
60




                                      C: 2010                                                                            D: 2018




                                                                Any Supplement                                                                      Any Supplement
                                                                No Supplement                                                                       No Supplement


     Notes: This figure shows which states had an EITC supplement (dark blue) and which states did not have a supplement (light blue) in 1990, 2000, 2010, and 2018.
                             F IGURE 12: S YNTHETIC C ONTROL A NALYSIS OF S TATE EITC R EFORMS


                                                      A: All State EITC Reforms
                                                                Reform
                  20
                  15
     Employment (%)
                  10
                  5
                  0
                  -5
                  -10




                        -5        -4    -3       -2        -1             0       1         2          3   4   5
                                                                         Year
                                                Treated States                  Synthetic Control States



                                             B: Excluding Small State EITC Reforms
                                                                Reform
                  20
                  15
     Employment (%)
                  10
                  5
                  0
                  -5
                  -10




                        -5        -4    -3       -2        -1             0       1         2          3   4   5
                                                                         Year
                                                Treated States                  Synthetic Control States


Notes: This figure shows stacked event studies of state EITC reforms using a synthetic control approach. The graphs
plot employment rates for single mothers in treatment and synthetic control states across event time, normalized to
zero in the last pre-reform year (event time -1). Panel A includes all states that instituted an EITC supplement before
2015, while panel B includes only states that instituted a "large" EITC supplement. Large supplements are defined as
refundable credits equal to at least 10% of the federal credit. In both panels, the synthetic control states are constructed
from states that never instituted an EITC supplement. For each treatment state, a synthetic control state is constructed
by matching on the employment rate in the five pre-reform years. Table A.VI shows the make-up of each synthetic state.
For states with supplements enacted before 1993 the sample is based on March CPS files alone, while for states with
supplements enacted after 1993 the sample is based on and March and monthly CPS files combined. The outcome is
weekly employment and the sample includes single mothers aged 20-50. See section D in the appendix for additional
details.
                                                                         61
                                                     F IGURE 13: S TACKED E VENT S TUDIES OF A LL S TATE AND F EDERAL EITC R EFORMS

                                                          A: Federal Reforms                                                                                                     B: State Reforms
                                                                  Reform                                                                                                                Reform
                              20




                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                       Average effect = 1.48 (0.52, 2.45)                                                                                    Average effect = 0.15 (-1.33, 1.63)
                              15




                                                                                                                                                    15
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                            Impact on Employment (pp)
                              10




                                                                                                                                                    10
                              5




                                                                                                                                                    5
                              0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                    -5
                              -10




                                                                                                                                                    -10
                                    -5   -4   -3     -2      -1             0      1     2         3          4         5                                 -5   -4   -3      -2     -1             0      1      2         3          4         5
                                                                   Event Time                                                                                                            Event Time
                                                                           Place                                                                                                                 Place



                                                   C: State and Federal Reforms                                                                                          D: State and Federal Reforms,
62




                                                                                                                                                                            Adjusted for Pre-Trends
                                                                  Reform                                                                                                                Reform
                              20




                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                       Average effect = 1.08 (0.26, 1.90)                                                                                    Average effect = 0.02 (-0.79, 0.84)
                              15




                                                                                                                                                    15
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                            Impact on Employment (pp)
                              10




                                                                                                                                                    10
                              5




                                                                                                                                                    5
                              0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                    -5
                              -10




                                                                                                                                                    -10




                                    -5   -4   -3     -2      -1             0      1     2         3          4         5                                 -5   -4   -3      -2     -1             0      1      2         3          4         5
                                                                   Event Time                                                                                                            Event Time
                                                                           Place                                                                                                                 Place

     Notes: This figure shows stacked event studies of all state and federal EITC reforms. The graphs plot DiD coefficients based on comparing single women with and
     without children across event time, normalized to zero in the pre-reform year (event time -1). The specifications control for demographics, and for the impact of
     waivers and unemployment around the 1993 federal reform (i.e., the controls in equation (7), interacted with an OBRA93 indicator). Panel A includes all federal
     reforms, Panel B includes all state reforms. while Panel C includes all state and federal reforms together. Panel D is similar to panel C, but adjusts for group-specific
     linear pre-trends. Each panel reports the average effect across the post-reform years, with 95% confidence intervals in parentheses. For reforms enacted before 1993
     the sample is based on the March CPS files alone, while for reforms enacted after 1993 the sample is based on the March and monthly CPS files combined. The
     outcome variable is weekly employment and the sample consists of single women aged 20-50. See section E in the appendix for additional details.
Online Appendix (Not for Publication)

A   Supplementary Figures and Tables




                                 63
                     TABLE A.I: H ISTORICAL EITC PARAMETERS


            Family      Phase-in   First    Max       Second   Phase-out   Exhaustion
  Year       Size       Rate (%)   Kink    Credit      Kink     Rate (%)     Point

1975-78       all          10      4,000        400   4,000      10.00       8,000

1979-84       all          10      5,000        500   6,000      12.50       10,000

1985-86       all          11      5,000        550   6,500      12.22       11,000

  1987        all          14      6,080        851   6,920      10.00       15,432

  1988        all          14      6,240        874   9,840      10.00       18,576

  1989        all          14      6,500        910   10,240     10.00       19,340

  1990        all          14      6,810        953   10,730     10.00       20,264

  1991      1 child       16.7     7,140    1,192     11,250     11.93       21,250
          2+ children     17.3     7,140    1,235     11,250     12.36       21,250

  1992      1 child       17.6     7,520    1,324     11,840     12.57       22,370
          2+ children     18.4     7,520    1,384     11,840     13.14       22,370

  1993      1 child       18.5     7,750    1,434     12,200     13.21       23,050
          2+ children     19.5     7,750    1,511     12,200     13.93       23,050

  1994     0 children     7.65     4,000     306       5,000      7.65        9,000
             1 child      26.3     7,750    2,038     11,000     15.98       23,755
          2+ children      30      8,425    2,528     11,000     17.68       25,296

  1995     0 children     7.65     4,100     314       5,130      7.65        9,230
             1 child       34      6,160    2,094     11,290     15.98       24,396
          2+ children      36      8,640    3,110     11,290     20.22       26,673

  1996     0 children     7.65     4,220     323       5,280      7.65        9,500
             1 child       34      6,330    2,152     11,610     15.98       25,078
          2+ children      40      8,890    3,556     11,610     21.06       28,495

  1997     0 children     7.65     4,340     332       5,430      7.65        9,770
             1 child       34      6,500    2,210     11,930     15.98       25,750
          2+ children      40      9,140    3,656     11,930     21.06       29,290

  1998     0 children     7.65     4,460     341       5,570      7.65       10,030
             1 child       34      6,680    2,271     12,260     15.98       26,473
          2+ children      40      9,390    3,756     12,260     21.06       30,095

  1999     0 children     7.65     4,530     347       5,670      7.65       10,200
             1 child       34      6,800    2,312     12,460     15.98       26,928
          2+ children      40      9,540    3,816     12,460     21.06       30,580

                                           64
         Family      Phase-in   First     Max     Second   Phase-out   Exhaustion
Year      Size       Rate (%)   Kink     Credit    Kink     Rate (%)     Point

2000    0 children     7.65     4,610     353      5,770      7.65       10,380
          1 child       34      6,920    2,353    12,690     15.98       27,413
       2+ children      40      9,720    3,888    12,690     21.06       31,152

2001    0 children     7.65      4,760    364      5,950      7.65       10,710
          1 child       34      7,140    2,428    13,090     15.98       28,281
       2+ children      40      10,020   4,008    13,090     21.06       32,121

2002    0 children     7.65      4,910    376      6,150      7.65       11,060
          1 child       34      7,370    2,506    13,520     15.98       29,201
       2+ children      40      10,350   4,140    13,520     21.06       33,178

2003    0 children     7.65      4,990    382      6,240      7.65       11,230
          1 child       34      7,490    2,547    13,730     15.98       29,666
       2+ children      40      10,510   4,204    13,730     21.06       33,692

2004    0 children     7.65      5,100    390      6,390      7.65       11,490
          1 child       34      7,660    2,604    14,040     15.98       30,338
       2+ children      40      10,750   4,300    14,040     21.06       34,458

2005    0 children     7.65      5,220    399      6,530      7.65       11,750
          1 child       34      7,830    2,662    14,370     15.98       31,030
       2+ children      40      11,000   4,400    14,370     21.06       35,263

2006    0 children     7.65      5,380    412      6,740      7.65       12,120
          1 child       34      8,080    2,747    14,810     15.98       32,001
       2+ children      40      11,340   4,536    14,810     21.06       36,348

2007    0 children     7.65      5,590    428      7,000      7.65       12,590
          1 child       34      8,390    2,853    15,390     15.98       33,241
       2+ children      40      11,790   4,716    15,390     21.06       37,783

2008    0 children     7.65      5,720    438      7,160      7.65       12,880
          1 child       34      8,580    2,917    15,740     15.98       33,995
       2+ children      40      12,060   4,824    15,740     21.06       38,646

2009    0 children     7.65      5,970    457      7,470      7.65       13,440
          1 child       34       8,950   3,043    16,420     15.98       35,463
        2 children      40      12,570   5,028    16,420     21.06       40,295
       3+ children      45      12,570   5,657    16,420     21.06       43,279

2010    0 children     7.65      5,980    457      7,480      7.65       13,460
          1 child       34       8,970   3,050    16,450     15.98       35,535
        2 children      40      12,590   5,036    16,450     21.06       40,363
       3+ children      45      12,590   5,666    16,450     21.06       43,352

2011   0 children      7.65     6,070     464     7,590      7.65        13,660


                                         65
                    Family        Phase-in       First      Max       Second      Phase-out      Exhaustion
         Year        Size         Rate (%)       Kink      Credit      Kink        Rate (%)        Point

                    1 child           34        9,100       3,094      16,690        15.98          36,052
                  2 children          40        12,780      5,112      16,690        21.06          40,964
                 3+ children          45        12,780      5,751      16,690        21.06          43,998

         2012     0 children         7.65        6,210       475        7,770         7.65          13,980
                    1 child           34        9,320       3,169      17,090        15.98          36,920
                  2 children          40        13,090      5,236      17,090        21.06          41,952
                 3+ children          45        13,090      5,891      17,090        21.06          45,060

         2013     0 children         7.65        6,370       487        7,970         7.65          14,340
                    1 child           34        9,560       3,250      17,530        15.98          37,870
                  2 children          40        13,430      5,372      17,530        21.06          43,038
                 3+ children          45        13,430      6,044      17,530        21.06          46,227

         2014     0 children         7.65        6,480       496        8,110         7.65          14,590
                    1 child           34        9,720       3,305      17,830        15.98          38,511
                  2 children          40        13,650      5,460      17,830        21.06          43,756
                 3+ children          45        13,650      6,143      17,830        21.06          46,997

         2015     0 children         7.65        6,580       503        8,240         7.65          14,820
                    1 child           34        9,880       3,359      18,110        15.98          39,131
                  2 children          40        13,870      5,548      18,110        21.06          44,454
                 3+ children          45        13,870      6,242      18,110        21.06          47,747

         2016     0 children         7.65        6,610       506        8,270         7.65          14,880
                    1 child           34        9,920       3,373      18,190        15.98          39,296
                  2 children          40        13,931      5,572      18,190        21.06          44,648
                 3+ children          45        13,930      6,269      18,190        21.06          47,955

         2017     0 children         7.65        6,670       510        8,340         7.65          15,010
                    1 child           34        10,000      3,400      18,340        15.98          39,617
                  2 children          40        14,040      5,616      18,340        21.06          45,007
                 3+ children          45        14,040      6,318      18,340        21.06          48,340

         2018     0 children         7.65        6,780       519        8,490         7.65          15,270
                    1 child           34        10,180      3,461      18,660        15.98          40,320
                  2 children          40        14,290      5,716      18,660        21.06          45,802
                 3+ children          45        14,290      6,431      18,660        21.06          49,194


Notes: This table shows federal EITC parameters by family size since the introduction of the program in 1975. The
phase-in rate corresponds to the increase in the tax credit for each additional dollar of income. The first kink point is
the minimum income needed to maximize the credit. The maximum credit is largest possible EITC amount a family can
receive. The second kink point is the maximum income allowed before the credit begins to phase out. The phase-out
rate is the reduction in the tax credit for each additional dollar of income above the second kink point. The exhaustion
point is the income level at which the EITC is completely phased out.




                                                           66
                    TABLE A.II: S TATE EITC S UPPLEMENTS


                                    At Introduction          Current
                         Year         % of                 % of
State                 Instituted   Fed. Credit   Type   Fed. Credit    Type

Alabama                   .             .         .          .          .
Alaska                    .             .         .          .          .
Arizona                   .             .         .          .          .
Arkansas                  .             .         .          .          .
California1             2015          n/a         R        n/a         R
Colorado2               1999           10         R         10         R
Connecticut             2011           25         R         23         R
Delaware                2006           20        NR         20         NR
Dist. of Columbia       2000           25         R         40         R
Florida                   .             .         .          .          .
Georgia                   .             .         .          .          .
Hawaii                  2018            .         .         20         NR
Idaho                     .             .         .          .          .
Illinois                2000            5        NR         18         R
Indiana3                1999          n/a        NR          9         R
Iowa                    1990           6.5       NR         15         R
Kansas                  1998           10         R         17         R
Kentucky                  .             .         .          .          .
Louisiana               2008           3.5        R          5         R
Maine                   2000            5        NR          5         R
Maryland4               1987           50        NR         28         R
Massachusetts           1997           10         R         23         R
Michigan                2008           20         R          6         R
Minnesota5              1991          n/a         R        n/a         R
Mississippi               .             .         .          .          .
Missouri                  .             .         .          .          .
Montana                   .             .         .          .          .
Nebraska                2005            8         R         10         R
Nevada                    .             .         .          .          .
New Hampshire             .             .         .          .          .
New Jersey              2000          17.5        R         37         R
New Mexico              2007           10         R         10         R
New York                1994           20         R         30         R
North Carolina6         2008            5         R          .          .

                                     67
                                                          At Introduction                     Current
                                         Year              % of                           % of
            State                     Instituted        Fed. Credit       Type         Fed. Credit      Type

            North Dakota                   .                  .             .                .            .
            Ohio                         2013                10            NR               10           NR
            Oklahoma                     2002                 5             R                5           NR
            Oregon7                      1997                 5            NR                8            R
            Pennsylvania                   .                  .             .                .            .
            Rhode Island8                1986                25            NR               15            R
            South Carolina               2018               125            NR              125           NR
            South Dakota                   .                  .             .                .            .
            Tennessee                      .                  .             .                .            .
            Texas                          .                  .             .                .            .
            Utah                           .                  .             .                .            .
            Vermont                      1988                28             R               36            R
            Virginia                     2006                20            NR               20           NR
            Washington9                  2008               n/a            n/a             n/a           n/a
            West Virginia                  .                  .             .                .            .
            Wisconsin10                  1989             5/25/75           R            4/11/34          R
            Wyoming                        .                  .             .                .            .

Notes: This table shows the years in which state EITC supplements were instituted, along with their parameters 3 years
after introduction ("at introduction") and in 2018 ("current"). The notation R and NR refers to whether the credit is
refundable or non-refundable.
1. California's EITC is not a percentage of the federal EITC, but is based on an independent schedule similar in structure
to the federal schedule. In 2018, the maximum California credit was equal to 45 percent of the corresponding maximum
federal credit for families with 0, 1, 2, and 3+ children.
2. Colorado's original EITC was contingent upon the state having surplus revenue. In 2015, legislation was enacted that
made the credit permanent. Before 2015, it was only paid out between 1999 and 2001.
3. Until 2002, Indiana's EITC was not a percentage of the federal EITC, but was based on an independent schedule
similar in structure to the federal schedule. In 2003, Indiana's credit was respecified to be 6 percent of the federal credit
and became refundable.
4. Maryland also offers a 50% non-refundable credit that taxpayers can choose in place of the refundable credit.
5. Minnesota's EITC is not a percentage of the federal EITC, but is based on an independent schedule similar in structure
to the federal schedule. In 2018, the maximum Minnesota credit was equal to 25, 30, 35, and 31 percent of the maximum
federal credit for families with 0, 1, 2, and 3+ children, respectively.
6. North Carolina's credit was eliminated from 2014.
7. Oregon's EITC is 11% of the federal credit for families with children under three.
8. While Rhode Island explicitly enacted a state EITC in 1986, they already had an implicit EITC from the introduction
of the federal credit in 1975. This is because, at that time, the Rhode Island income tax was assessed as a percentage of
the federal income tax.
9. Washington enacted a state EITC in 2008, but the credit has never been funded or paid out.
10. Wisconsin introduced a non-refundable EITC already in 1984, which was repealed in 1986 and reinstituted in 1989
as a refundable credit. Wisconsin's credit varies by family size. The numbers shown in the table correspond to the credit
for 1, 2, and 3+ eligible children, respectively.

                                                             68
                        TABLE A.III: A PPROVAL AND I MPLEMENTATION D ATES OF S TATEWIDE WAIVERS


                            Termination     Work Requirement      JOBS            JOBS           Family         Earnings
                   State    Time Limits       Time Limits      Exemptions       Sanctions         Caps          Disregard
                            Appr    Impl    Appr     Impl      Appr    Impl    Appr    Impl    Appr    Impl    Appr    Impl

               Alabama
                 Alaska
                Arizona     5-95    11-95                              11-95   5-95    11-95   5-95    11-95
              Arkansas                                                                         4-94     7-94
              California                    9-95     9-95                                      8-96            10-92   12-92
              Colorado
           Connecticut      12-95    1-96                      8-94     1-96   8-94     1-96   12-95    1-96   8-94    1-96
              Delaware      5-95    10-95   5-95     10-95     5-95    10-95   5-95    10-95   5-95    10-95   5-95    10-95
     Dist. of Columbia
69




                 Florida            2-94                       6-96                            6-96                    2-94
                Georgia                                                        11-93   1-94    11-93   1-94    6-94
                Hawaii      8-96    2-97                        6-94   2-97                                    8-96    2-97
                  Idaho                                        8-96            8-96
                 Illinois                                      9-95            9-95    10-95   9-95    12-95   11-93   11-93
                Indiana     12-94    5-95                      12-94    5-95   12-94    5-95   12-94    5-95
                    Iowa    8-93    10-93                      8-93    10-93   8-93    10-93                   8-93    10-93
                 Kansas
              Kentucky
              Louisiana
                  Maine                                        6-96
              Maryland                                         8-96    10-96   8-96    10-96   8-95    3-96    8-96    10-96
        Massachusetts                       8-95     11-95      8-95   11-95    8-95   11-95   8-95    11-95   8-95    11-95
              Michigan                      8-92               10-94   10-94   10-94   10-94                   8-92    10-92
             Minnesota
            Mississippi                                                                        9-95    10-95
               Missouri                     4-95                               4-95    6-95
                                        Termination       Work Requirement              JOBS                JOBS              Family            Earnings
                              State     Time Limits         Time Limits              Exemptions           Sanctions            Caps             Disregard
                                       Appr      Impl     Appr          Impl        Appr      Impl     Appr      Impl     Appr      Impl      Appr     Impl

                      Montana                              4-95         2-96         4-95     2-96      4-95     2-96                         4-95      2-96
                      Nebraska          2-95     10-95                               2-95     10-95     2-95     10-95     2-95     10-95     2-95
                        Nevada
                New Hampshire                              6-96                      6-96               6-96                                  6-96
                    New Jersey                                                       7-92     10-92     7-92     10-92     7-92     10-92     7-92
                   New Mexico
                     New York
                 North Carolina         2-96     7-96                                2-96      7-96     2-96      7-96     2-96      7-96
                  North Dakota                                                                                    7-96                                 10-96
                          Ohio          3-96                                                            3-96      7-96                        3-96     7-96
                     Oklahoma
70




                        Oregon          3-96     7-96                                7-92      2-93     3-96      7-95
                  Pennsylvania
                  Rhode Island
                 South Carolina         5-96                                         5-96               5-96               5-96
                  South Dakota                             3-94         6-94                            3-94      6-94
                     Tennessee          7-96     10-96                               7-96      9-96     7-96      9-96     7-96      9-96     7-96      9-96
                          Texas         3-96     6-96                               3-96       6-96    3-96       6-96
                          Utah                                                      10-92      1-93    10-92      1-93                        10-92     1-93
                       Vermont                             4-93         7-94         4-93      7-94     4-93      7-94                         4-93     7-94
                       Virginia         7-95     7-95      7-95         7-95        7-95       7-95    7-95       7-95     7-95      7-95     7-95      7-95
                   Washington           9-95     1-96
                  West Virginia                                                                         7-95      2-96
                     Wisconsin                             9-96         9-96         8-95      1-96     8-95      1-96     6-94      1-96
                     Wyoming

     Source: Department of Health and Human Services, Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (1997). Setting the Baseline: A Report on State Welfare Waivers.
     Notes: This table shows dates of approval and implementation for the six main types of statewide welfare waivers. For waivers that were rolled out at the county
     level, dates of implementation correspond to the date the first county implemented the reform.
TABLE A.IV: M AXIMUM M ONTHLY AFDC B ENEFITS IN 1993 FOR S INGLE M OTHERS , BY N UM -
BER OF C HILDREN



                                        Monthly Benefit in 1993 (2018 USD)

                     One       Two       Three         Four        Five       Six       Seven
 State               Child   Children   Children      Children   Children   Children   Children

 Alabama             238       285         337          391        438        499        547
 Alaska              1427     1604        1781         1958       2136       2313       2490
 Arizona             478       603         726          850        975       1098       1222
 Arkansas            282       355         429          497        575        648        721
 California          852      1055        1256         1432       1609       1767       1925
 Colorado            488       620         751          891       1027       1135       1243
 Connecticut         822      1010        1187         1357       1536       1733       1915
 Delaware            469       587         707          825        945       1064       1183
 Dist. of Columbia   573       730         891         1027       1208       1385       1531
 Florida             419       527         633          740        846        954       1060
 Georgia             408       487         573          657        712        772        817
 Hawaii              982      1237        1493         1748       2004       2259       2513
 Idaho               436       551         664          779        891       1006       1121
 Illinois            466       638         719          845        947        997       1050
 Indiana             398       500         601          704        805        907       1008
 Iowa                627       740         860          952       1060       1164       1270
 Kansas              612       746         864          970       1076       1182       1288
 Kentucky            341       396         495          579        653        728        728
 Louisiana           240       330         407          481        549        612        679
 Maine               542       726         914         1098       1284       1470       1656
 Maryland            497       636         766          888        977       1098       1208
 Massachusetts       845      1006        1161         1321       1484       1644       1802
 Michigan            645       798         978         1145       1376       1508       1640
 Minnesota           759       924        1079         1211       1343       1477       1592
 Mississippi         167       209         250          292        334        375        417
 Missouri            407       507         594          674        749        824        893
 Montana             553       697         841          985       1130       1272       1418



                                                 71
                                                  Monthly Benefit in 1993 (2018 USD)

                          One         Two           Three         Four         Five          Six         Seven
  State                   Child     Children       Children      Children    Children      Children     Children

  Nebraska                  509         633           756           879        1003          1126          1249
  Nevada                    500         605           709           813         916          1020          1124
  New Hampshire             836         956          1065           1170       1310          1420          1583
  New Jersey                560         737           848           959        1070          1176          1265
  New Mexico                492         620           749           876        1004          1133          1262
  New York                  813        1003          1194           1390       1536          1755          1913
  North Carolina            410         473           516           563         606           648           671
  North Dakota              579         711           871           989        1091          1163          1237
  Ohio                      485         593           732           857         954          1065          1182
  Oklahoma                  436         563           699           817         935          1053          1157
  Oregon                    686         799           982           1147       1312          1460          1607
  Pennsylvania              549         700           864           1024       1164          1309          1453
  Rhode Island              780         963          1098           1234       1390          1529          1686
  South Carolina            276         348           417           488         558           629           700
  South Dakota              660         747           831           918        1004          1090          1173
  Tennessee                 247         321           393           459         530           600           671
  Texas                     275         320           384           427         494           535           610
  Utah                      577         719           841           958        1055          1105          1157
  Vermont                   911        1093          1234           1390       1491          1661          1809
  Virginia                  401         506           603           712         756           756           756
  Washington                765         949          1116           1286       1461          1687          1868
  West Virginia             349         433           542           626         718           801           829
  Wisconsin                 765         900          1074           1230       1331          1441          1527
  Wyoming                   556         626           678           782         886           999          1112


  Median                    509         636           756           888        1004          1105          1222

Source: U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means (1993). Green Book: Background Material and Data
on Programs within the Jurisdiction of the Committee on Ways and Means.
Notes: This table shows the AFDC benefit for families with zero countable income by number of children and state in
1993. For states whose benefits vary across counties, the most generous benefit is listed. All families include 1 adult
caretaker.




                                                            72
       TABLE A.V: E XTENSIVE M ARGIN E LASTICITIES W HEN I GNORING C ONFOUNDERS
                                                D EMOGRAPHIC C ONTROLS


                                Earnings and Tax                      Employment                  Participation
                                   Parameters                           Effects                      Effects

                          Earnings                  (1 -  )          P       P                    P       P         
                              (1)         (2)        (3)            (4)       (5)     (6)        (7)       (8)     (9)

    Any Children:          14,685       0.283       0.077          0.606    0.113     1.8       0.690    0.115     1.6

            1 Child:       16,197       0.338       0.034          0.680    0.079     2.2       0.756    0.079     2.0

         2 Children        14,703       0.280       0.105          0.610    0.124     1.4       0.697    0.126     1.2

        3 Children:        12,110       0.192       0.124          0.474    0.164     2.3       0.570    0.175     2.0

      4+ Children:          8,327       0.067       0.159          0.300    0.211     4.1       0.400    0.208     3.0


Notes: This table shows estimates of the extensive margin elasticities based on the 1993 reform, assuming that the
entire DiD effect between 1993-2003 (controlling for demographic changes) can be attributed to the EITC. Columns (1)-
(3) show predicted earnings and tax parameters, columns (4)-(6) show employment effects, and columns (7)-(9) show
participation effects. Each statistic is shown for all single mothers in the first row and separately by number of children
in the following rows. The earnings measure in column (1) is based on predicted earnings for non-workers (estimated
using equation 3) and actual earnings for workers. The changes in employment and participation rates (P ) as well as
the EITC-induced change in the net-of-tax rate ( (1 -  )) represent difference-in-differences comparing single women
with and without children. The elasticities in columns (6) and (9) are calculated using equation (2). See section C in the
appendix for additional details.




                                                            73
                                  TABLE A.VI: S YNTHETIC EITC S TATES


            Treated State      Synthetic State

                California     49.4% KY, 27.5% UT, 17.8% WV, 4.0% TN, 1.3% WY
                Colorado       69.4% SD, 30.6% ID
             Connecticut       34.0% SD, 31.3% ND, 27.5% ID, 7.2% NH
                Delaware       67.6% MT, 20.7% WY, 8.7% NV, 3.0% UT
     Dist. Of Columbia         86.2% WV, 13.8% PA
                   Illinois    49.2% WA, 17.8% MT, 14.9% PA, 12.1% AK, 5.9% MO
                  Indiana      71.8% NH, 24.6% UT, 3.3% WV, 0.3% WY
                      Iowa     51.4% PA, 21.4% MT, 18.2% TX, 8.9% AL
                   Kansas      52.9% ID, 27.5% UT, 19.5% ND
                Louisiana      58.5% MS, 22.4% GA, 19.1% AK
                    Maine      50.1% UT, 30.0% MT, 18.2% AK, 1.3% AZ, 0.4% ID
                Maryland       56.3% MO, 26.5% NV, 17.1% TN
          Massachusetts        59.1% PA, 30.4% WV, 10.5% TN
                Michigan       46.6% TX, 26.1% AL, 17.6% AK, 9.8% WV
               Minnesota       35.9% PA, 23.8% AL, 17.3% WA, 16.8% MT, 6.2% TX
                Nebraska       37.9% NH, 30.6% WY, 22.5% UT, 9.0% MT
              New Jersey       80.7% PA, 19.3% MO
            New Mexico         48.4% AR, 20.0% KY, 15.1% TN, 14.7% FL, 1.8% MS
               New York        87.3% WV, 12.7% PA
         North Carolina        34.0% SD, 29.5% MS, 17.1% PA, 12.0% AR, 7.4% FL
                      Ohio     48.7% ID, 27.7% WV, 22.9% UT, 0.8% NV
               Oklahoma        44.1% SD, 26.7% WV, 15.7% AK, 12.0% UT, 1.6% WY
                   Oregon      9.9% SD, 9.6% TN, 9.4% ND, 7.1% UT, 6.1% WV, 57.9% Other
            Rhode Island       52.1% WV, 19.9% WA, 14.0% MS, 13.6% TN, 0.4% WY
                 Vermont       34.6% AR, 33.9% AZ, 31.5% PA
                  Virginia     80.3% NH, 11.1% WY, 8.6% UT
               Wisconsin       43.1% PA, 29.9% FL, 27.0% MT


Notes: This table shows how synthetic EITC states in figure (12) are constructed. Each synthetic state is calculated as
a linear combination of the set of control states. Values are independently rounded and may not add up to 100%. For
synthetic states with more than six control states, remaining states are grouped into an "other" category.



                                                          74
                             F IGURE A.I: E XTENSIVE M ARGIN M EASURES


                                            A: All Women, 20-50




                                                                                                        4.6
     80




                                                                                                          Unemployment Rate
     70
     60




                                                                                 Weekly Employment
     50




                                                                                 Weekly Participation
                                                                                 Annual Employment
                                                                                 Annual Participation




                                                                                                        2.6
     40




          68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18
                                                     Year


                                          B: Single Women, 20-50




                                                                                                        4.6
     90
     80




                                                                                                          Unemployment Rate
     70
     60




                                                                                 Weekly Employment
                                                                                 Weekly Participation
                                                                                 Annual Employment
                                                                                 Annual Participation
                                                                                                        2.6
     50




          68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18
                                                     Year

Notes: This figure shows the weekly employment, weekly participation, annual employment, and annual participation
of women (panel A) and single women (panel B) between 1968 and 2018. See section B.1 for additional details. The
sample includes women aged 20-50 using the March CPS files.




                                                       75
                  F IGURE A.II: E ARNINGS D ISTRIBUTION OF S INGLE W OMEN WITH C HILDREN


                                   First EITC Kink                          Avg. EITC Exhaustion
           0.06
           0.04
 Density
           0.02
           0.00




              -20000     -10000          0           10000      20000          30000               40000     50000            60000
                                                     Earnings Net of First EITC Kink

                                             High School & Below                  Some College & Above

Notes: This figure plots the pooled earnings distribution, from 1975 to 2018, net of the first EITC kink for single mothers
of different education levels. All dollar values are in 2018 USD. EITC kink is measured in the same year as earnings.
The average EITC exhaustion line corresponds to the average point of EITC exhaustion, relative to the first EITC kink,
across all years and observations in the sample. Distributions are divided into 40 quantiles and are plot separately for
women with a high school degree or less and with any college education and above. The sample includes single women
aged 20-50 using March CPS files alone.




                                                            76
                                                   F IGURE A.III: F IFTY Y EARS OF L ABOR F ORCE PARTICIPATION FOR S INGLE W OMEN
                                                                                     D IFFERENT E XTENSIVE M ARGIN M EASURES

                      100                         A: Weekly Participation                                                                                B: Annual Participation




                                                                                                                             100
                      90




                                                                                                                             90
      Participation (%)




                                                                                                             Participation (%)
                                                                                                                                               16.1pp             12.9pp
                      80




                                                                                                                             80
                                                           14.1pp

                             14.3pp
                      70




                                                                                                                             70
                      60




                                                                                                                             60
                      50




                                                                                                                             50
                            68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18                          68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18
                                                                     Year                                                                                                   Year
                                                     With Children          Without Children                                                                With Children          Without Children
77




                                                  C: Weekly Employment                                                                                   D: Annual Employment




                                                                                                                             100
                      90
                      80




                                                                                                                             90
      Employment (%)




                                                                                                             Employment (%)
                                                           17.3pp
                      70




                                                                                                                             80
                             14.8pp                                                                                                 15.1pp                        14.8pp
                      60




                                                                                                                             70
                      50




                                                                                                                             60
                      40




                                                                                                                             50




                            68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18                          68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18
                                                                     Year                                                                                                   Year
                                                     With Children          Without Children                                                                With Children          Without Children



     Notes: This figure shows the weekly participation, annual participation, weekly employment, and annual employment rates rate of single women with and without
     children between 1968 and 2018. The sample includes single women aged 20-50 using the March CPS files.
                                                   F IGURE A.IV: F IFTY Y EARS OF L ABOR F ORCE PARTICIPATION FOR S INGLE W OMEN
                                                                            D IFFERENT E XTENSIVE M ARGIN M EASURES , L OW-E DUCATED

                      100                         A: Weekly Participation                                                                                B: Annual Participation




                                                                                                                             100
                      90




                                                                                                                             90
      Participation (%)




                                                                                                             Participation (%)
                      80




                                                                                                                             80
                                                                                                                                               16.6pp

                                                                                                                                                                  10.7pp
                             20.7pp                        17.1pp
                      70




                                                                                                                             70
                      60




                                                                                                                             60
                      50




                                                                                                                             50
                            68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18                          68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18
                                                                     Year                                                                                                   Year
                                                     With Children            Without Children                                                              With Children          Without Children
78




                                                  C: Weekly Employment                                                                                   D: Annual Employment




                                                                                                                             100
                      90
                      80




                                                                                                                             90
      Employment (%)




                                                                                                             Employment (%)
                      70




                                                                                                                             80
                             20.8pp
                                                                                                                                    14.2pp
                                                           19.4pp
                      60




                                                                                                                             70
                                                                                                                                                                  11.9pp
                      50




                                                                                                                             60
                      40




                                                                                                                             50




                            68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18                          68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18
                                                                     Year                                                                                                   Year
                                                     With Children            Without Children                                                              With Children          Without Children



     Notes: This figure shows the weekly participation, annual participation, weekly employment, and annual employment rates rate of single women with and without
     children with a high school degree or less between 1968 and 2018. The sample includes single women aged 20-50 using the March CPS files.
                                                         F IGURE A.V: F IFTY Y EARS OF PARTICIPATION FOR S INGLE W OMEN , BY FAMILY S IZE
                                                                                                 D IFFERENT E XTENSIVE M ARGIN M EASURES

                                                         A: Weekly Participation                                                                                            B: Annual Participation

                                  Tax Reduction                                                                                                      Tax Reduction
                                   Act of 1975              TRA86   OBRA90 OBRA93                     ARRA                                            Act of 1975              TRA86   OBRA90 OBRA93                ARRA
                      90




                                                                                                                                         95
                      80




                                                                                                                                         85
      Participation (%)




                                                                                                                         Participation (%)
                      70




                                                                                                                                         75
                      60




                                                                                                                                         65
                      50




                                                                                                                                         55
                      40




                                                                                                                                         45
                           68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18                                      68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18
                                                                          Year                                                                                                               Year
                                            0 Children          1 Child             2 Children           3+ Children                                           0 Children          1 Child             2 Children      3+ Children
79




                                                         C: Weekly Employment                                                                                               D: Annual Employment

                                  Tax Reduction                                                                                                      Tax Reduction
                                   Act of 1975              TRA86   OBRA90 OBRA93                     ARRA                                            Act of 1975              TRA86   OBRA90 OBRA93                ARRA
                      85




                                                                                                                                         90
                      75




                                                                                                                                         80
      Employment (%)




                                                                                                                         Employment (%)
                      65




                                                                                                                                         70
                      55




                                                                                                                                         60
                      45




                                                                                                                                         50
                      35




                                                                                                                                         40




                           68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18                                      68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18
                                                                          Year                                                                                                               Year
                                            0 Children          1 Child             2 Children           3+ Children                                           0 Children          1 Child             2 Children      3+ Children



     Notes: This figure shows the weekly participation, annual participation, weekly employment, and annual employment rates rate of single women with 0,1, 2, and 3
     or more children between 1968 and 2018. The sample includes single women aged 20-50 using the March CPS files.
                                                         F IGURE A.VI: F IFTY Y EARS OF PARTICIPATION FOR S INGLE W OMEN , BY FAMILY S IZE
                                                                                    D IFFERENT E XTENSIVE M ARGIN M EASURES , L OW-E DUCATED

                                                         A: Weekly Participation                                                                                        B: Annual Participation

                                  Tax Reduction                                                                                                  Tax Reduction
                                   Act of 1975              TRA86   OBRA90 OBRA93                  ARRA                                           Act of 1975              TRA86   OBRA90 OBRA93                ARRA
                      90




                                                                                                                                     95
                      80




                                                                                                                                     85
      Participation (%)




                                                                                                                     Participation (%)
                      70




                                                                                                                                     75
                      60




                                                                                                                                     65
                      50




                                                                                                                                     55
                      40




                                                                                                                                     45
                           68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18                                  68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18
                                                                          Year                                                                                                           Year
                                            0 Children          1 Child               2 Children      3+ Children                                          0 Children          1 Child             2 Children      3+ Children
80




                                                         C: Weekly Employment                                                                                           D: Annual Employment

                                  Tax Reduction                                                                                                  Tax Reduction
                                   Act of 1975              TRA86   OBRA90 OBRA93                  ARRA                                           Act of 1975              TRA86   OBRA90 OBRA93                ARRA
                      80




                                                                                                                                     90
                      70




                                                                                                                                     80
      Employment (%)




                                                                                                                     Employment (%)
                      60




                                                                                                                                     70
                      50




                                                                                                                                     60
                      40




                                                                                                                                     50
                      30




                                                                                                                                     40




                           68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18                                  68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18
                                                                          Year                                                                                                           Year
                                            0 Children          1 Child               2 Children      3+ Children                                          0 Children          1 Child             2 Children      3+ Children



     Notes: This figure shows the weekly participation, annual participation, weekly employment, and annual employment rates rate of single women with 0, 1, 2, and 3
     or more with a high school degree or less between 1968 and 2018. The sample includes single women aged 20-50 using the March CPS files.
                                                              F IGURE A.VII: F IFTY Y EARS OF PARTICIPATION FOR M ARRIED W OMEN


                                                                                                                               A: All Married Women
                                                                                                        Tax Reduction
                                                                                                         Act of 1975             TRA86   OBRA90 OBRA93                                            ARRA




                                                                                          85
                                                                                          75
                                                                          Participation (%)
                                                                                          65
                                                                                          55
                                                                                          45
                                                                                          35
                                                                                               68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18
                                                                                                                                                Year
                                                                                                                                With Children                            Without Children
81




                                      B: Spousal Earnings Below First EITC Kink                                                                                             C: Spousal Earnings Above vs Below First EITC Kink

                                  Tax Reduction                                                                                                                                   Tax Reduction
                                   Act of 1975        TRA86    OBRA90 OBRA93                                            ARRA                                                       Act of 1975                   TRA86   OBRA90 OBRA93                   ARRA
                      85




                                                                                                                                                                    85
                      75




                                                                                                                                                                    75
      Participation (%)




                                                                                                                                                    Participation (%)
                      65




                                                                                                                                                                    65
                      55




                                                                                                                                                                    55
                      45




                                                                                                                                                                    45
                      35




                                                                                                                                                                    35




                           68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18                                                                 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16 18
                                                                    Year                                                                                                                                                        Year
                                                    With Children                              Without Children                                                                                   Spousal Earnings Below Kink            Spousal Earnings Above Kink


     Notes: This figure shows weekly labor force participation of married women between 1968 and 2018. The sample includes married women aged 20-50 using the
     March CPS files. Panel A compares married women with and without children. Panel B conditions on having spousal earnings below the first EITC kink (for one-
     child families), and again compares married women with and without children. Panel C conditions on having children, and compares married women with spousal
     earnings below and above the first EITC kink. Because the EITC is based on joint household income, having spousal earnings below or above the first EITC kink
     determines whether the policy creates a positive or negative extensive margin incentive. The fact that the two participation series in Panel C track each other over
     time suggests that there has been no extensive margin impact on married women.
                                                                 F IGURE A.VIII: D I D E VENT S TUDIES OF F EDERAL A LL EITC R EFORMS
                                                                                          W EEKLY E MPLOYMENT (D EMOGRAPHIC C ONTROLS )

                                              A: 1975 Reform, With vs Without Children                                                                         B: 1986 and 1990 Reforms, With vs Without Children
                                                               TRA1975                                                                                                                TRA1986                              OBRA90
                              20




                                                                                                                                                    20
                              15




                                                                                                                                                    15
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                            Impact on Employment (pp)
                              10




                                                                                                                                                    10
                              5




                                                                                                                                                    5
                              0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                    -5
                              -10




                                                                                                                                                    -10
                                    70   71     72   73   74             75          76   77            78   79   80   81                                 82     83    84   85   86             87          88   89   90            91   92   93
                                                                              Year                                                                                                                   Year
82




                                              C: 1993 Reform, With vs Without Children                                                                                D: 2009 Reform, 3+ vs Without Children
                                                           OBRA1993                            PRWORA                                                                                  ARRA
                              20




                                                                                                                                                    20
                              15




                                                                                                                                                    15
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                            Impact on Employment (pp)
                              10




                                                                                                                                                    10
                              5




                                                                                                                                                    5
                              0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                    -5
                              -10




                                                                                                                                                    -10




                                    89   90     91   92   93             94          95   96            97   98   99   00                                 04     05    06   07   08             09          10   11   12            13   14   15
                                                                              Year                                                                                                                   Year


     Notes: This figure shows DiD event studies for the five federal EITC reforms. The graphs plot estimates of t based on specification (1) that includes controls for
     demographic composition: dummies for the age of the woman (six categories), dummies for the age of the youngest child (seven categories), and dummies for
     education (three categories).. Panels A-C are based on comparing single women with and without children, while Panel D is based on comparing single women with
     3+ children to those without children. In each panel, the difference in the pre-reform year is normalized to zero. The dependent variable is weekly employment.
     The sample includes single women aged 20-50. Panels A-B use the March CPS files alone, while Panels C-D use the March and monthly files combined. The 95%
     confidence intervals are based on robust standard errors clustered at the individual level.
                                                                      F IGURE A.IX: D I D E VENT S TUDIES OF F EDERAL A LL EITC R EFORMS
                                                                                             W EEKLY PARTICIPATION (D EMOGRAPHIC C ONTROLS )

                                                 A: 1975 Reform, With vs Without Children                                                                            B: 1986 and 1990 Reforms, With vs Without Children
                                                                  TRA1975                                                                                                                   TRA1986                              OBRA90
                                 20




                                                                                                                                                          20
                                 15




                                                                                                                                                          15
      Impact on Participation (pp)




                                                                                                                               Impact on Participation (pp)
                                 10




                                                                                                                                                          10
                                 5




                                                                                                                                                          5
                                 0




                                                                                                                                                          0
                                 -5




                                                                                                                                                          -5
                                 -10




                                                                                                                                                          -10
                                       70   71     72   73   74             75          76   77            78   79   80   81                                    82     83    84   85   86             87          88   89   90            91   92   93
                                                                                 Year                                                                                                                      Year
83




                                                 C: 1993 Reform, With vs Without Children                                                                                   D: 2009 Reform, 3+ vs Without Children
                                                              OBRA1993                            PRWORA                                                                                     ARRA
                                 20




                                                                                                                                                          20
                                 15




                                                                                                                                                          15
      Impact on Participation (pp)




                                                                                                                               Impact on Participation (pp)
                                 10




                                                                                                                                                          10
                                 5




                                                                                                                                                          5
                                 0




                                                                                                                                                          0
                                 -5




                                                                                                                                                          -5
                                 -10




                                                                                                                                                          -10




                                       89   90     91   92   93             94          95   96            97   98   99   00                                    04     05    06   07   08             09          10   11   12            13   14   15
                                                                                 Year                                                                                                                      Year




     Notes: This figure shows DiD event studies for the five federal EITC reforms. The graphs plot estimates of t based on specification (1) that includes controls for
     demographic composition: dummies for the age of the woman (six categories), dummies for the age of the youngest child (seven categories), and dummies for
     education (three categories).. Panels A-C are based on comparing single women with and without children, while Panel D is based on comparing single women with
     3+ children to those without children. In each panel, the difference in the pre-reform year is normalized to zero. The dependent variable is weekly participation.
     The sample includes single women aged 20-50. Panels A-B use the March CPS files alone, while Panels C-D use the March and monthly files combined. The 95%
     confidence intervals are based on robust standard errors clustered at the individual level.
                                                                    F IGURE A.X: D I D E VENT S TUDIES OF F EDERAL A LL EITC R EFORMS
                                                                                          A NNUAL E MPLOYMENT (D EMOGRAPHIC C ONTROLS )

                                              A: 1975 Reform, With vs Without Children                                                                         B: 1986 and 1990 Reforms, With vs Without Children
                                                               TRA1975                                                                                                                TRA1986                              OBRA90
                              20




                                                                                                                                                    20
                              15




                                                                                                                                                    15
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                            Impact on Employment (pp)
                              10




                                                                                                                                                    10
                              5




                                                                                                                                                    5
                              0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                    -5
                              -10




                                                                                                                                                    -10
                                    70   71     72   73   74             75          76   77            78   79   80   81                                 82     83    84   85   86             87          88   89   90            91   92   93
                                                                              Year                                                                                                                   Year
84




                                              C: 1993 Reform, With vs Without Children                                                                                D: 2009 Reform, 3+ vs Without Children
                                                           OBRA1993                            PRWORA                                                                                  ARRA
                              20




                                                                                                                                                    20
                              15




                                                                                                                                                    15
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                            Impact on Employment (pp)
                              10




                                                                                                                                                    10
                              5




                                                                                                                                                    5
                              0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                    -5
                              -10




                                                                                                                                                    -10




                                    89   90     91   92   93             94          95   96            97   98   99   00                                 04     05    06   07   08             09          10   11   12            13   14   15
                                                                              Year                                                                                                                   Year




     Notes: This figure shows DiD event studies for the five federal EITC reforms. The graphs plot estimates of t based on specification (1) that includes controls for
     demographic composition: dummies for the age of the woman (six categories), dummies for the age of the youngest child (seven categories), and dummies for
     education (three categories).. Panels A-C are based on comparing single women with and without children, while Panel D is based on comparing single women with
     3+ children to those without children. In each panel, the difference in the pre-reform year is normalized to zero. The dependent variable is annual employment.
     The sample includes single women aged 20-50 using the March CPS files alone. The 95% confidence intervals are based on robust standard errors clustered at the
     individual level.
                                                F IGURE A.XI: A FANNING -O UT B Y N UMBER OF C HILDREN
                                                                       PARTICIPATION

                                                                       A: Raw Data
                                                             OBRA93            PRWORA
                                30




                                                                                                                       4+ Kids
     Impact on Participation (pp)
                                20




                                                                                                                       3 Kids




                                                                                                                       2 Kids
                                10




                                                                                                                       1 Kid
                                0
                                -10




                                      89   90     91   92   93    94    95    96    97   98   99   00   01   02   03
                                                                             Year


                                                            B: Controlling for Demographics
                                                             OBRA93            PRWORA
                                30
     Impact on Participation (pp)




                                                                                                                       4+ Kids
                                20




                                                                                                                       3 Kids



                                                                                                                       2 Kids
                                10




                                                                                                                       1 Kid
                                0
                                -10




                                      89   90     91   92   93    94    95    96    97   98   99   00   01   02   03
                                                                             Year

Notes: This figure shows DiD event studies for the 1993 reform by number of EITC-eligible children (1, 2, 3, 4+). The
graphs plot DiD coefficients t based on an extension of specification (1) that includes dummies for each family size.
Hence, each series shows the difference between single mothers with a given number of children and single women
without children, normalized to zero in 1993. Panel A shows raw estimates, while panel B controls for demographic
composition: dummies for the age of the woman (six categories), dummies for the age of the youngest child (seven
categories), and dummies for education (three categories). The dependent variable is weekly participation. The sample
includes single women aged 20-50 using the March and monthly CPS files combined.




                                                                             85
                               F IGURE A.XII: AFDC/TANF PARTICIPATION R ATES B Y N UMBER OF C HILDREN

                                                     OBRA93                PRWORA
                          70
                          60
AFDC/TANF Participation (%)
                          50
                          40
                          30




                                                                                                                            4+ Kids
                          20




                                                                                                                            3 Kids
                                                                                                                            2 Kids
                          10




                                                                                                                            1 Kid
                          0




                               89   90   91   92    93    94   95         96    97   98   99   00      01      02      03
                                                                         Year

Notes: This figure shows event studies for the 1993 reform by number of EITC-eligible children (1, 2, 3, 4+). The graphs
plot DiD coefficients t based on an extension of specification (1) without demographic controls that includes dummies
for each family size. The dependent variable is annual AFDC/TANF participation. The sample includes single women
aged 20-50 using the March files alone.




                                                                    86
   F IGURE A.XIII: D ISTRIBUTIONS OF E ARNINGS AND PARTICIPATION TAX R ATES IN 1993

                                                                           A: Earnings
                                       First   Second                  EITC
                                    EITC Kink EITC Kink              Exhaustion
                  .1
       Fraction
                  .05
                  0




                        0                10000                 20000                  30000          40000        50000        60000
                                                                                     Earnings



                                                               B: Participation Tax Rates

                                                                      Mean = 0.283
                  .15
                  .1
       Fraction
                  .05
                  0




                        -.2   -.1           0             .1    .2           .3           .4    .5    .6     .7    .8     .9    1
                                                                         Participation Tax Rate

Notes: This figure shows the distribution of earnings and participation tax rates among single mothers. Panel A shows
the earnings distribution using predicted earnings for non-workers (estimated from equation 3) and actual earnings for
workers. Panel B shows the distribution of participation tax rates. The sample includes single mothers aged 20-50 using
March CPS files from 1992-94 (corresponding to tax years 1991-93).




                                                                                     87
                                                                            F IGURE A.XIV: A CTUAL VS S IMULATED R ESPONSES TO THE 1993 R EFORM
                                                                                                                D EMOGRAPHIC C ONTROLS

                                                                           A: 1 vs 0 Children                                                                                                                   B: 2 vs 0 Children
                                                                  OBRA93             PRWORA                                                                                                            OBRA93             PRWORA
                              30




                                                                                                                                                                   30
                                    Explained by the EITC: 13%                                                                                                           Explained by the EITC: 21%
                              25




                                                                                                                                                                   25
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                                           Impact on Employment (pp)
                              20




                                                                                                                                                                   20
                              15




                                                                                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Actual DiD
                              10




                                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                                              Actual DiD
                              5




                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                = .3
                                                                                                                           = .3
                              0




                                                                                                                                                                   0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                                   -5
                                   89    90      91      92      93    94     95    96     97   98   99   00   01   02   03                                             89    90      91      92      93    94     95    96     97   98   99   00   01   02   03
                                                                                   Year                                                                                                                                 Year
                                                                                   place                                                                                                                                place
88




                                                                           C: 3 vs 0 Children                                                                                                               D: 4+ vs 0 Children
                                                                  OBRA93             PRWORA                                                                                                            OBRA93             PRWORA
                              30




                                                                                                                                                                   30
                                    Explained by the EITC: 13%                                                                                                           Explained by the EITC: 7%




                                                                                                                                                                   25
                              25
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                                           Impact on Employment (pp)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Actual DiD




                                                                                                                                                                   20
                              20




                                                                                                                              Actual DiD




                                                                                                                                                                   15
                              15




                                                                                                                                                                   10
                              10




                                                                                                                                                                   5
                              5




                                                                                                                           = .3                                                                                                                                 = .3
                                                                                                                                                                   0
                              0




                                                                                                                                                                   -5
                              -5




                                   89    90      91      92      93    94     95    96     97   98   99   00   01   02   03                                             89    90      91      92      93    94     95    96     97   98   99   00   01   02   03
                                                                                   Year                                                                                                                                 Year
                                                                                   place                                                                                                                                place


     Notes: This figure shows actual and simulated DiD event studies for the 1993 reform, by number of EITC-eligible children. The actual DiD series plot DiD coefficients
     t based on an extension of specification (1) with separate dummies for each family size and controlling for demographics. The specification does not include
     demographic controls and the dependent variable is weekly employment. The simulated DiD series (black dashed lines) plot Pt calculated from equation (4),
     assuming an elasticity of 0.3. See section C in the appendix for additional details. The fraction explained by the EITC equals the simulated DiD estimate in 2003
     divided by the actual DiD estimate in 2003. The sample includes single women aged 20-50 using the March and monthly CPS files combined. The 95% confidence
     intervals are based on robust standard errors clustered at the individual level.
                                      F IGURE A.XV: E MPLOYMENT VS AFDC/TANF C ASELOADS


                                                             A: Annual Employment
                                                         OBRA93                   PRWORA
                       95
                       90
     Employment Rate (%)
                       85
                       80
                       75
                       70
                       65




                            89   90      91   92        93        94    95     96      97       98      99    00     01     02     03
                                                                              Year
                                                   Employment with Kids                    Employment without Kids



                                              B: Adding Annual AFDC/TANF Caseloads
                                                         OBRA93                   PRWORA
                    95
                    90
      Employment Rate (%)
                    85
                    80




                                 AFDC/TANF Caseload
                    75
                    70
                    65




                            89   90     91    92    93        94       95     96       97       98     99     00     01     02     03
                                                                             Year
                                 Employment with Kids             Employment without Kids            Employment-Welfare Rate with Kids


Notes: This figure shows the employment rate (Panel A) and the "employment-welfare rate" (Panel B) for single women
with and without children. The employment-welfare rate equals the combined fraction of those who are employed
and/or participants in the AFDC/TANF program. For single women without children, AFDC/TANF participation is
zero and hence there is no distinction between the employment and employment-welfare rates for this group. The
outcome variables are measured at the annual level. The sample includes single women aged 20-50 using March CPS
files.




                                                                             89
                                           F IGURE A.XVI: E MPLOYMENT VS AFDC/TANF C ASELOADS , BY N UMBER OF C HILDREN

                                           A: With vs Without Children                                                                                          B: 1 vs 0 Children
                                              OBRA93              PRWORA                                                                                    OBRA93              PRWORA
                 20




                                                                                                                              20
                 15




                                                                                                                              15
                 10




                                                                                                                              10
       Impact (pp)




                                                                                                                    Impact (pp)
                 5




                                                                                                                              5
                 0




                                                                                                                              0
                 -5




                                                                                                                              -5
                 -10




                                                                                                                              -10
                       89   90   91   92     93    94      95    96       97    98     99       00   01   02   03                      89   90   91   92   93     94     95    96       97    98     99       00   01   02   03
                                                                Year                                                                                                          Year
                                              Employment              Employment-Welfare Rate                                                               Employment              Employment-Welfare Rate
90




                                                  C: 2 vs 0 Children                                                                                            D: 3+ vs 0 Children
                                              OBRA93              PRWORA                                                                                    OBRA93              PRWORA
                 20




                                                                                                                              35
                                                                                                                              30
                 15




                                                                                                                              25
                 10




                                                                                                                              20
       Impact (pp)




                                                                                                                    Impact (pp)
                                                                                                                              15
                 5




                                                                                                                              10
                 0




                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                              0
                 -5




                                                                                                                              -10 -5
                 -10




                       89   90   91   92     93    94      95    96       97    98     99       00   01   02   03                      89   90   91   92   93     94     95    96       97    98     99       00   01   02   03
                                                                Year                                                                                                          Year
                                              Employment              Employment-Welfare Rate                                                               Employment              Employment-Welfare Rate



     Notes: This figure shows DiD event studies of the 1993 reform by number of children for two different outcomes: the employment rate (solid line) and the
     employment-welfare rate (dashed line). The estimates are based on an extension of equation (1) that includes separate dummies for each number of children (1,
     2, and 3+). The specification does not include demographic controls. The outcome variables (employment or employment/welfare) are measured at the annual level.
     The sample includes single women aged 20-50 using March CPS files.
F IGURE A.XVII: E MPLOYMENT VS AFDC/TANF C ASELOADS , BY N UMBER OF C HILDREN AND
A GE OF Y OUNGEST C HILD

                                  A: 1 Child, Youngest Aged 0-7                                                                                                   B: 1 Child, Youngest Aged 8-18
                                                         OBRA93           PRWORA                                                                                                          OBRA93           PRWORA
                      20




                                                                                                                                                       20
                      15




                                                                                                                                                       15
                      10




                                                                                                                                                       10
            Impact (pp)




                                                                                                                                             Impact (pp)
                      5




                                                                                                                                                       5
                      0




                                                                                                                                                       0
                      -5




                                                                                                                                                       -5
                      -10




                                                                                                                                                       -10
                            89    90    91    92     93       94   95    96     97    98    99   00     01    02    03                                       89    90    91    92     93       94   95    96     97    98    99   00     01    02    03
                                                                        Year                                                                                                                             Year
                                                   Employment                 Employment-Welfare Rate                                                                               Employment                 Employment-Welfare Rate



                               C: 2 Children, Youngest Aged 0-7                                                                                                 D: 2 Children, Youngest Aged 8-18
                                                                                                                                                                                       OBRA93              PRWORA
                                                      OBRA93              PRWORA




                                                                                                                                             20
            20




                                                                                                                                             15
            15




                                                                                                                                             10
            10
  Impact (pp)




                                                                                                                                   Impact (pp)
                                                                                                                                             5
            5




                                                                                                                                             0
            0




                                                                                                                                             -5
            -5
            -10




                                                                                                                                             -10




                          89     90    91    92     93       94    95    96      97    98   99    00     01    02        03                                89     90    91    92     93       94    95    96      97    98   99    00     01    02        03
                                                                        Year                                                                                                                             Year
                                                   Employment                 Employment-Welfare Rate                                                                               Employment                 Employment-Welfare Rate




                               E: 3+ Children, Youngest Aged 0-7                                                                                             F: 3+ Children, Youngest Aged 8-18
                                                      OBRA93              PRWORA                                                                                                       OBRA93              PRWORA
            35




                                                                                                                                             35
            30




                                                                                                                                             30
            25




                                                                                                                                             25
            20




                                                                                                                                             20
  Impact (pp)




                                                                                                                                   Impact (pp)
            15




                                                                                                                                             15
            10




                                                                                                                                             10
            5




                                                                                                                                             5
            0




                                                                                                                                             0
            -10 -5




                                                                                                                                             -10 -5




                          89     90    91    92     93       94    95    96      97    98   99    00     01    02        03                                89     90    91    92     93       94    95    96      97    98   99    00     01    02        03
                                                                        Year                                                                                                                             Year
                                                   Employment                 Employment-Welfare Rate                                                                               Employment                 Employment-Welfare Rate




Notes: This figure shows DiD event studies of the 1993 reform by family size and age of youngest child for two different
outcomes: the employment rate (solid line) and the employment-welfare rate (dashed line). The estimates are based on
an extension of equation (1) that includes separate dummies for each number of children (1, 2, 3+), age of youngest child
(0-7 and 8-18), and their interaction. The specification does not include demographic controls. The outcome variables
(employment or employment/welfare) are measured at the annual level. The sample includes single women aged 20-50
using March CPS files.




                                                                                                                              91
                                         F IGURE A.XVIII: E MPLOYMENT VS AFDC/TANF C ASELOADS , BY S TATE


                                                                          A: AFDC/TANF Caseloads

                                                                          OBRA93             PRWORA
                                               10
          Impact on AFDC/TANF Caseloads (pp)
                                               0
                                               -10
                                               -20
                                               -30
                                               -40




                                                     89   90   91   92   93     94    95    96    97   98    99    00   01   02   03
                                                                                           Year
                                                                              States with Below Median Caseload Drop
                                                                              States with Above Median Caseload Drop



                                                                         B: Employment-Welfare Rate
                                                                          With vs Without Children
                                                                          OBRA93             PRWORA
          Impact on Employment-Welfare Rate (pp)
                                               20
                                               10
                                               0
                                               -10
                                               -20




                                                     89   90   91   92   93     94    95    96    97   98    99    00   01   02   03
                                                                                           Year
                                                                              States with Below Median Caseload Drop
                                                                              States with Above Median Caseload Drop


Notes: This figure shows DiD event studies of the 1993 reform, split by states with below and above median
AFDC/TANF caseload drops between 1993-2000. Panel A plots the AFDC/TANF caseload series for the two groups of
states, while Panel B plots the employment-welfare rate series. The estimates are based on an extension of equation (1)
that interacts each variable with a dummy for being in a state with an above-median drop in AFDC/TANF caseload.
The outcome variables are measured at the annual level. The sample includes single women aged 20-50 using March
CPS files.


                                                                                           92
                                                        F IGURE A.XIX: H OW M UCH CAN BE E XPLAINED BY THE B USINESS C YCLE AND WAIVERS ?
                                                                                                       VARYING THE O UTCOME AND S AMPLE

                                         A: Employment of All Single Mothers (Baseline)                                                                                       B: Participation of All Single Mothers
                                                            OBRA1993            PRWORA                                                                                                   OBRA1993            PRWORA
                              20




                                                                                                                                                         20
                              15




                                                                                                                                                         15
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                              Impact on Participation (pp)
                              10




                                                                                                                                                         10
                              5




                                                                                                                                                         5
                              0




                                                                                                                                                         0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                         -5
                              -10




                                                                                                                                                         -10
                                    89   90   91   92      93      94   95     96    97     98    99     00    01   02   03                                    89   90   91     92      93      94   95     96    97     98    99     00    01   02   03
                                                                              Year                                                                                                                         Year
                                                        Raw Data             With Unemployment & Waiver Controls                                                                     Raw Data             With Unemployment & Waiver Controls



                                         C: Employment of Low-Educated Single Mothers                                                                               D: Participation of Low-Educated Single Mothers
93




                                                            OBRA1993            PRWORA                                                                                                   OBRA1993            PRWORA
                              20




                                                                                                                                                         20
                              15




                                                                                                                                                         15
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                              Impact on Participation (pp)
                              10




                                                                                                                                                         10
                              5




                                                                                                                                                         5
                              0




                                                                                                                                                         0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                         -5
                              -10




                                                                                                                                                         -10




                                    89   90   91   92      93      94   95     96    97     98    99     00    01   02   03                                    89   90   91     92      93      94   95     96    97     98    99     00    01   02   03
                                                                              Year                                                                                                                         Year
                                                        Raw Data             With Unemployment & Waiver Controls                                                                     Raw Data             With Unemployment & Waiver Controls


     Notes: This figure shows DiD event studies for the 1993 reform with controls for unemployment and waivers using different samples and outcomes. The graphs plot
     DiD coefficients t based on equation (7). The top row shows results for all single mothers while the bottom row shows results for single mothers with a high school
     education or below. The left column shows results for weekly employment while the right panel shows results for weekly participation. In both panels, the black
     series show the raw DiD without controls. The sample includes single women aged 20-50 using the March and monthly CPS files combined. The 95% confidence
     intervals are based on robust standard errors clustered at the individual level.
                                                         F IGURE A.XX: H OW M UCH CAN BE E XPLAINED BY THE B USINESS C YCLE AND WAIVERS ?
                                                                                                              B Y N UMBER OF C HILDREN

                                               A: With vs Without Children (Baseline)                                                                                                 B: With 1 vs 0 Children
                                                            OBRA1993            PRWORA                                                                                               OBRA1993            PRWORA
                              20




                                                                                                                                                       20
                              15




                                                                                                                                                       15
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                               Impact on Employment (pp)
                              10




                                                                                                                                                       10
                              5




                                                                                                                                                       5
                              0




                                                                                                                                                       0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                       -5
                              -10




                                                                                                                                                       -10
                                    89   90   91   92      93      94   95     96    97     98    99     00    01   02   03                                  89   90   91   92      93      94   95     96    97     98    99     00    01   02   03
                                                                              Year                                                                                                                     Year
                                                        Raw Data             With Unemployment & Waiver Controls                                                                 Raw Data             With Unemployment & Waiver Controls



                                                            C: With 2 vs 0 Children                                                                                                 D: With 3+ vs 0 Children
94




                                                            OBRA1993            PRWORA                                                                                               OBRA1993            PRWORA
                              20




                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                                                       25
                              15
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                               Impact on Employment (pp)
                                                                                                                                                       20
                              10




                                                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                                                       10
                              5




                                                                                                                                                       5
                              0




                                                                                                                                                       0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                       -5
                              -10




                                                                                                                                                       -10




                                    89   90   91   92      93      94   95     96    97     98    99     00    01   02   03                                  89   90   91   92      93      94   95     96    97     98    99     00    01   02   03
                                                                              Year                                                                                                                     Year
                                                        Raw Data             With Unemployment & Waiver Controls                                                                 Raw Data             With Unemployment & Waiver Controls


     Notes: This figure shows DiD event studies for the 1993 reform with controls for unemployment and waivers by number of EITC-eligible children (any, 1, 2, and
     3+). The graphs plot DiD coefficients t based on an extension of equation (7) that includes dummies for each family size. In both panels, the black series show the
     raw DiD without controls. The dependent variable is weekly employment. The sample includes single women aged 20-50 using the March and monthly CPS files
     combined. The 95% confidence intervals are based on robust standard errors clustered at the individual level.
                                                        F IGURE A.XXI: H OW M UCH CAN BE E XPLAINED BY THE B USINESS C YCLE AND WAIVERS ?
                                                                                                  VARYING THE S PECIFICATION OF WAIVERS

                                                           A: Baseline Specification                                                                                  B: Separate Indicators for the Six Waiver Types
                                                            OBRA1993            PRWORA                                                                                                OBRA1993            PRWORA
                              20




                                                                                                                                                      20
                              15




                                                                                                                                                      15
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                              Impact on Employment (pp)
                              10




                                                                                                                                                      10
                              5




                                                                                                                                                      5
                              0




                                                                                                                                                      0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                      -5
                              -10




                                                                                                                                                      -10
                                    89   90   91   92      93      94   95     96    97     98    99     00    01   02   03                                 89   90     91   92      93      94   95     96    97     98    99     00    01   02   03
                                                                              Year                                                                                                                      Year
                                                        Raw Data             With Unemployment & Waiver Controls                                                                  Raw Data             With Unemployment & Waiver Controls
95




                                                   C: Using Date of Implementation                                                                                                   D: Post-Waiver Indicator
                                                            OBRA1993            PRWORA                                                                                                OBRA1993            PRWORA
                              20




                                                                                                                                                      20
                              15




                                                                                                                                                      15
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                              Impact on Employment (pp)
                              10




                                                                                                                                                      10
                              5




                                                                                                                                                      5
                              0




                                                                                                                                                      0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                      -5
                              -10




                                                                                                                                                      -10




                                    89   90   91   92      93      94   95     96    97     98    99     00    01   02   03                                 89   90     91   92      93      94   95     96    97     98    99     00    01   02   03
                                                                              Year                                                                                                                      Year
                                                        Raw Data             With Unemployment & Waiver Controls                                                                  Raw Data             With Unemployment & Waiver Controls



     Notes: This figure shows DiD event studies for the 1993 reform with controls for unemployment and waivers. The graphs plot DiD coefficients t based on equation
     (7). The black series show the raw DiD without controls. In panel A, the blue series controls for unemployment by kids, state fixed effects, and waivers by kids (based
     on the waiver approval date). Panel B is based on an extension of equation (7) where the any waiver dummy is replaced by separate dummies for each of the six
     waiver types. Panel C is similar to panel A, but uses the date of waiver implementation rather than approval. Panel D uses a similar specification to panel A, but does
     not interact the any waiver dummy with yearly indicators. The dependent variable is weekly employment. The sample includes single women aged 20-50 using the
     March and monthly CPS files combined. The 95% confidence intervals are based on robust standard errors clustered at the individual level.
                                                                         F IGURE A.XXII: C ONTROLLING O NLY FOR W ELFARE WAIVERS
                                                                                              VARYING THE S PECIFICATION OF WAIVERS

                                                        A: Baseline Specification                                                                                  B: Separate Indicators for the Six Waiver Types
                                                         OBRA1993          PRWORA                                                                                               OBRA1993          PRWORA
                              20




                                                                                                                                                   20
                              15




                                                                                                                                                   15
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                           Impact on Employment (pp)
                              10




                                                                                                                                                   10
                              5




                                                                                                                                                   5
                              0




                                                                                                                                                   0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                   -5
                              -10




                                                                                                                                                   -10
                                    89   90   91   92   93     94   95    96    97     98     99       00   01   02   03                                 89   90     91   92   93     94   95    96    97     98     99       00   01   02   03
                                                                         Year                                                                                                                   Year
                                                             Raw Data           With Waiver Controls                                                                                Raw Data           With Waiver Controls
96




                                                   C: Using Date of Implementation                                                                                             D: Post-Waiver Indicator
                                                         OBRA1993          PRWORA                                                                                               OBRA1993          PRWORA
                              20




                                                                                                                                                   20
                              15




                                                                                                                                                   15
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                           Impact on Employment (pp)
                              10




                                                                                                                                                   10
                              5




                                                                                                                                                   5
                              0




                                                                                                                                                   0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                   -5
                              -10




                                                                                                                                                   -10




                                    89   90   91   92   93     94   95    96    97     98     99       00   01   02   03                                 89   90     91   92   93     94   95    96    97     98     99       00   01   02   03
                                                                         Year                                                                                                                   Year
                                                             Raw Data           With Waiver Controls                                                                                Raw Data           With Waiver Controls



     Notes: This figure shows DiD event studies for the 1993 reform with controls for unemployment and waivers. The graphs plot DiD coefficients t based on equation
     (7) without state unemployment controls. In all panels, the black series show the raw DiD without controls. In panel A, the blue series includes controls for state
     fixed effects and waivers by kids based on the date of waiver approval. Panel B is based on an extension of equation (7) where the any waiver dummy is replaced
     by separate dummies for each of the six waiver types. Panel C is similar to panel A, but uses the date of waiver implementation rather than approval. Panel D uses
     a similar specification to panel A, but does not interact the any waiver dummy with yearly indicators. The dependent variable is weekly employment. The sample
     includes single women aged 20-50 using the March and monthly CPS files combined. The 95% confidence intervals are based on robust standard errors clustered at
     the individual level.
                                 F IGURE A.XXIII: A S YNTHETIC C ONTROL A NALYSIS OF S TATE EITC R EFORMS
                                              C OMPARING S INGLE W OMEN WITH AND WITHOUT C HILDREN

                                                                A: All State EITC Reforms
                             20
                             15                                           Reform
     Impact on Employment (pp)
                             10
                             5
                             0
                             -5
                             -10




                                   -5    -4       -3       -2        -1             0       1         2          3   4   5
                                                                                   Year
                                                          Treated States                  Synthetic Control States



                                                       B: Excluding Small State EITC Reforms
                                                                          Reform
                             20
                             15
     Impact on Employment (pp)
                             10
                             5
                             0
                             -5
                             -10




                                   -5    -4       -3       -2        -1             0       1         2          3   4   5
                                                                                   Year
                                                          Treated States                  Synthetic Control States


Notes: This figure shows stacked event studies of state EITC reforms using a synthetic control approach. The graphs
plot employment rates for single women with children relative to single women without children in treatment and
synthetic control states, respectively, normalized to zero in the pre-reform year. This is a triple-differences approach
using variation across states and by the presence of children within states. Panel A includes all states that instituted
an EITC supplement before 2015, while panel B includes only states that instituted a "large" EITC supplement. Large
supplements are defined as refundable credits equal to at least 10% of the federal credit. In both panels, the synthetic
control states are constructed from states that never instituted an EITC supplement. For each treatment state, a synthetic
control state is constructed by matching on the employment rate in the five pre-reform years. Table A.VI shows the
make-up of each synthetic state. For states with supplements enacted before 1993 the sample is based on March CPS
files alone, while for states with supplements enacted after 1993 the sample is based on and March and monthly CPS
files combined. The outcome is weekly employment and the sample includes all single women aged 20-50. See section
D in the appendix for additional details.                    97
                                                   F IGURE A.XXIV: S TACKED E VENT S TUDIES OF A LL S TATE AND F EDERAL EITC R EFORMS
                                                                                       E MPLOYMENT OF L OW-E DUCATED S INGLE W OMEN

                                                          A: Federal Reforms                                                                                                       B: State Reforms
                                                                  Reform                                                                                                                  Reform
                              20




                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                         Average effect = 1.60 (0.24, 2.96)                                                                                    Average effect = 1.37 (-1.10, 3.85)
                              15




                                                                                                                                                      15
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                              Impact on Employment (pp)
                              10




                                                                                                                                                      10
                              5




                                                                                                                                                      5
                              0




                                                                                                                                                      0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                      -5
                              -10




                                                                                                                                                      -10
                                    -5   -4   -3     -2      -1             0      1       2         3          4         5                                 -5   -4   -3      -2     -1             0      1       2         3         4          5
                                                                   Event Time                                                                                                              Event Time
                                                                           Place                                                                                                                   Place



                                                   C: State and Federal Reforms                                                                                            D: State and Federal Reforms,
98




                                                                                                                                                                              Adjusted for Pre-Trends
                                                                  Reform                                                                                                                  Reform
                              20




                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                         Average effect = 1.24 (0.03, 2.44)                                                                                    Average effect = -0.30 (-1.50, 0.90)
                              15




                                                                                                                                                      15
      Impact on Employment (pp)




                                                                                                                              Impact on Employment (pp)
                              10




                                                                                                                                                      10
                              5




                                                                                                                                                      5
                              0




                                                                                                                                                      0
                              -5




                                                                                                                                                      -5
                              -10




                                                                                                                                                      -10




                                    -5   -4   -3     -2      -1             0      1       2         3          4         5                                 -5   -4   -3      -2     -1             0      1       2         3         4          5
                                                                   Event Time                                                                                                              Event Time
                                                                           Place                                                                                                                   Place

     Notes: This figure shows stacked event studies of all state and federal EITC reforms. The graphs plot DiD coefficients based on comparing single women with and
     without children across event time, normalized to zero in the pre-reform year (event time -1). The specifications control for demographics, and for the impact of
     waivers and unemployment around the 1993 federal reform (i.e., the controls in equation (7), interacted with an OBRA93 indicator). Panel A includes all federal
     reforms, Panel B includes all state reforms. while Panel C includes all state and federal reforms together. Panel D is similar to panel C, but adjusts for group-specific
     linear pre-trends. Each panel reports the average effect across the post-reform years, with 95% confidence intervals in parentheses. For reforms enacted before 1993
     the sample is based on the March CPS files alone, while for reforms enacted after 1993 the sample is based on the March and monthly CPS files combined. The
     outcome variable is weekly employment, and the sample consists of single women aged 20-50 with a high school degree or less. See section E in the appendix for
     additional details.
B     Data Description

B.1      Current Population Survey (CPS)

The CPS is made up of two main components: the Basic Monthly Survey and topical Supple-
ments. In most cases, supplement samples are limited to individuals who participate in the Basic
Monthly Survey. The Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC) -- the "March files" --
is an exception. It includes an oversample of respondents from other months who are not sched-
uled to receive the March Basic Monthly CPS. The ASEC is the most commonly used supplement
of the CPS due to its long history, large sample size, and detailed information on annual income
and social assistance. I use the Basic Monthly and the ASEC CPS files, extracted from IPUMS at
https://cps.ipums.org/cps/.
    The Basic Monthly CPS uses a sample rotation scheme whereby households are included in the
sample for four consecutive months, excluded for eight, and then return for another four months
before leaving the sample permanently. Due to the 4-8-4 sampling pattern, individuals in the CPS
show up a total of eight times over a 16 month period. Despite this panel element of the CPS, most
researchers use the survey as a repeated cross-section. While it is impossible to link respondents
between the Basic Monthly samples and the ASEC oversample, it is possible to link respondents
across the monthly samples alone. IPUMS has greatly simplified this process by creating the vari-
able CPSIDP. CPSIDP is a combination of the year a household enters the sample, the month a
household enters the sample, a within-month household ID, and a within-month person ID. It al-
lows users to uniquely identify and track respondents across all Basic Monthly samples. CPSIDP is
not available for respondents in the ASEC oversample, however, and it is therefore not possible to
link respondents from the ASEC oversample to their observations in the Basic Monthly Survey.49
More detail about how the unique ID is constructed given these constraints is described in section
B.1.4.
    I use the Basic Monthly files from 1989-2018 and the ASEC files from 1968-2018.50 Although the
monthly files are available from 1976, they do not allow for accurate identification of the presence
and number of children in a household prior to 1989. To identify children in the CPS, I rely on
the IPUMS variable RELATE. For each observation in a household, this variable identifies the
relationship to the household head. Prior to 1989, the only RELATE categories available in the
  49
     See Flood & Pacas (2016) for a more comprehensive explanation for why the ASEC oversample respondents cannot
be linked to their observations in the other months.
  50
     I exclude the March Basic file, because all respondents in the March Basic sample are included in ASEC.


                                                       99
monthly files are "householder," "spouse," "other relative," and "other non-relative." The ASEC
files, on the other hand, have more consistent categories for RELATE over time and, importantly,
these categories include "child." The absence of the "child" category in the monthly files results in
a substantial undercounting of children relative to the ASEC files. Hence, I use the Basic Monthly
files (combined with ASEC files) from 1989 onwards, and the ASEC files on their own before this
time.


B.1.1   Extensive Margin Measures

I consider all four extensive margin measures available in the CPS: weekly employment, weekly
participation, annual employment, and annual participation. Weekly measures are based on re-
spondents' activities during the last week and are available in all Basic Monthly and ASEC files.
Annual measures are based on respondent's activities during the last year and are only available
in the ASEC.
    Weekly Measures: Individuals' weekly employment and participation statuses are determined
on the basis of answers to a series of questions relating to their activities during the preceding
week. Upon answering these questions, respondents are grouped into eleven categories: "armed
forces," "at work," "has a job, not at work last week," "unemployed, experienced worker," "unem-
ployed, unexperienced worker," "housework," "unable to work," "school," "other," "unpaid, less
than 15 hours," and "retired." Respondents classified as "at work" include those who either did
any work for pay or profit or worked for at least fifteen hours without pay in a family business or
farm. Respondents classified as "has a job, not at work last week" include those who did not work
during the previous week but who acknowledged having a job or business from which they were
temporarily absent (e.g. due to illness, vacation, or labor dispute). Individuals who do not fall into
the above two categories but who reported either being temporarily laid off or actively search-
ing for work are classified as unemployed.51 Respondents who do not fall into any of the above
categories are classified as not in labor force and distributed among the remaining six categories:
"housework," "unable to work," "school," "other," "unpaid, less than 15 hours," and "retired."
    Annual Measures: These are determined on the basis of questions in the ASEC pertaining to
respondents' activities last year. The annual measures of employment and participation are based
on different questions than the weekly measures. Annual employment is determined based on
  51
     Respondents were considered to be actively searching for work if they were either looking for work as their major
activity during the previous week (for 1962 through 1993) or answered yes to a question about whether they had been
looking for work in the past four weeks (for 1994 onwards).


                                                        100
respondents' earnings last year. Respondents with positive earnings are classified as employed
last year. Annual participation is based on the number of weeks a respondent was either working
or searching last year. Respondents who either worked or were looking for work for one or more
weeks last year are classified as having participated last year.


B.1.2   Historical Changes to the CPS

In January 1994, the questions regarding labor force status (which underlie the weekly measures
of employment and participation) underwent certain changes. A primary motivation for this re-
design was to better classify individuals engaged in informal or intermittent activities. The re-
design included a number of changes, all of which are explained in detail in Cohany et al. (1994). I
focus here on the changes most pertinent to my analysis.
   Prior to 1994, respondents were asked an "ice-breaker question" about their main activity dur-
ing the preceding week. The question took the form "what were you doing most of last week?
were you keeping house/working/in school or something else?" where the choice of prompt de-
pended on the respondent's age and sex. The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) concluded that this
question led to an underreporting of women in part-time work. Additionally, respondents who
indicated that they did not have a job were asked a follow-up question of the form "why were
you absent from work last week?" Due to its open-ended nature, this question may have led to
underreporting of respondents who were temporarily laid off. Beginning in 1994, these questions
were redesigned to have more specific wording and fewer open-ended responses. For example,
the initial "ice-breaker question" was replaced with a question asking if the respondent did any
work for pay or profit last week. Similarly, respondents who indicated they did not have a job
were asked whether they were laid off and if the layoff was temporary.
   To asses the impact of this redesign on estimates of labor force participation, the BLS ran a
parallel survey from July 1992 through December 1993 that interviewed households using the new
survey questions. Cohany et al. (1994) examine the differences between official CPS and parallel
survey estimates in a variety of metrics. They find that for women aged 20 and above, the weekly
employment rate was 55.1% in the official CPS and 55.8% in the parallel survey, a difference of
only 0.7 percentage points. The weekly participation rate was 58.5% in the official CPS and 59.6%
in the parallel survey, a difference of 1.1 percentage points. When including controls for state of
residence, race, and hispanic origin, these differences drop to 0 and 0.1 percentage points, respec-
tively. These differences are too small to have any substantial effect on the analysis. In any case,


                                                 101
the difference-in-differences design reduces this issue even further, or eliminates it entirely, by
including year fixed effects.


B.1.3   Nonresponse in the CPS

The CPS is subject to two types of nonresponse: noninterview households and item nonresponse.
Noninterview occurs when a household refuses to participate in the survey altogether and is es-
pecially common in March, corresponding to the delivery of the ASEC. In the Basic Monthly CPS,
noninterview is accounted for by distributing the weights of noninterview households among in-
terviewed households. In the ASEC, noninterview is accounted for by imputing missing values.
   The second source of data loss, item nonresponse, occurs when respondents refuse to answer
specific questions within the survey. To compensate for item nonresponse (and for noninterview in
the ASEC), the BLS imputes missing values using one of three methods. First, if possible, missing
values are inferred from other characteristics of a respondent or other respondents within the same
household. For example, if a respondent has a missing value for race, it is assigned based the race
of other household members. These edits, known as relational edits, are most commonly used
for demographic variables. Next, if relational edits are not possible, longitudinal edits are made.
Longitundial edits exploit the panel nature of CPS data and use respondent's entries from previous
months to fill in missing values. Labor force items are typically imputed using longitudinal edits.
Finally, if neither of the above are possible, the CPS uses a "hot-deck" imputation method. The
"hot-deck" method assigns a missing value from a record with similar characteristics, called the
hot deck. Hot decks are made up of demographic characteristics such as age, race, sex, occupation
and educational attainment. The specific characteristics that make up a hot deck vary depending
on which variable is being imputed.
   How common is nonresponse in the CPS? Historically, nonresponse in the CPS was very mod-
est, but it has grown significantly over time (see e.g., Meyer et al. 2015; Bollinger et al. 2017; Jones &
Ziliak 2019). Household non-interview rates have risen from 7-9 percent in 2004 to 13-15 percent
in 2017.52
   As for item nonresponse, two points are worth mentioning. First, item nonresponse is much
smaller for demographic and labor force variables than it is for earnings. In 2018, only 0.45% of
the respondents in the estimation sample have imputed labor force status and 3.1% have imputed
  52
     These statistics have been retrieved from https://www.census.gov/prod/2006pubs/tp-66.pdf and
https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/cps/technical-documentation/methodology/non-response-rates.html.



                                                   102
demographics (marital status, age, or race), compared to 17.9% with imputed earnings. Second,
the degree of item nonresponse in earnings has increased over time. While 17.9% of respondents
have imputed earnings in 2018, this number was only 10.9% in 1970.53 The significant degree of
nonresponse and imputation in the earnings variable is another argument for using the weekly
measures of extensive margin labor supply, as I do here.


B.1.4     Sample and Variables

I restrict the sample to single women (never married, separated, divorced, or widowed) aged 20-
50.54 I drop observations with a zero, negative, or missing weight (wgt), missing state FIPS code
(stf ips), or missing educational attainment (educ). The difference-in-differences analyses are based
on comparing single women with EITC eligible children (treatment group) to single women with-
out recorded children (control group). The control group includes both those who never had any
children and those whose children do not live at home. A small fraction of single women with
EITC ineligible children living at home are dropped from the sample.55 These restrictions leave me
with a sample of 4,858,644 individual-month observations across survey years 1968-2018.
       Unless otherwise specified, variables in the ASEC and monthly files are defined in the same
way. Variables based on income and welfare participation are only available in the ASEC.

       · Unique household ID (hid): This variable is my best attempt at a unique identifier for each
         household in the CPS. In the monthly files, households can be uniquely identified and tracked
         across subsequent months using IPUMS variable CPSID. In the ASEC files, the variable CP-
         SID is unavailable so I instead identify households using a combination of IPUMS variables
         YEAR and SERIAL. As a result, respondents in the ASEC cannot be linked to those in the
         monthly files and the variable hhid only uniquely identifies households in the monthly and
         ASEC files separately.

       · Unique person ID (id): This variable is a unique combination of hhid and IPUMS variable
         PERNUM, which uniquely identifies individuals within a household.
  53
     The growth in item nonresponse rates has also been quite large for other income variables, including income from
social assistance programs. See Meyer et al. (2015) and Meyer & Mittag (2019) for an investigation of item nonresponse
bias in questions pertaining to social assistance receipt.
  54
     Except for one analysis in the online appendix in which I consider a sample of married women.
  55
     For example, this includes women with children who recently turned 19 and are not full-time students. The reason
for dropping these observations (as opposed to assigning them to the control group) is that most of them would have
been EITC eligible in the recent past and are therefore borderline cases between the treatment and control groups. In
any case, assigning them to the control group does not make much of a difference to any of the results.



                                                        103
· Number of eligible children (nechild): This variable identifies the number of EITC eligible
  children a respondent has. An ETIC eligible child is defined as a household member who
  is either under 19 or who is under 24 and a full time student (EMPSTAT = 33). Using a
  combination of household ID (hhid) and IPUMS variables MOMLOC and POPLOC, I link
  respondents to their biological and adoptive children. I then look to the age and education
  associated with each child's observation to establish whether the child is EITC eligible. For
  more detail on how to link respondents to their children, see https://cps.ipums.org/cps-
  action/variables/MOMLOC#description_section.

· Age of youngest child (ageyc): The minimum age of all EITC eligible children. Takes on a
  value of 99 if respondent has no children.

· Single (single): Takes on a value of one if the respondent is separated (MARST = 3), divorced
  (MARST = 4), widowed (MARST = 5), or never married (MARST = 6), a value of zero if
  the respondent is married with spouse present (MARST = 1) or married with spouse absent
  (MARST = 2), and is missing otherwise.

· Age (age): this variable is taken from the IPUMS age variable and is top-coded at 90.

· Gender (f emale): takes on a value of one if IPUMS variable SEX = 2 and zero otherwise.

· Education Level (edlevel): takes on a value of one if the respondent has less than a HS edu-
  cation (IPUMS variable EDUC = 2-72), a value of two if the respondent has a HS diploma or
  equivalent (EDUC = 73), and a value of three if the respondent has more than a HS education
  (EDUC = 80-125).

· Low-educated (lowed): takes on a value of one if respondent has less than a HS education
  (edlevel = 1 - 2) and zero otherwise.

· Alternate low-educated (lowedA): takes on a value of one if respondent has less than a HS
  education (edlevel = 1 - 2) and zero if the respondent has a a college degree or above
  (EDU C = 91 - 125).

· AFDC receipt (af dc_annual): takes on a value of one if respondent receives AFDC/TANF
  (SRCWELFR = 1) or both AFDC/TANF and another type of welfare (SRCWELFR = 3), takes
  on a value of zero if respondent doesn't receive welfare (SRCWELFR = 0) or receives only
  another type of welfare (SRCWELFR = 2), and is missing otherwise.

                                               104
       · Weekly employment (emp): takes on a value of one if respondent is in the armed forces
         (EMPSTAT = 1), working (EMPSTAT = 10), or has a job but is not at work (EMPSTAT = 12),
         a value of zero if respondent is unemployed (EMPSTAT = 20-22), or not in the labor force
         (EMPSTAT = 30-36), and is missing otherwise.

       · Weekly participation (lf p): takes on a value of one if the respondent is in the armed forces
         (EMPSTAT = 1), working (EMPSTAT = 10), has a job but is not at work (EMPSTAT = 12), or
         is unemployed (EMPSTAT = 20-22), a value of zero if the respondent is not in the labor force
         (EMPSTAT = 30-36), and is missing otherwise.

       · Annual employment (emp_annual): takes on a value of one if person had positive earnings
         last year (IPUMS variable INCWAGE > 0), zero if they had zero earnings last year.56

       · Annual participation (lf p_annual): takes on a value of one if the respondent worked (WKSWORK1)
         or looked for work (NWLOOKWK) for at least one week last year and takes on a value of zero
         if the respondent didn't look for work at all last year (WKSWORK1 = 0 and NWLOOKWK =
         0), and is missing otherwise.

       · Income (wsal): the wsal variable comes from the IPUMS variable INCWAGE. Values of
         9999999 and 9999998 are recoded to be missing.

       · Person weight (wgt): in the ASEC this variable is equal to the IPUMS variable ASECWT; in
         the monthly files this variable is equal to the IPUMS variable WTFINL.

       · State unemployment rate (st_unemployed): the state unemployment rate is calculated by
         dividing the number of unemployed respondents (EMPSTAT = 20-22) by the number of re-
         spondents in the armed forces (EMPSTAT = 1), working (EMPSTAT = 10), or with a job but
         not at work (EMPSTAT = 12) in a given state.


B.2      Supplementary Data

Data on state welfare waivers comes from the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).57
I follow HHS and consider only major statewide waivers in the following six categories: termina-
tion time limits, work requirement time limits, JOBS exemptions, JOBS sanctions, family caps, and
  56
     When using the annual employment variables (lf ply and emply ) as outcomes, I substitute year for year - 1 to
reflect the fact that the employment measure refers to the previous year.
  57
     Health and Human Services, Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, Setting the Baseline: A Report on
State Welfare Waivers. Retrieved from https://aspe.hhs.gov/report/setting-baseline-report-state-welfare-waivers.


                                                       105
earnings disregards. I use either the dates of approval or the dates of implementation to create a
state-by-year dataset that contains indicators for each waiver type that are equal to 1 in all years
post-approval (or post-implementation) and 0 otherwise. I define the first post-approval year to
be the year of approval, no matter the time of year the waiver was approved. The any-waiver
indicator is equal to one if any statewide waiver was in effect in that year.
       Data on federal EITC parameters come from the Tax Policy Center.58 Data on state EITC pa-
rameters come from the Tax Policy Center,59 the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER),60
and various state-specific sources.




  58
     Tax Policy Center.         "Earned Income Tax Credit Parameters, 1975-2018."                Retrieved    from
https://www.taxpolicycenter.org/statistics/eitc-parameters.
  59
     Tax Policy Center.           "State EITC as Percentage of the Federal EITC" Retrieved                    from
https://www.taxpolicycenter.org/statistics/state-eitc-percentage-federal-eitc.
  60
     NBER. "State EITC provisions 1977-2016." Retrieved from https://users.nber.org/taxsim/state-eitc.html.


                                                       106
C       Elasticity Calculations

The extensive margin elasticity with respect to the net-of-tax rate on labor force participation is
defined in equation (2).
      The numerator of the elasticity (P /P ) is calculated as the difference-in-differences between
single women with and without children (or between different numbers of children) after 10 years.
Specifically, P corresponds to the coefficient estimate ^ 2003 in equation (1), while P is the baseline
employment or participation rate in 1993. The values of P and P for each family size are shown
in Table 3.
      The denominator of the elasticity ( (1 -  ) / ) is calculated based on a pre-reform sample of
single women (years 1991-1993), predicted earnings from the specification in (3), and a tax-benefit
calculator. The tax parameters  and  are calculated at the individual level, but the denominator
of  is based on the population averages. The following subsections describe the details of the
calculation of  and  .


C.1      Baseline Net-of-Tax Rate

Tax Simulations:
Calculating the baseline net-of-tax rate 1 -  in the full sample requires a measure of earnings
conditional on working for both workers and non-workers. I use actual observed earnings for
workers and predicted earnings from (3) for non-workers. Based on these earnings measures,
I simulate tax liabilities from state income taxes, federal income taxes, and payroll taxes using
NBER's tax simulation model (TAXSIM). TAXSIM requires information on income, dependents,
and demographics.61 The following list describes the mapping between TAXSIM variables (shown
in parentheses) and CPS variables:

      · Marital status (mstat) is set as "single or head of household" (corresponding to a value of
        one) for all observations.

      · Age (page) is equal to the variable age described in appendix section B.1.4.

      · Number of dependents (depx) uses IPUMS variable NCHILD, which corresponds to the
        number of own children at home.
 61
      The full list of TAXSIM inputs is listed online at https://users.nber.org/~taxsim/taxsim27/




                                                          107
· Number of children under 13 with eligible child care expenses (dep13) is equal to number of
  children at home that are under 13. Uses variables NCHILD (described above) and ageyec
  (described in appendix section B.1.4).

· Number of children under 17 for the entire tax year (dep17) is equal to number of children at
  home that are under 17. Uses variables NCHILD (described above) and ageyec (described in
  appendix section B.1.4).

· Number of qualifying children for EITC (dep18) is equal to variable nechild (described in
  appendix section B.1.4).

· Earnings from wages and salary (pwages) is equal to observed earnings for workers (variable
  inc, described in appendix section B.1.4) and predicted earnings for non-workers (estimated
  from the earnings regression in eq. 3). The earnings regression includes dummies for the age
  of the woman (20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-50), number of EITC eligible children (0, 1,
  2, 3, 4, 5, 6+), age of youngest child (0-1, 2-3, 4-6, 7-9, 10-13, 14-17, 18+), education level (below
  high school, high school degree, some college, college degree), race (white, non-white), state
  of residence, and two-way interactions between education, age, number of children, and age
  of youngest child. The specification is weighted by CPS weights and run on the sample of
  single women with positive earnings in the pre-reform years, 1991-1993 (all adjusted to 1993
  USD). Using the parameters from this regression, earnings are predicted for non-workers.
  Those with predicted earnings below zero are dropped (only 7 observations).

· Dividends (dividends) comes from IPUMS variable INCDIVID. INCDIVID indicates how
  much pre-tax income the respondent received from stocks and mutual funds.

· Interest received (intrec) comes from IPUMS variable INCINT. INCINT indicates how much
  pre-tax income the respondent received from interest on saving accounts, certificates of de-
  posit, money market funds, bonds, treasury notes, IRAs, and/or other investments which
  paid interest.

· Other property income (otherprop) comes from IPUMS variable INCRENT. INCRENT in-
  dicates how much pre-tax income the respondent received from rent (after expenses), from
  charges to roomers or boarders, and from money paid by estates, trusts, and royalties.

· Gross Social Security benefits (gssi) comes from IPUMS variable INCSS. INCSS indicates
  how much pre-tax income the respondent received from Social Security payments.

                                               108
   · Unemployment insurance (ui) comes from IPUMS variable INCUNEMP. INCUNEMP indi-
     cates how much pre-tax income the respondent received from state or federal unemploy-
     ment compensation, Supplemental Unemployment Benefits (SUB), or union unemployment
     or strike benefits.

   · Age and wage of spouse (sage, swages) are set to zero as the sample only includes single
     women.

   · Other income (stcg , ltcg , mortgage, nonprop, pensions, rentpaid, proptax, otheritem, childcare)
     are set to zero as they are not observed in the CPS.

For each individual, tax liability is simulated when working and when not working. Hence,
TAXSIM is run twice, once where earnings from wages and salary is set equal to actual/predicted
earnings (as described above) and once where earnings is set equal to zero. Based on the simula-
tions of state income tax, federal income tax, and payroll tax liabilities, the average tax rate AT R
can be calculated as follows


                                    (f ed1 - f ed0 ) + (st1 - st0 ) + F ICA
                           AT R =
                                                     pwages

where f ed1 and f ed0 (st1 and st0 ) are the federal (state) income tax liabilities when working and
not working, respectively, and F ICA is the payroll tax liability (Federal Insurance Contributions
Act tax) when working.

Welfare Simulations:
In addition to taxes, the participation tax rate also accounts for welfare benefits that are lost when
entering the labor market. Annual benefits from AFDC and Food Stamps when not working (B0 )
are calculated as
                                 B0 = (maxAF DC + maxF S ) · 12

where maxAF DC and maxF S denote the maximum monthly benefits from AFDC and Food
Stamps (in 1993), which vary by family size and by state.
   For those who are working, benefits from AFDC (AF DC1 ) and Food Stamps (F S1 ) are clawed
back as earned income increases. However, part of earned income is disregarded when determin-
ing benefit levels. Specifically, monthly benefits are calculated as follows




                                                 109
        AF DC1 = min (P aymentStandard - N etIncomeAF DC , maxAF DC ) · IAF DC

            F S1 = (maxF S - 0.3 · N etIncomeF S ) · IF S ,


where the indicators IAF DC and IF S are equal to one when the calculated AFDC and Food Stamp
benefits are non-negative and equal to zero otherwise. The net income measures (N etIncomeAF DC
and N etIncomeF S ) are defined as follows


        N etIncomeAF DC = max GrossIncome - W orkExp - ChildCareExp · n

                                  -EarningsDisregardAF DC , 0

            N etIncomeF S = max GrossIncome - ShelterCosts - ChildCareExp · n

                                  -StandardDeduction - EarningsDisregardF S , 0 .


The following list describes the components of the monthly benefit calculation:

   · Payment Standard (P aymentStandard) denotes a baseline AFDC benefit level (before claw-
     back) used to compute benefits for working individuals in 1993. The payment standard
     varies by family size and by state. It is typically equal to maxAF DC , but some states set
     P aymentStandard to a level above maxAF DC .

   · Gross Income (GrossIncome) includes monthly wage and salary income as well as unearned
     income (e.g., interest income). Unearned income is assumed to be zero for all individu-
     als in the sample. Therefore, the monthly gross income equals monthly wages and salary
     (Earnings).

        ­ For individuals who are observed working, Earnings are calculated by dividing annual
          wage and salary income (pwages) by the number of months worked (M onthsW orked).
          The variable M onthsW orked is calculated from the IPUMS variable WKSWORK1, which
          corresponds to the number of weeks worked. For individuals who are not working,
          Earnings are calculated based on their predicted annual earnings conditional on work-
          ing (from the regression in eq. 3) and an imputed value of M onthsW orked. The impu-
          tation of M onthsW orked for non-workers is based on the average value for workers in
          different cells of family size n.

                                               110
   · Work Expenses Disregard (W orkExp) denotes work-related expenses such as transportation
     costs. Following Fajgelbaum et al. (2020), W orkExp are set equal to the maximum disregard
     in 1993 ($90).

   · Child Care Expenses Disregard (ChildCareExp) denotes child care expenses incurred per
     child. Following Fajgelbaum et al. (2020), ChildCareExp are set equal to the maximum dis-
     regard in 1993 ($175 per child for AFDC and $160 per child for Food Stamps).

   · AFDC Earnings Disregard (EarningsDisregardAF DC ) denotes an earned income disre-
     gard, which provides AFDC recipients a financial incentive to seek and maintain employ-
     ment. It is equal to $30 + 0.33 · Earnings per month for the first 4 months worked and $30
     per month for all subsequent months.

   · Standard Deduction (StandardDeduction) is a monthly deduction to account for basic costs,
     which varies by state.

   · Food Stamps Earnings Disregard (EarningsDisregardF S ) denotes an earned income dis-
     regard which provides Food Stamps recipients a financial incentive to seek and maintain
     employment. It is equal to 0.2 · Earnings.

   · Shelter Deduction (ShelterCosts) is an allowance for excess housing costs. It is equal to
     housing expenses (such as rent and utilities) exceeding 50 percent of "net income," up to
     a maximum. Here, net income is computed as Earnings net of the standard deduction
     (StandardDeduction) and the earnings disregard (EarningsDisregardF S ). Following Fa-
     jgelbaum et al. (2020), it is assumed that households living in rented properties incur hous-
     ing expenses equal to 30 percent of monthly earnings, whereas households living in owned
     properties are assumed to have no allowance for excess housing costs. Property ownership is
     determined using the IPUMS variable OWNERSHP, which indicates whether the household
     rented or owned its housing unit. The maximum shelter cost deduction varies by state.

The annual benefits from AFDC and Food Stamps when working (B1 ) are calculated as follows




           B1 = AF DC1 · M onthsW orked + maxAF DC · (12 - M onthsW orked)

                      +F S1 · M onthsW orked + maxF S · (12 - M onthsW orked)



                                              111
When working, individuals receive benefits AF DC1 and F S1 each month, and in the remaining
months they receive the maximum benefits maxAF DC and maxF S .

Participation Tax Rate:
Finally, the participation tax rate can be calculated as follows


                                                                     B0 - B1
                                       = AT R + takeup_rate ·                ,
                                                                     pwages

where takeup_rate scales welfare benefits to account for incomplete benefit take-up among elig-
bles. Based on the evidence presented in Blank & Ruggles (1996), Blank (2001), and Currie (2006),
the average take-up rate is set equal to 70%. The participation tax rate is top-coded at 0.99.


C.2      Change in Tax Rate

To calculate the average change in the participation tax rate, (1 -  ), I focus exclusively on the
changes implied by the EITC expansion. For each individual, I calculate a pre-reform EITC subsidy
(1993 rules) and a post-reform EITC subsidy (1996 rules) using baseline earnings in 1993.62 The
EITC is a function of earnings (pwages), family size n, and year t. It is calculated as follows


                  
                   pwages · phase_innt
                                                                            if pwages < k 1nt
                  
                  maxcreditnt                                               if k 1nt  pwages  k 2nt
                  
       EIT C =
                   maxcreditnt - phase_outnt · (pwages - k 2nt )            if k 2nt  pwages  exhaustnt
                  
                  0                                                         if pwages > exhaustnt
                  


where phase_in and phase_out denote the EITC phase-in and phase-out rates, maxcredit is the
maximum possible EITC refund, k 1 and k 2 are the first and second kink points of the EITC, while
exhaust is the point of EITC exhaustion. The change in the net-of-tax rate equals the difference
between the pre- and post-reform EITC credits (1993 vs 1996, under baseline earnings pwages),
EIT C96 - EIT C93 , divided by baseline earnings pwages. Labeling this difference  (1 - n ) for
family size n, the tax rate change that enters into the elasticity formula (2) equals the difference-in-
differences  (1 -  ) =  (1 - n ) -  (1 - 0 ). This calculation assumes 100% take-up of the EITC
conditional on eligibility. Given incomplete take-up, the net-of-tax rate change  (1 -  ) will be
 62
      The calculation of the post-reform EITC under baseline earnings uses 1993 earnings measured in 1996 USD.


                                                         112
upward biased and the elasticity  is therefore conservative.




                                               113
D       Synthetic Control Approach

This analysis is implemented by creating a synthetic control state for each state with an EITC
supplement, and then running a stacked event study comparing treatment and synthetic control
states around state EITC introductions. Table A.II lists all states with an EITC supplement and
provides key details about those supplements.


D.1      Constructing synthetic controls

To run the synthetic control analysis, CPS data is collapsed into state-by-year observations. The
data is collapsed separately for single women with and without children. I consider an event
study window from five years before to five years after each reform. Since the monthly files can
only be used from 1989 onwards, to ensure that each reform has a consistent dataset across the
event window, the analysis uses the March CPS files alone for reforms that occurred before 1993
and the March and monthly CPS files combined for reforms that occurred from 1993 onwards.
Event time is set to zero in the first year after the introduction of the EITC supplement.
       I focus on the 27 states that implemented and maintained an EITC supplement for at least 3
years.63 For each of these treatment states, a synthetic control state is constructed from states that
never had a supplement, matching on the level of the employment rate in each of the five pre-
reform years. Table A.VI shows the makeup of each synthetic state. Synthetic control regressions
are run using the stata command synth.64
       In the main specification, synthetic control regressions are run on the sample of single women
with children. Hence, the empirical strategy is a difference-in-differences comparing different
states over time, conditioning on children. As a robustness check, I consider a triple-differences
specification that also exploits the variation between those with and without children within states.


D.2      Stacked Event Study

Having obtained measures of employment in treatment and synthetic control states, a stacked
event study specification is used to estimate the average effect across all state EITC reforms. The
event study is based on the following specification
  63
     A total of 30 states have instituted a supplement (see Table A.II). But the state of Washington never funded and paid
out the credit, while Hawaii and South Carolina instituted their supplements only in 2018.
  64
     See http://fmwww.bc.edu/RePEc/bocode/s/synth.html for documentation on the synth command.




                                                          114
                Pst =      j · Eventj =t +  · T reats +                     j · Eventj =t · T reats + st ,       (8)
                           j                                       j = -1


where Pst is the employment rate in state s at time t, Eventj =t is an indicator for event time t, and
T reats is an indicator for treatment states. In Figure 12, the treatment series (solid line) corresponds
to the coefficient ^t + ^ t , while the synthetic control series (dashed line) corresponds to ^ t . Two
different samples of treatment states are considered. In panel A of Figure 12, the treatment sample
includes all 27 states that implemented and maintained a supplement for at least three years. In
panel B, the treatment sample includes only the 12 states with "large EITC reforms", defined as the
introduction of refundable supplements that reached at least 10% of the federal EITC within three
years of enactment.65
       Figure A.XXIII is based on a similar analysis, but it adds the variation from children (within
states) to the variation across states in a triple-differences design. Specifically, the analysis is based
on the following specification




                 Pkst =         j · Eventj =t +  · Kidsk +  · T reats +  · Kidsk · T reats
                               j

                               +            j · Eventj =t · Kidsk +           j · Eventj =t · T reats            (9)
                                   j = -1                             j =-1

                               +            j · Eventj =t · Kidsk · T reats + kst
                                   j = -1


where Pkst is the employment rate for those with kids status k (with or without) in state s at time t.
Here, the treated series (solid line) corresponds to the coefficient ^t + ^t , while the synthetic control

series (dashed line) corresponds to ^t .




  65
    The 12 states with large EITC reforms are California (2015), Connecticut (2011), Dist. of Columbia (2000), Kansas
(1998), Massachusetts (1997), Michigan (2008), Minnesota (1991), New Jersey (2000), New Mexico (2007), New York
(1994), Vermont (1988), and Wisconsin (1989).


                                                             115
E    Stacked Event Study of All Federal and State Reforms

The purpose of the stacked event study analysis is to capture the average effect across all 31 EITC
reforms at the state and federal level.66 The analysis is implemented by converting calendar time
around each reform into event time (with t = 0 denoting the first year after each reform), and then
stacking the CPS data for the 31 events. The window around each reform runs from event time -5
to +5, except for the federal reform in 1993 (OBRA93) where the window runs from event time -5
to +2.67 This avoids overlap between the 1993 EITC reform and TANF reform, which we cannot
control for. Given the monthly files can be used only from 1989, to ensure that each reform uses
consistent data across time, I use March CPS files alone for reforms that occurred before 1993 and
March and monthly CPS files combined for reforms that occurred from 1993 onwards.
    The stacked event study is based on the following specification


       Pimt =         j · Eventj =t +  · Kidsi +                  j · Eventj =t · Kidsi
                     j                                   j = -1

                     +IOBRA93 ·     j · Eventj =t · W aiversj +  j · Eventj =t · Kidsi · W aiversj                 (10)
                                    j                                     j

                     + · Ust +  · Ust · Kidsi + s + Xi  + imt ,


where the first line is the basic DiD event study specification, and the second and third lines add
controls for welfare waivers, the business cycle, and demographics. The waiver and business cycle
controls are switched on only for the 1993 federal reform (IOBRA93 = 1) where they are necessary for
identification. For the 2009 federal reform, the dummy variable Kidsi is an indicator for having 3+
children (relative to 0 children), while for all other reforms it is an indicator for having any children.
Notice also that, for the stacked event study, the state reforms are analyzed by comparing single
women with and without children within each state. This is similar to the DiD analyses of federal
reforms elsewhere in the paper, but different from the more involved synthetic control approach
to state reforms in section 6.1 (which exploits variation both by the presence of children and across
different states).
    The results of this analysis are presented in Figure 13 in the main text and Figure A.XXIV in the
appendix. Panel A of these figures is based on running specification (10) for the federal reforms
  66
     These are the 27 state EITC reforms analyzed in section 6.1 along with four federal reforms: the 1975, 1986, 1993,
and 2009 reforms. I exclude the 1990 reform as a separate event because of its small size and close proximity in time to
the 1986 and 1993 reforms.
  67
     The other exception is the state reform enacted in California in 2015. This reform allows for an event time window
running only to +2.


                                                         116
alone, Panel B runs (10) for the state reforms alone, while Panel C runs (10) for the federal and
state reforms combined. Because there is a gradual pre-trend in Panel C, the final panel considers
an extension of (10) that adjusts for this pre-trend.
   The pre-trend adjustment is done based on estimating linear, group-specific trends using only
pre-reform data. This consists of two steps. First, using pre-reform data (event time -5 to -1), I run
a version of equation (10) in which the event time dummies Eventj =t in the first line are replaced
by a continuous event time variable t. Hence, this specification includes the same control variables
as the specification of interest. This yields pre-trend coefficients for those with and without kids,
^ k=1 and 
          ^ k=0 . Second, I residualize the outcome variable Pimt using these coefficients, i.e. P
                                                                                                 ^imt 

Pimt - ^ k =0 · t - ^ k=1 · t · Kidsi . Equation (10) is then run using P
                                                                        ^imt as the outcome.

   The individual reforms are reweighted to adjust for changes in CPS sample size over time. In
an unweighted stacked regression, later reforms would tend to weigh more heavily than earlier
reforms due to the increase in CPS samples over time. To adjust for this, the CPS weights are
rescaled such that all federal reforms are weighted equally and all state reforms are weighted
according to their share of the national population in 2016. Specifically, the rescaling factor for
                         1
each reform equals   s/pop          where s is the number of sample observations for a given reform and
                             2016

pop2016 is the national or state population in 2016, depending on whether the observation is from
a federal or state reform. This rescaling factor is multiplied by the individual CPS weights.




                                                      117
