                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WORKING THEIR WAY UP? US IMMIGRANTS' CHANGING LABOR MARKET
              ASSIMILATION IN THE AGE OF MASS MIGRATION

                                        William J. Collins
                                         Ariell Zimran

                                       Working Paper 26414
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26414


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




For helpful comments, the authors thank Ran Abramitzky, Leah Boustan, Joseph Ferrie, Joel
Mokyr, Zach Ward, and seminar participants at Northwestern University and Vanderbilt
University. Work on this paper was completed while Ariell Zimran was a W. Glenn Campbell
and Rita Ricardo-Campbell National Fellow and the William C. Bark National Fellow at the
Hoover Institution, Stanford University; funding from the Hoover Institution is gratefully
acknowledged. Collins is the Terence E. Adderley Jr. Professor of Economics at Vanderbilt
University and a Research Associate of the NBER. Zimran is an Assistant Professor of
Economics at Vanderbilt University and a Faculty Research Fellow of the NBER. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by William J. Collins and Ariell Zimran. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Working Their Way Up? US Immigrants' Changing Labor Market Assimilation in the Age
of Mass Migration
William J. Collins and Ariell Zimran
NBER Working Paper No. 26414
October 2019, Revised June 2020
JEL No. J61,J62,N11,N12,N13,N14

                                         ABSTRACT

Whether immigrants advance in labor markets relative to natives is a fundamental question in
immigration economics. It is difficult to answer this question for the Age of Mass Migration,
when US immigration was at its peak. New datasets of linked census records show that
immigrants experienced substantial "catching up" relative to natives' occupational status from
1850 to 1880, but not from 1900 to 1930. This change was not due to the shift in immigrant
source countries. Instead, it was rooted in a sizable change in natives' occupations. The results
revise the influential view that European immigrants "worked their way up".


William J. Collins
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
VU Station B #351819
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235-1819
and NBER
william.collins@vanderbilt.edu

Ariell Zimran
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235
and NBER
ariell.zimran@vanderbilt.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26414
1. Introduction
        The 30 million European immigrants who entered the United States in the century before
1921's closing of the "Golden Door" powerfully shaped American economic, demographic, and
political development.1 Their experiences form a cornerstone of broad interpretations of US history,
especially regarding the opportunity for and realization of upward economic mobility. The idea that
the United States is (or was) the "land of opportunity" goes hand-in-hand with the idea that the
United States is "a nation of immigrants." These ideas, in turn, continue to inform contemporary
views on immigration and social policy. A widely held and influential view is that European
immigrants entered the US economy in low-paying occupations but experienced rapid economic and
cultural assimilation despite facing discrimination and receiving little aid (Kennedy 1964; Smith et
al. 2018).2 Against this idealized historical benchmark, some question the capacity or willingness of
many of today's immigrants to assimilate, and see this as a rationale for more restrictive and selective
policies (e.g., Kelly 2018; Martin 2019).3 In this paper, we test the soundness of this view of
historical immigrants' experiences. We show that European immigrants did narrow gaps in
economic status relative to US natives in the mid-nineteenth century, whereas later European
immigrants did not. We also investigate why this pattern changed and find, surprisingly, that the
dramatic shift of countries-of-origin within Europe (toward the South and East) had little to do with
it. The answer instead lies in the deep transformation of the US economy between the middle and
late nineteenth century.
        Many scholars have studied immigrants' labor market outcomes and how they change with
time spent in the United States in both historical settings and in recent decades.4 Indeed, whether and
how quickly immigrants advance in labor markets relative to natives is one of the core questions in
the economics of immigration (e.g., Borjas 2014). The value of historical perspective on this

1
  This refers to the 1921 Emergency Quota Act, the first quantitative restriction on European immigration to
the United States. Other dates often discussed as the end of the Age of Mass Migration include 1914 (the
outbreak of World War I, which effectively stopped transatlantic migration), 1917 (the imposition of the
literacy test) and 1924 (the National Origins Act, which tightened the quotas imposed in 1921).
2
  In the 1994 General Social Survey, 80 percent of respondents agreed or strongly agreed with the statement
that, "The Irish, Italians, Jews, and many other minorities overcame prejudice and worked their way up.
Today's immigrants should do the same without any special favors" (Smith et al. 2018).
3
  Ken Cuccinelli, the acting head of US Citizenship and Immigration Services, stated that he would welcome
immigrants "who can stand on their own two feet, be self-sufficient, pull themselves up by their bootstraps--
again, as in the American tradition. My Italian-Irish heritage looks back at that. Most people in America look
back at that. And that's what we expect going forward" (Martin 2019).
4
  See Blau (1980), Hannon (1982), Eichengreen and Gemery (1986), Hanes (1996), Hatton (1997, 2000),
Ferrie (1999), Minns (2000), and Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson (2014) for historical studies. See
Chiswick (1978), Borjas (1985, 2015), Card (2005), Lubotsky (2007), and Cassidy (2019) for studies of more
recent decades.


                                                                                                             1
question is widely recognized in this literature, but data limitations have obscured scholars' view of
what actually happened between the 1840s and the 1920s, during the "Age of Mass Migration." This
period, on which we focus, predates the design and implementation of national longitudinal surveys
or large-scale and representative administrative records. Instead, we conduct our analyses with
individual-level census records that we link over time. To construct the datasets, we start with all
white men ages 18 to 40 in the "complete-count" Census of Population records for 1850, the first
year in which birthplace is recorded in the census; then, we use automated methods to search for the
same men in the complete-count 1880 records by using information on their birthplace, year of birth,
and name.5 We repeat this approach with men in the complete-count records of the 1900 census,
searching for their matches in 1930. The panel structure of the linked data avoids biases that arise in
assimilation studies that use cross-sectional data, such as changing cohort quality and selective return
migration (Chiswick 1978; Borjas 1985; Lubotsky 2007; Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson 2014).
In addition, the datasets are sufficiently large that we can study outcomes for immigrants from
specific source countries within the early and later immigrant cohorts. We show that our results are
not sensitive to the linkage method we employ, which gives us confidence that we can reliably
compare immigrants' and natives' outcomes over the full span of the Age of Mass Migration for the
first time.
        A challenge to studying historical labor market outcomes is that individual wage information
is not available in nationally representative data sources. The census did not collect wage data until
1940 and even then omitted earnings for farmers and other self-employed workers. Therefore, we
focus on workers' occupational status. We start by characterizing occupational status according to
broad and simple categories--unskilled, operative, craft, farmer, and white collar. Then, we make
full use of the censuses' detailed (three-digit) occupational information to rank workers using two
different approaches. One approach relies on the complete-count records of the 1870 census to
calculate the average level of wealth for men in each detailed occupational category; this
"occupational score" is then assigned to each worker in our linked data according to his current
occupation and transformed into a ranking.6 A second approach relies on average income circa 1900

5
  As described below, subsequent analyses focus on non-southern whites. We focus on men because name
changes at marriage make it difficult to link women and historical occupational codes for women have serious
shortcomings (Goldin 1990, pp. 222-227). We focus on non-southern men because few immigrants resided in
the South, because the Civil War's impact on the South would confound comparisons over this period (e.g., the
application of occupational rankings that rely on post-Civil War data to the pre-Civil War South), and to
maintain comparability to prior studies.
6
  In 1860 and 1870, the census collected personal and real wealth information; in 1880 and later censuses,
there are no questions about wealth.


                                                                                                           2
for occupations reported in Preston and Haines (1991), which in turn relies heavily on Commissioner
of Labor (1903), Douglas (1930), and Lebergott (1964). We supplement that information with a new
estimate of white farmers' average income using the Census of Agriculture in 1900.
        As with other metrics of occupational status, which are commonly used in studies of
historical economic mobility and immigrant assimilation, such rankings will capture changes in
status associated with changes in occupation but not changes in economic status within occupation.
However, later in the paper, we examine whether the main results are sensitive to using age-group-
specific occupational scores, which allow for differential changes in status within occupations over
the lifecycle. This addresses the concern that farmers (or others) might have accumulated wealth and
improved their relative status without changing occupations, which would confound results based on
a fixed occupational score. Our results and interpretations are not sensitive to this alternative.
        Our first main finding is that there was a substantial change in immigrants' occupational
assimilation patterns over the Age of Mass Migration. The cohort of immigrants observed in 1850
and 1880 experienced substantial occupational upgrading relative to native-born men. This pattern
runs contrary to influential conclusions based on the experiences of immigrants in the early
twentieth-century (Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson 2014). Measured according to a ranking that
averages over the two approaches mentioned above, the mid-nineteenth-century immigrant cohort
reduced the gap in occupational status relative to natives from 14 to 7 percentiles. In stark contrast,
when we examine a later cohort of immigrants observed in 1900 and 1930, we find little or no
occupational upgrading relative to natives. This finding for the twentieth century is in line with
Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson's (2014) conclusions and is reassuring since we employ different
methods for linking census records and assessing occupational status, and we build our linked data
from larger census datasets. In sum, whereas the nineteenth-century patterns support the commonly
held view that immigrants in the Age of Mass Migration started behind natives in labor markets but
gained ground with time, the early twentieth-century experience was quite different.
        Our second main finding is that the difference in immigrants' upgrading relative to natives in
the nineteenth versus twentieth century was not the product of changing immigrant source countries.
This finding is important in light of influential claims by social scientists, commentators, and
policymakers circa 1900 that immigrants from the "new sources" were "inferior" to those who had
previously come from the "old sources."7 Such claims helped to motivate the design and
implementation of immigration restrictions in the 1920s that were severely biased against potential

7
 The "old sources" were primarily Germany, Britain, and Ireland. The "new sources" were primarily Italy, the
Russian Empire, and the Austro-Hungarian Empire.


                                                                                                          3
immigrants from eastern and southern Europe and remained in place for most of the twentieth
century (Walker 1896; Commissioner-General of Immigration 1903; Zolberg 2006; Benton-Cohen
2018). This is the first paper to use panel data to provide comparative perspective on the relationship
between assimilation and country of origin over the Age of Mass Migration.
        Instead of changes in country of origin, we show that the difference in immigrants'
occupational upgrading between the early and later parts of the Age of Mass Migration was rooted in
sizable changes in the occupational distribution of natives between 1850 and 1900. In 1850, natives
in our sample were concentrated in farming whereas immigrants were largely engaged in unskilled
labor. Men engaged in unskilled labor, whether immigrant or native, experienced high rates of
occupational upgrading on average, whereas those in farming did not. By 1900, the US economy's
structural transformation away from agricultural employment had collapsed differences in
occupations between immigrant and native workers under age 40. That is, there were far more young
natives in "unskilled" jobs in 1900 than before. We show that because natives upgraded at least as
much as immigrants did conditional on the initial year's occupation in both the early and later
cohorts, the smaller immigrant-native differences in initial-year occupations (in 1900 compared to
1850) were strongly associated with diminished upgrading for immigrants relative to natives. In this
sense, the "catching up" of immigrants in the nineteenth century--the only basis that we find for the
idealized historical assimilation benchmark--is largely attributable to their arrival at a time when
natives were primarily employed in farming.
        Our finding that immigrants in both periods (early and late in the Age of Mass Migration)
failed to keep pace with natives who started in similar occupations is novel and implies an important
qualification of the widely held view of historical assimilation. It contradicts the notion that
European immigrants were at first under-placed in labor markets relative to natives with similar
productive abilities and then gained ground rapidly with the accumulation of US-specific human
capital (e.g., language skills). In fact, we show that even though immigrants in the early twentieth
century did substantially improve their language skills, this did not translate into overall occupational
gains relative to natives.
        This paper advances the economics and economic history of immigration in several ways. It
does so by first building large new datasets that provide a clear and wide window on immigrants' and
natives' labor market outcomes, spanning both their individual careers and the entire Age of Mass
Migration. Most crucially, the paper revises our knowledge and understanding of the facts of
economic assimilation in American history. It provides the first study of immigrants' assimilation
patterns over a long period with consistent methods and panel data, and the first evidence based on


                                                                                                        4
such data of a change in immigrant assimilation patterns in the Age of Mass Migration. It also goes
beyond other papers in this literature by providing the first explanation for why these patterns
prevailed and changed over time.8 At a time when an oversimplified view of historical immigrants'
experiences is held up as justification for policy, these insights are timely and instructive. They
challenge prevalent narratives about European immigrants' economic mobility in America--myths
that continue to influence modern debates over immigration policy.


2. Immigrants in the US Labor Market during the Age of Mass Migration
        Figures 1(a) and 1(b) show the volume of European immigration to the United States
(relative to the population) and its composition by source country during the Age of Mass Migration,
respectively.9 During this time, there were minimal restrictions on immigration from Europe. This
openness allowed for a surge in immigration during the 1840s, reflecting reduced costs of
transatlantic travel, the Irish Famine, and the beginning of large-scale migration from Germany.
Later in the nineteenth century, the main source countries shifted from northern and western Europe
to the south and east.10 World War I interrupted the flow of immigrants, but only temporarily. After
adding a literacy test for immigrants in 1917, the United States implemented restrictive immigration
quotas in 1921 and 1924, culminating decades of intense debate over immigration policy
(Hutchinson 1981; Goldin 1994; Benton-Cohen 2018). In addition to imposing restrictions on annual
immigration totals, the country-specific quotas were severely biased against potential migrants from
southern and eastern Europe and effectively barred immigration by Asians. With minor
modifications, this system governed entry to the United States until the Hart-Celler Act of 1965.
        Figure 2 shows the share of white male natives and European immigrants, ages 18 to 65,
working in two broad occupational categories--unskilled labor and farming--from 1850 to 1930.11
The predominance of immigrants in unskilled work and natives in farming in 1850 is immediately
apparent, as is the secular decline in farming as a share of the native labor force (and of the
8
  In advancing our understanding of assimilation in the Age of Mass Migration, this paper complements
research by Hatton and Williamson (1998), Ferrie (1999), Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson (2014),
Abramitzky et al. (2019b), Collins and Zimran (2019), and Pérez (2019), among others. Abramitzky and
Boustan (2017) and Hatton and Ward (2019) survey this literature.
9
  We focus on European migration because it accounts for nearly 90 percent of the total inflows to the US prior
to 1914 (Abramitzky and Boustan 2017, Figure 2, p. 1316), because it was the subject of the main policy
debates in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and because it was effectively unconstrained prior to World
War I (as opposed to Asian immigration, which was effectively banned by the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882
and the "Gentlemen's Agreement" of 1907).
10
   See Gould (1980), Hatton and Williamson (1998), and Spitzer and Zimran (2020) for a discussion of the
timing, rapidity, and causes of this shift.
11
   We define these occupational categories as described in footnote 29 below.


                                                                                                             5
immigrant labor force after 1880). From 1850 to 1880, there is convergence in the shares of each
group working in farming, and by 1930, the gaps between immigrants' and natives' shares in farming
and unskilled jobs were smaller than in the mid-nineteenth century. But these patterns of
convergence are difficult, and possibly misleading, to interpret as evidence of labor market
assimilation. Due to the continuous inflow and outflow (i.e., return migration) of immigrants, cross-
sectional data sources provide little useful insight into how immigrants who stayed in the United
States fared over their lifecycle. This has been a central challenge to studying immigrants' labor
market outcomes during the Age of Mass Migration.
        Data shortcomings, of course, did not forestall policy debates and decisions centered on
immigrants' assimilation in the labor market and in other social dimensions. US natives' concerns
over immigrants' poverty, lack of skills, insularity, and religion are at least as old as the onset of
mass immigration. For instance, the influx of poor Irish immigrants in the 1840s and 1850s triggered
an intensification of nativism and anti-Catholicism, epitomized by the rise of the "Know-Nothing"
Party (Higham 1955; Anbinder 1992; Alsan, Eriksson, and Niemesh 2019). Later in the nineteenth
century, the shift in source countries to southern and eastern Europe renewed vigorous debates over
immigration policy (Goldin 1994; Williamson 1998; Benton-Cohen 2018). By this time, a common
argument in favor of restricting European immigration involved unfavorable comparisons of the
"new immigrants" to the "old immigrants," where "new" and "old" referred to place of origin. In
1896, Francis A. Walker, the first president of the American Economic Association, characterized the
"new" immigrants as "beaten men from beaten races; representing the worst failures in the struggle
for existence" (Walker 1896).12 The Commissioner-General of Immigration, William Williams,
bemoaned the "new" immigrants' urban settlement patterns, viewing them as evidence of the
immigrants' low quality: "Notwithstanding the well-known demand for agricultural labor in the
Western States, thousands of foreigners keep pouring into our cities, declining to go where they
might be wanted because they are neither physically nor mentally fitted to go to these undeveloped
parts of our country and do as did the early settlers from northern Europe" (Commissioner-General of
Immigration 1903, p. 70).13
        In 1907, Congress authorized the era's most influential study of immigrants--the Dillingham
Commission Reports. The Commission's investigation was unprecedented in scope and detail,

12
   Later, Irving Fisher, another president of the AEA, who had come to embrace eugenics and promote
immigration restriction, wrote, "The core problem of immigration is one of race and eugenics..." (1921, p.
226; cited by Benton-Cohen 2018, p. 115).
13
   See Willcox (1906) for further discussion of this issue, including a discussion of the difficulties in drawing
conclusions from cross-sectional data.


                                                                                                                    6
including the collection of data on immigrant and native workers in a variety of industries. The
Commission's policy recommendations included a literacy test, source-specific quotas, and
continuing bans on Asian immigration (US Congress 1911). Hourwich (1912) and Douglas (1919)
published critiques of the reports and of popular summaries of the Commission's work, most notably
Jenks and Lauck's (1912) book, The Immigration Problem.14 They highlighted the limits of
interpretation from cross-sectional data, especially in comparing "new" and "old" immigrants who
had been in the United States for different lengths of time. Nonetheless, several of the Commission's
main recommendations eventually became law (Benton-Cohen 2018).
        Modern econometric analyses have produced mixed evidence as to whether nineteenth-
century immigrants improved their status relative to natives as they gained experience in the US
labor market. Blau (1980), for instance, drew on cross-sectional data tabulated and published by the
Dillingham Commission and concluded that immigrants, especially from "new" sources, initially
earned less than natives, but caught up over time.15 Later studies shifted attention to cross-sectional,
micro-level datasets, which include wage information for workers in specific industries and states
circa 1890. Hannon (1982), for instance, concluded that immigrants in Michigan's mining industry
slowly caught up to those of natives, whereas Eichengreen and Gemery (1986) and Hanes (1996)
concluded that immigrants did not gain in earnings relative to natives. In contrast, after allowing
more flexible functional forms in age-earnings profiles for workers in Michigan and California,
Hatton (1997) concluded that immigrants who arrived as adults started at a lower wage than similar
natives, gained substantially in relative pay with age, but did not fully catch up to natives. Minns
(2000) shifted attention to census microdata for 1900 and 1910, which provided a more
geographically comprehensive view of immigrants and natives in the labor market, albeit without
wage information. He found evidence consistent with occupational gains for immigrants relative to
natives, at least outside the farm sector.
        More recently and most closely related to our work, Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson
(2014) extended methods pioneered by Ferrie (1994, 1995, 1997, 1999) to construct and study a
panel dataset of immigrants and natives between 1900 and 1920.16 They found almost no differential
gains for immigrants in terms of occupational status, attributing findings of immigrant assimilation in
14
   Jenks, an economist, was an appointed member of the Commission; Lauck was a key staff member. Their
book summarized their view of the Commission's findings and was more accessible to readers than the 41
volumes published by the Commission (Benton-Cohen 2008).
15
   Higgs (1971) and McGouldrick and Tannen (1977) also examined data tabulated by the Commission.
16
   Ferrie focused on immigrants arriving in New York City in the mid-nineteenth century and documented their
occupational upgrading and wealth accumulation. He did not directly compare their upgrading to that of
natives.


                                                                                                          7
this period by prior studies to data deficiencies that are addressed by the use of panel data. Relative
to their work, we have extended coverage to the mid-nineteenth century, linked the data using
updated methods (but also linked it using their method to check robustness), worked from the
complete-count census records in the base year (resulting in larger samples), and focused on
occupational ranks derived from different approaches to measuring occupational status.17 This
enables us to provide consistent and comprehensive (all industries, all non-southern states)
comparisons of immigrants' and natives' labor market outcomes over both the early decades of the
Age of Mass Migration, which were dominated by immigration from "old" source countries, and the
later decades, which were dominated by immigration from "new" sources, and to show that the
patterns of immigrant assimilation differed dramatically between them. This is the first systematic
comparison of immigrants' labor market assimilation using panel data in both the early and later eras
within the Age of Mass Migration and the first analysis of the assimilation of nineteenth-century
immigrants based on panel data. These data also enable us to make an important advance over such
broad descriptions of assimilation patterns by explaining why patterns of occupational upgrading
appear substantially different across the two eras within the Age of Mass Migration. The first step
toward accomplishing these goals entails building new datasets from historical census records.


3. Building new datasets
Linking census records
        We began by extracting all US- or European-born men from the complete-count records of
the 1850 US census (Ruggles et al. 2015; Minnesota Population Center 2017). We then searched for
the same men in the complete-count records of the 1880 census (Ruggles et al. 2015; Minnesota
Population Center 2017), using linkage methods described below and in more detail in Appendix A.
For men found at both points in time, we can observe and compare their occupations; this forms the
basis for our analyses of the occupational status of immigrants relative to natives. The 1850 census
was the first to record place of birth (thus identifying immigrants) and was implemented several
years after the onset of mass migration from Europe. The 30-year span (to 1880) allows sufficient
time to observe occupational upgrading over the lifecycle. We focus our subsequent analyses on
non-southern white men because few immigrants located in the South in this period and because the
Civil War's impact on the South may confound comparisons that span the war (e.g., applying an
occupational ranking based on post-Civil War data to the South in 1850 would be tenuous). Our

17
  We use occupational ranks instead of scores so that cardinal differences in our scores, which may be a
source of inaccuracy, are de-emphasized.


                                                                                                           8
second dataset covers the early twentieth century, linking men from the 1900 to the 1930 census
records using the same method (Ruggles et al. 2019). The 1900 start point allows us to include a
large number of "new" immigrants, and the 1930 end point observes outcomes in the first census
taken after the imposition of quotas but just before the full effects of the Great Depression.
        The panel structure of the linked datasets is essential to study changes in immigrants'
occupational status. Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson (2014) show that using either cross-section
or repeated cross-section data can generate spurious evidence of labor market assimilation due to
changing arrival-cohort quality and negatively selected return migration. As in their work, our panel
datasets avoid potential confounds by limiting attention to a fixed sample of men who remained in
the United States. This design is appropriate for studies that are primarily interested in whether
immigrants who stayed in the United States experienced relative improvements in labor market status
or other aspects of assimilation. It is worth bearing in mind, however, that the linked census data
might not capture the lifetime experience of the "average immigrant" given that many returned to
their country of origin or died before being observed for a second time (Bandiera, Rasul, and
Viarengo 2013); we return to this issue below.
        Our record linkage procedure follows that of Collins and Zimran (2019), which belongs to a
class of methods derived from Ferrie's (1996) pioneering work.18 In brief, we began by eliminating
from consideration men who are not unique in the base-year census (1850 or 1900) on their
combination of name, birthplace, and birthyear (+/- 4 years); for example, a match would not be
attempted for a John Smith born in New York in 1820. Removing non-unique individuals reduces
the likelihood of making false matches. We then searched for each remaining man in the later-year
census (1880 or 1930), allowing for inexact matches on the basis of name and birth year. We
retained only unique matches for the analyses of occupations (i.e., matches in which an 1850 record
and an 1880 record have a unique match in the opposite census, and similarly for 1900 and 1930).
This approach incorporates several features highlighted by Bailey et al. (2019) and Abramitzky et al.
(2019a) as useful in improving match quality, such as the use of string distance measures to compare
names,19 the elimination of non-unique individuals in the base year before linkage, and the restriction
to cases in which a unique match is made between the initial and final censuses.
        Table 1 presents rates of successful linkage separately for immigrants and natives. For 1850-

18
   Our approach is most similar to the methods used by Ferrie and his coauthors in recent work such as Aizer et
al. (2016), Beach et al. (2016), and Long and Ferrie (2018). This class also includes the linkage methods of
Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson (2012, 2014).
19
   Specifically, we use the SAS function SPEDIS, which is described in detail by Gershteyn (2000). This
string distance measure is similar to the Jaro-Winkler distance but treats different types of edits differently.


                                                                                                              9
80, linkage rates are expressed relative to the base population of non-southern white males aged 18-
40 in 1850.20 Columns (2) and (5) indicate the number and fraction of men (in parentheses) who
remained after our removal of those who were not unique on linkage characteristics. Columns (3)
and (6) present the number of successful links, with the fraction of successful links expressed relative
to the unique sub-sample in parentheses (i.e., those we attempted to match) and expressed relative to
the entire base population (columns (1) and (4)) in square brackets. The linkage rates relative to the
unique sub-sample are 25.7 percent for natives and 13.7 percent for immigrants. The former is
approximately comparable to the rate of linkage relative to unique men achieved by Ferrie (1996).21
The latter is somewhat lower. The lower rate for immigrants likely reflects the large number of
immigrant arrivals after 1850, which may prevent successful links even for those who were unique in
1850. The linkage rates relative to the entire base population are 11.5 percent for natives and 5.7
percent for immigrants. These are lower than those achieved by other algorithms derived from Ferrie
(1996) in other contexts (e.g., Beach et al. 2016). But as shown in Appendix F, the linkage rates are
similar to those achieved using alternative methods described in detail by Abramitzky et al.
(2019a).22 Subsequent rows in Table 1 describe the linkage rates for 1900 to 1930, which are
somewhat higher than in the 1850-80 data.23 Two possible reasons for this improvement are the
increased diversity of birthplaces over time and, perhaps, improvement in the quality of census data.
        Several concerns arise in the use of linked census data. First, non-random selection into
linkage is common in such studies. For instance, individuals with higher human capital may be more
likely to survive and report consistent information to census enumerators, and name uniqueness may
vary by country of origin or other characteristics.24 Figure 3 compares observable characteristics in
the linked and full samples of census data. Panel 3(a) (for natives) and 3(b) (for immigrants) focus
on 1850-80 and reveal some evidence of positive selection into the linked sample, such as the over-
representation of individuals with greater 1850 wealth holdings. To address this in subsequent
analyses, we construct inverse probability weights based on probit regressions of a dummy variable




20
   We attempt to link all males regardless of age and make the restriction to 18-40 year olds afterwards.
21
   Note that Ferrie (1996) defines uniqueness relative to the target census rather than the base census.
22
   Our slightly lower link rates as compared to those using these alternative methods likely reflect the relatively
strict definition of uniqueness that we use.
23
   The second row, which describes linkage rates relative to the 1900 population, provides statistics most
comparable to those for 1850-1880, which compare to the 1850 population. The rates relative to the 1930
population, however, may be more important to consider, as we discuss below.
24
   Consistent with this concern, Appendix Tables A.1, A.2, and A.3 report rates of successful linkage for a
variety of European source countries and reveal considerable variation in the rates of successful linkage.


                                                                                                                10
for successful linkage on flexible functions of the 1850 covariates (separately by country of birth).25
The effect of these weights is to make the distribution of 1850 observables in the linked sample
match (as closely as possible) their distribution in the sample of men in 1850 who we attempted to
link. Panels 3(c) and 3(d) report similar information for the 1900-30 samples. Given the higher rates
of return migration in this period (Bandiera, Rasul, and Viarengo 2013), we weight the linked 1900-
30 immigrant sample to look like the 1930 population of immigrants, aged 44-74, who reported
arriving in the US before 1900 (rather than to resemble the 1900 sample that we attempted to link)
and similarly reweight the 1900-30 native sample to match the 1930 native population aged 44-74.26
        Second, some of the matches in the linked samples may be false positives, perhaps leading to
spuriously high estimates of the probability of changing occupations over time. From the start, we
adopted relatively strict match criteria to limit false positives with this concern in mind. Nonetheless,
in Appendix E, we repeat our analysis using subsets of the linked samples that are limited to exact
matches only; the results are qualitatively similar. Finally, results could be sensitive to some
idiosyncrasy of the linkage method. To verify that this is not the case, Appendix F repeats our results
using alternate linkage methods; again, the results are qualitatively similar.


Studying occupations to learn about labor market assimilation
        We focus on the occupational status of immigrants relative to natives. This is primarily
because the US census did not inquire about individuals' incomes until 1940, and even then it did not
cover proprietors' or farmers' incomes.27 Occupational information, on the other hand, was collected
in each census beginning in 1850, enabling our analysis of individual-level occupational changes in
both the nineteenth and the twentieth centuries in a fairly consistent manner.28 We rely on the
detailed three-digit occupational coding provided by Ruggles et al. (2015, 2019) and the Minnesota


25
   For birth countries with few observations, we estimate one regression with birth-country fixed effects.
26
   Weighting the linked 1900-30 sample to match the 1900 population of immigrants would make the (linked)
sample of stayers match the average characteristics of the combined groups of stayers and return migrants.
This is undesirable because our focus is on stayers, who are likely different from return migrants. Because
1880's census did not ascertain year of arrival, we cannot weight the 1850-80 sample in the same way as the
1900-30 sample; but the low rates of return migration in the early period mitigate our concern. We discuss the
use of 1900-based weights for the 1900-30 sample later in the paper.
27
   For this reason, the recent literature on immigrants' economic assimilation during the Age of Mass
Migration, as well as of historical socioeconomic mobility more generally, have focused on occupational status
rather than on some other measure of economic status, such as income.
28
   Similarly, the census reported wealth holdings for 1850-1870 and these data formed the basis of studies of
immigrant assimilation such as Ferrie's (1999). But because wealth is not reported in twentieth-century
censuses, we cannot use wealth-based assimilation to draw comparisons between the experiences of
immigrants in the early and late Age of Mass Migration.


                                                                                                           11
Population Center (2017). We begin by using the codes to define five broad classes of occupations--
farmer, white collar, craft, operative, and unskilled.29 Our preliminary analysis entails simple
comparisons (controlling only for age) of the shares of immigrants and natives in each occupational
category and of changes in those shares over the men's lifecycle. This approach has the advantage of
not requiring any assumptions about the relative standing of occupations beyond this broad
categorization.
        We then introduce rank measures of occupational status. The literature has often relied on an
occupational income score based on information from the 1950 census. We prefer not to use this
measure because of its temporal distance from our study period, particularly in the early portions.
Instead, we construct several alternative occupational scores. The first is based on the 1870 census
questions about real and personal wealth (Collins and Zimran 2019; Ager, Boustan, and Eriksson
2019; Craig, Eriksson, and Niemesh 2019). We use the complete-count sample of the 1870 census
(Ruggles et al. 2020) to compute average total wealth (the sum of real and personal wealth) within
each detailed (three-digit) occupational cell for men aged 30 to 65.30 This produces an occupational
wealth score that is similar in spirit to the occupational income score commonly used in studies of
historical labor markets, including immigrants' occupational assimilation. We use this score in two
ways--directly (in logarithmic form) and to compute occupational ranks.31 The ranks are expressed
relative to all non-southern white men in the US labor force (ages 18-74 with reported occupations).
Thus, for any given man, a change in rank over time depends on whether he changed occupations and
on how the occupational distribution of all men in the labor force changed.32 We prefer the rank
measure over the score itself because it is less sensitive to the specific cardinal differences of the
particular score assigned. As a robustness check, we also derive wealth scores based on age groups
within detailed occupational categories in 1870; this allows changes in scores over the lifecycle even

29
   The broad occupational categories are defined using IPUMS occ1950 codes: white collar [1,100) and [200,
500); farmer [100, 200); craft [500, 600); operative [600, 700); unskilled [700, 970]. The 1900 and 1930 data
include a significant fraction of individuals whose occupation codes are "Not Yet Classified" (occ1950 code
979). Our baseline analysis omits these individuals. In Appendix D, we classify these individuals by using the
modal classification of the NYSIIS code of their occupational string (similar to Collins and Wanamaker 2020)
and repeat the main analysis. Our results are qualitatively unaffected by the inclusion of these individuals.
30
   These wealth statistics are calculated separately for southern and non-southern men. In cases where a
region-occupation cell has fewer than 100 observations, the score is based on a broad occupational category
(e.g., white collar) rather than on the specific occupation. We depart from Collins and Zimran (2019), who
were the first to use these scores, by basing them on the complete 1870 sample rather than the 1% sample.
31
   In the case of ties (which are common due to the invariance of the score within occupational cells), we
assign each individual in a category the average rank of the group. For example, if farmers are 20 percent of
the work force and range between the 50th and 70th percentile, we assign them a rank of 0.6.
32
   This property of occupational scores and rankings has led to criticism by Inwood, Minns, and Summerfield
(2019) and Saavedra and Twinam (2020).


                                                                                                           12
for those who do not change occupations. Specifically, we compute separate scores for individuals
aged 18-40 and those aged 41-70. Since we observe individuals once when they are aged 18-40 and
once when they are aged 48-70 (setting aside allowances for differences in age in the linkage), this
approach allows changes in rank between the two censuses to also reflect life-cycle changes in
wealth holdings.33
        We create another occupational income score using information that Preston and Haines
(1991) compiled from Commissioner of Labor (1903), Douglas (1930), and Lebergott (1964). This
provides estimates of annual income by detailed occupation circa 1900.34 Preston and Haines do not
provide an estimate for farmers, so we used the 1900 Census of Agriculture to estimate average net
income for farmers based on the reported value of farm production, cost of inputs, and estimates of
in-kind income. Again, we use this measure directly (in logarithmic form) as well as to compute a
ranking, as with the 1870-based score. Unlike the 1870 wealth-based score, data are not available to
modify the wage-based score to capture changes over the lifecycle.
        Finally, we also use the two ranking schemes to create an average occupational rank, which
is the simple average of ranks based on the two occupational scores discussed above. This is our
preferred measure for making consistent comparisons across the 1850-80 and 1900-30 periods. The
main results are qualitatively insensitive to which ranking scheme is used.35
        In our analysis, our initial focus is on immigrants' "unconditional assimilation"--that is, we
ask whether the average occupational status of immigrants improved relative to that of natives over
the 30 years in which we observe each cohort, adjusting only for differences in age. This answers a
simple but fundamental question about the Age of Mass Migration, and it shows how immigrants'
and natives' relative occupational status changed as the US economy transformed into an urban and
industrial powerhouse.

33
   Dividing into these "young" and "old" age cells is a simple but effective way of addressing concerns over
different upgrading over time within occupational cells. In principle, we could create even finer cells. For
instance, we could create birthplace-specific cells. But doing so would prevent us from distinguishing between
immigrants who had been in the United States for some time from recent arrivals, thus eliminating one of the
gains from the use of panel data.
34
   The Preston and Haines (1991) occupation codes do not correspond directly to those in the current IPUMS
files (occ1950). Therefore, we merged the "old" Preston-Haines public use microdata sample
(https://usa.ipums.org/usa/samples.shtml), which includes both the Preston-Haines occupation codes and the
occ1950 census codes, with the Preston-Haines income data, and then collapsed the data to calculate averages
for occ1950 cells. We thank Laura Salisbury for providing helpful insight on this issue.
35
   The correlation of the two ranking schemes depends on the year in which it is calculated. In our linked
samples, the correlations between the ranks of the two measures are (in chronological order) 0.49, 0.44, 0.72,
and 0.56. These correlations increase when excluding farmers and become (again in chronological order) 0.74,
0.80, 0.85, and 0.79. The difficulty in finding the appropriate ranking for farmers is common to the use of
occupational scores, and it is unsurprising that the precise ranking of this large group is important.


                                                                                                           13
        Specifically, we estimate a series of regressions of the form
                                         !" = " ! + (!" ) + !"                                                     (1)
where !" is an outcome for individual i in year t, ! is an indicator for foreign birth, and (!" ) is a
quartic function in individual i's age in year t. We first describe differences in occupational
categories, then in occupational scores and ranks, and finally differences in some rough measures of
human capital. Although human capital is an input into labor market outcomes, we provide the
separate analysis for a direct view on differences in basic skills that workers bring to the market,
including the ability to speak English, which has long been central to discussions of immigrants'
assimilation (e.g., US Congress 1911, Borjas 2015).
        We estimate equation (1) separately for each outcome for each census year t. The coefficient
" represents the difference in occupational status between natives and immigrants in that census
year, conditional on age. To measure changes between census years for each cohort, we estimate
equation (1) twice by seemingly unrelated regression, once using data from the early census year and
once using data from the later census year. A measure of assimilation is then given by computing
" -  "#$% .36 The difference will be positive in cases where immigrants increased average levels of
y relative to natives over time, and indicates assimilation in cases where immigrants were initially
behind natives.37
        We also use estimates of equation (1) for the five occupational category measures to compute
dissimilarity indices between the two groups according to
                                                   1
                                              " = / 12 1,                                                   (2)
                                                   2 "&
                                                      &

where 2"& is the estimated coefficient from estimating equation (1) with occupational category
indicator k as the dependent variable. This statistic is analogous to the standard dissimilarity index
(Duncan and Duncan 1955), but the difference in the fraction of each nativity group in each
occupational category is estimated while controlling for the different age structures of the two
groups.38
        After characterizing assimilation patterns using these measures, we compare immigrants'

36
   We use seemingly unrelated regression because the estimates of immigrant-native differences will be
correlated for a linked sample across its two years (i.e., !" and !"#$% will be correlated). Seemingly unrelated
regression adjusts standard errors for this and enables proper hypothesis testing of " - "#$% .
37
   For instance, if immigrants start off with a lower occupational rank than natives, then a positive value of
" - "#$% indicates that this gap closed over thirty years, implying that immigrants were more like natives (so
long as it is not large enough for immigrants to overtake natives).
38
   Estimating the five coefficients by seemingly unrelated regression enables us to compute the standard error
of " by the delta method.


                                                                                                             14
occupational upgrading to that of natives who start in occupations with similar economic status by
estimating equations of the form
                           !" - !"#$% = ! + !"#$% + (!"#$% ) + !                                            (3)
where !" - !"#$% is the change in worker's average rank measure between the two periods, !"#$%
is the worker's rank in the initial year based on the detailed occupational coding and scoring
described above, and all other notation is the same as in equation (1). The coefficient  measures the
average upgrading of immigrants relative to natives, conditional on the worker's initial occupational
status and a quartic in age. These "conditional assimilation" results enable us to determine whether
changes in assimilation (or lack thereof) documented by estimating equation (1) reflect changes in
lifetime mobility or in initial occupational distributions.


Summary statistics
        Table 2 presents summary statistics for broad occupational categories and rank, measures of
human capital, and indicators for region of residence and urban status. The indicators for residence
confirm well known patterns, such as the over-representation of immigrants in urban areas and the
Northeast. Immigrants were less literate than natives and, not surprisingly, less likely to speak
English in 1900 (this cannot be observed in earlier censuses).
        Figure 4 depicts the broad occupational distributions for men in the linked samples for easier
comparison. In 1850, immigrants and natives had quite different occupational distributions; the
modal immigrant held an unskilled job and the modal native was a farmer. Immigrants were more
likely than natives to hold craft or operative occupations, whereas natives were more likely to hold
white-collar occupations. In 1880, the occupational distributions retained these properties, but both
immigrants and natives experienced considerable movement into the "farmer" category over their
lifecycles (often upgrading from farm laborer).
        In contrast, moving to the later cohorts, in 1900 the modal immigrant and native both held
unskilled occupations, though by 1930 both groups had reduced their presence in unskilled work.
Immigrants were over-represented in craft and operative labor, while natives remained over-
represented in white collar and farming occupations. Comparing the 1850 and 1900 occupational
distributions highlights important changes in the American economy that will have implications later
in our analysis, especially the decline in the share of natives who were farmers and the rise in
unskilled occupations.




                                                                                                       15
4. Unconditional gains in occupational status in the 19th and 20th centuries
           Table 3 presents estimates of equation (1) for broad occupational categories. Columns (1)
and (2) pertain to 1850 and 1880, respectively, and column (3) presents the measure of assimilation
(" -  "#$% ). Columns (4) to (6) present analogous figures for the 1900-30 cohort. The starkest
evidence of convergence in occupations between immigrants and natives comes from the first two
rows for the 1850-80 cohort. In 1850, the foreign born were 23.8 percentage points more likely to
hold an unskilled occupation than were natives; by 1880, the gap had shrunk to only 12.8 percentage
points. Meanwhile, natives were 27.8 percentage points more likely than immigrants to be farmers in
1850, but by 1880 the gap had declined to 18.7 percentage points. Gaps in white collar and craft
occupations declined only slightly, and the gap slightly widened in operative jobs.
           In 1900-30, natives and immigrants began with a statistically indistinguishable probability of
holding an unskilled occupation (conditional on age);39 by 1930, however, the foreign-born were 4.6
percentage points more likely to hold an unskilled occupation. Immigrants narrowed the gap in
farming, but only by a small amount (from 10.7 to 8.4 percentage points), and they did not narrow
the gap in white-collar work. Overall, Table 3 reinforces the visual impression from Figure 4, in that
the 1850-80 period was characterized by wide differences in initial broad occupations and strong
convergence, whereas the 1900-30 period was characterized by comparatively smaller initial
differences and limited convergence.
           In Table 4, we summarize the occupational category differences in the form of the
dissimilarity index computed as in equation (2). Specifically, the table reports dissimilarity indices
for each year based on the five major categories defined above and on the estimates of Table 3. The
statistic 0.31 for 1850 in column (1) indicates that 31 percent of immigrants would have to change
their occupational category to match the occupational distribution of natives, or vice versa. The
dissimilarity index declined from 0.31 to 0.21 between 1850 and 1880, reflecting the considerable
occupational assimilation visible in Figure 4 and Table 3. On the other hand, although there is a
slight decline in the index between 1900 and 1930, from 0.15 to 0.13, it is much smaller than in the
earlier period, supporting the conclusion from Table 3 of limited assimilation in the twentieth
century. It is notable, however, that the index in 1900 is already at a much lower level than for the
earlier cohort in 1850 or even in 1880--the differences between natives and immigrants had greatly
compressed. Indeed, it is plausible that the rising tide of calls for immigration restriction reflected



39
     Note that the adjustment for age eliminates the 1900 difference in unskilled work that appears in Figure 4.


                                                                                                                   16
the more direct contact and competition between immigrants and natives in the labor market (Goldin
1994; Hatton and Williamson 1998).
          It is possible that the broad occupational categories examined to this point obscure important
variation within each category; moreover, such broad categories provide a limited sense of whether
men are moving up the occupational ladder with time. Therefore, we incorporate more detailed
occupational definitions into the analysis and rank occupations based on what is known about the
average economic status of men holding them. Table 5 repeats the estimation of equation (1) for the
occupational income scoring and ranking schemes described above. Column (3) again reports
changes in immigrants' status relative to natives over time, with positive numbers indicating that
immigrants advanced faster than natives. Substantial assimilation for the 1850-80 cohort is again
evident, with the immigrant-native gap in rank (averaged over the two ranking methods) closing by
nearly 7 percentiles; using the 1870 wealth-based scoring, the gap narrows by 8 percentiles. All
methods of scoring and ranking indicate substantial labor market assimilation in the 1850-80 dataset.
In contrast, for the 1900-30 cohort, there is evidence of slightly widening gaps in status using every
metric.
          Table 6 estimates equation (1) for various measures of human capital for years in which they
are available. The measures include literacy (not available in the 1880 complete count records),
numeracy (an indicator for reporting an age not divisible by five), and whether the individual speaks
English (available only for 1900 and 1930). Data limitations make it difficult to say much about
changes for the 1850-80 cohort, though age heaping becomes slightly more prevalent for immigrants
compared to natives. For the 1900-30 cohort, it is notable that the English-speaking and literacy gaps
both narrowed; by 1930, the foreign-born in our sample were only 1.6 percentage points less likely
than natives to speak English (though, of course, we have no metric for fluency). This is particularly
interesting because the acquisition of language skills is often hypothesized to be a mechanism for
immigrants' improvement in labor market outcomes (Bleakley and Chin 2010; c.f., Ward 2020); in
the early twentieth century, the improvement in immigrants' language skills did not translate into
overall gains relative to natives in occupational status.


Robustness
          In Appendix B, we rule out several concerns regarding the robustness of the results described
above. One possible concern is that the continued assimilation of second-generation immigrants in
the 1900-30 sample (i.e., US-born children of immigrants, who would be included as natives) might
lead to an understatement of the relative gains of immigrants. We repeat our main results comparing


                                                                                                      17
immigrants to natives with native fathers and find that our results are qualitatively unchanged.
Another concern is that lack of relative progress for immigrants in the 1900-30 sample might be due
to including immigrants who had been in the United States for a long time and who had already
experienced a period of catching up before first being observed in 1900. By using the information in
1900's census on each immigrant's year of arrival, we can limit the sample to those who arrived
between 1890 and 1900.40 Again, our results are qualitatively unchanged. Next, we repeat our main
results omitting from the sample men aged 31-40 in the initial census year (1850 or 1900) to address
the possibility that selective mortality that differed between immigrants and natives may have an
impact on our results. We find a somewhat better starting position for immigrants relative to natives
for 1900-1930 and somewhat less assimilation, but the differences are small and our results are
qualitatively unchanged. Finally, we use occupational scores that are based on the wealth holdings of
younger (18-40) and older (41-70) men within each detailed occupational category in the 1870. For
example, if the age-wealth profile were steeper among farmers than other occupational categories,
this approach would allow that fact to register in the assignment of scores and ranks. The results are
similar to those from our baseline analysis.41


5. Conditional gains in occupational status in the 19th and 20th centuries
        The changing pattern of unconditional upgrading between the early and later cohorts in the
Age of Mass Migration raises the question of whether the results primarily reflect changes in natives'
or immigrants' occupational mobility or, alternatively, changes in their initial distribution of
occupations, each of which had a different likelihood of leading to upward mobility. To better
understand the empirical underpinnings of the unconditional results, we estimate equation (3),
presenting results in Table 7.
        Columns (1) and (2) of Table 7, which omit the initial rank variable (!" ) from the right-hand
side, simply reiterate the findings from section 4--that immigrants achieved greater occupational
upgrading than natives in the period 1850-80 but somewhat slower upgrading in the period 1900-
30--but provide a benchmark to which subsequent estimates can be compared. Columns (3) and (4)

40
   The average immigrant in our 1900-30 sample had been in the United States for 13 years in 1900 (Table 2).
It is not possible to do something similar with the 1850-80 sample because neither of those censuses inquired
about year of arrival in the US.
41
   Although this changes only the 1870-based scores (and not in the occupational category definition), using
these scores might lead to different results for other measures of status, such as occupational category, because
these scores factor into the creation of weights to correct for selection into linkage. It is notable that not only
the results based on the average occupational rank (which includes the non-age-varying 1900-based rank), but
also the ranks based only on 1870 show very similar results to those of the main text.


                                                                                                                18
add the control for initial rank. From this perspective immigrants' upgrading relative to natives was
remarkably similar--and negative--over the two periods within the Age of Mass Migration. If
anything, immigrants in the later period (-0.03) fared slightly better than in the earlier period (-0.04).
In both periods immigrants upgraded less than natives who were comparably positioned in the base
year. This runs contrary to the notion that immigrants were initially under-placed in the labor market
relative to their underlying skills or productivity but gradually erased that disadvantage with the
acquisition of US-specific experience. It also implies that immigrant-native differences in upgrading
conditional on initial occupation tended to dampen overall immigrant-native convergence in the
nineteenth century.
        Figure 5 provides a simple visual summary of the immigrant-native differences in upgrading
conditional on initial occupational status. In this figure, we group men by broad categories for their
base-year job, but changes in status are calculated using the detailed occupational information. The
figure plots the average change in rank for men in each (broad) occupational category, expressed
relative to that for natives who held white-collar occupations in the base year; that is, zero
corresponds to the average upgrading for natives who were initially in a white-collar occupation.
Three patterns stand out. First, average upgrading from the "unskilled" category tends to be larger
than from other categories. Second, immigrants experienced less occupational upgrading than
natives in almost every case, especially in the 1850-80 cohort. Third, relative to white-collar natives,
upgrading throughout the occupational distribution was greater in 1850-80 than in 1900-30.
        We can also make comparisons across the early and later periods within the Age of Mass
Migration. In column (5) of Table 7, we re-weight the 1850-80 sample so that its initial occupational
distribution matches that of the 1900-30 sample for natives and immigrants separately, but retaining
the 1850-80-specific occupational upgrading. Column (6) weights the 1900-30 sample to match the
occupational distribution of the 1850-80 sample. Column (5) shows that, had 1850-80 immigrants
and natives had the 1900-30 occupational distributions, the immigrant-native gap would have
widened by 4.4 percentiles rather than narrowing by 6.9 percentiles between 1850 and 1880.
Similarly, if the 1900-30 sample is weighted by the 1850 distributions of occupations (column 6), the
immigrant-native gap would have narrowed by 8.2 percentiles after 1900 instead of widening by 1.8
percentiles. In this counterfactual sense, the change in occupational distributions between 1850 and
1900 strongly influenced whether convergence occurred. The changing initial occupational
distributions are thus proximately responsible for the different immigrant assimilation patterns that




                                                                                                        19
we observe between the two periods.42
        The transformation of the US economy over the nineteenth century underpins these results.
Most importantly, young native workers experienced a large change in their occupational
distribution; the age-adjusted dissimilarity index between natives' 1850 and 1900 occupational
distributions is 0.26, a difference almost as large as that between natives and immigrants in 1850 (in
Table 4). Immigrants, on the other hand, had a relatively small change in occupational distributions
between 1850 and 1900; the age-adjusted dissimilarity index is only 0.08. The dramatic change in
the initial occupational distribution of natives was driven primarily by a shift of native labor out of
farming and into unskilled labor. Whereas 41.8 percent of natives were farmers in 1850's linked
sample, only 18.2 percent were farmers in 1900's linked sample (a shift of 23.6 percentage points);
conversely, whereas only 15.2 percent of natives were in unskilled occupations in 1850's sample,
38.9 percent were by 1900 (an almost identical shift of 23.7 percentage points).
        Taken together, the results of sections 4 and 5 indicate that prevalent popular (e.g., Smith et
al. 2018, Martin 2019) and academic (Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson 2014; Ferrie 1999) views
of European immigrants' assimilation during the Age of Mass Migration are incomplete. In section
4, we showed that immigrants' assimilation patterns changed dramatically over the Age of Mass
Migration, with immigrants in the nineteenth century experiencing substantial convergence over time
in occupational status relative to natives, unlike immigrants in the early twentieth century. But while
the "catching up" of immigrants in the nineteenth century was real and contrasts with the conclusions
for the Age of Mass Migration based solely on twentieth-century data, it was not the product of
immigrants' superior performance relative to comparably placed natives, nor was it the product of
"old" source immigrants faring better than "new" source immigrants, as we show below. Rather, the
nineteenth-century immigrants were disproportionately concentrated in jobs from which many white
workers (whether native, immigrant, new source or old) were likely to upgrade during their lifetime.
Even though immigrants experienced less upgrading than natives in the same initial occupation,
immigrants' initial concentration in low-status (but high-upgrading) occupations led to greater
average occupational gains. The shift of natives into these higher-upgrading occupations by 1900,
combined with natives' greater upgrades conditional on initial status, led to a divergence in
occupational status over time for the later cohort. Although it might be tempting to suppose that
being concentrated toward the bottom of the occupational distribution left nineteenth-century

42
   The results of columns (5) and (6) also imply that if the initial occupation-specific upgrading were
interchanged between periods, this would be insufficient to reverse the results of assimilation in the nineteenth
century and slight divergence in the twentieth century.


                                                                                                               20
immigrants with upward mobility relative to white natives as the only possibility, the findings are not
the result of processes that are mechanical or inevitable. In particular, the experience of black
Americans after the Civil War shows that upward mobility from the bottom of the occupational
distribution could be very slow (Collins and Wanamaker 2020).


Robustness
          As with the results of section 4, there is concern that these results might be affected by the
continued assimilation of second-generation immigrants, by different time spent in the United States,
or by differences in selective mortality. As with the results of section 4, we verify robustness to
these concerns in Appendix B.


6. Alternative explanations for differences in immigrant assimilation over cohorts
          In this section, we evaluate several alternative explanations for the changing patterns of
occupational upgrading that we documented above and interpreted in light of changes in the US
economy during its structural transformation. Specifically, we consider whether changing source
countries, changing immigrant selection, changing patterns of return migration, or changing
correlates of upward mobility (e.g., literacy or internal migration) might have driven the differences
in upgrading between the 1850-80 cohort and the 1900-30 cohort. We find that none of these can
account for the changes observed.


Changing source countries
          Influential commentators and policymakers in the early twentieth century lamented the
arrival of "new" immigrants and questioned their ability to adapt to life in the United States. This
view framed the "immigration problem" that the literacy test and then the quota system were
intended to solve, but at the time (and until now) data did not exist to study the issue carefully. With
linked census data, a simple way to test whether "old" and "new" source immigrants fared differently
in terms of occupational upgrading in the early twentieth century is to include an indicator variable
for "old source" in the upgrading regression, as shown in column (7) of Table 7.43 The coefficient is
small, negative, and statistically insignificant. This implies that on average there was no meaningful
difference between the groups in average upgrading and, therefore, that changes in immigrants'
source countries cannot account for the lack of upgrading relative to natives in the 1900-30 period.


43
     Table 2 shows that "old source" immigrants made up 42 percent of all immigrants in our 1900-30 sample.


                                                                                                              21
A subtler question is whether "old" immigrants fared better than "new" immigrants conditional on
initial occupational rank. In column (8) of Table 7, there is some evidence of better performance for
the "old" immigrants, but it is a small difference (approximately 1 percentile), and the sum of the
coefficients on immigrant and old source still implies that on average "old" source immigrants fell
behind natives during the 1900-30 period.
        We provide more detailed information on the relative outcomes for immigrants from different
source countries in Figures 6 (occupational rank) and 7 (unskilled occupations), which present
estimates of equation (1) with separate " coefficients for selected countries. The Irish are of
particular interest given the magnitude of their migration and their relatively low initial occupational
status (see also Collins and Zimran 2019). Importantly, whereas the Irish in 1850-80 showed strong
evidence of "catching up" to natives, the Irish in 1900-30 did not. The patterns for German and
British immigrants, though less stark, are consistent: they upgraded relative to natives in 1850-80, but
they fell behind slightly in 1900-30. Again, this undermines the view that the main difference
between the early and later period was the source of immigrants.
        While we conclude that changes in source country cannot account for the differences in
average occupational upgrading over the two immigrant cohorts we analyze, there is some important
heterogeneity by source country that merits closer examination in future research. Two of the largest
"new" immigrant groups were from Italy and Russia (60 percent of whom reported Yiddish or
Hebrew as their mother tongue). In Figures 6(b) and 7(b) (for 1900-30), the Italians have the among
the lowest starting occupational status and the Russians have the highest. In Figure 6(b), however,
neither group manages to keep pace with natives in terms of average upgrading (i.e., the 1930 bar
declines relative to the 1900 bar),44 with a similar result in Figure 7(b).
        Given section 5's emphasis on the quantitative importance of upgrading by men who started
in the unskilled category, it may seem surprising that the Irish and Italians, who were relatively
concentrated in unskilled work in 1900, failed to narrow the gap in average occupational status by
1930. Instead, the gap widened by 2 percentiles for the Irish and by 5 percentiles for the Italians
(Appendix Table C.1). In part, this is because natives upgraded more than the Irish and Italians from
all initial job categories after 1900,45 but it is also because the Irish and Italian relative concentration
in unskilled work was small by 1900 (around 6 percentage points more than natives). The


44
   Appendix Figure C.1 shows that differences are also apparent conditional on initial occupational group, with
Russians upgrading more than natives who start in the same broad occupation (and better than other immigrant
groups) and Italians upgrading less (and worse than other immigrant groups).
45
   This can be seen in Appendix Figure C.1.


                                                                                                            22
importance of the changes in occupational distributions between 1850 and 1900 can be seen in a
counterfactual that is specific to Irish and Italian immigrants (Appendix Table C.1): if the 1900-30
Irish and Italian immigrants are re-weighted to match the 1850 occupational distribution of all
immigrants, while the 1900-30 natives are re-weighted to match the 1850 distribution of natives, the
Irish would have closed the gap relative to natives by 5.6 percentiles and the Italians by 2.2
percentiles.


Changing return migration
        Because we focus on individuals who could be linked between US censuses, return migrants
are not included in our analysis. Return migration likely increased as transportation costs fell,46 and
therefore selective return migration might complicate comparisons of the earlier and later samples
(Greenwood and Ward 2015; Ward 2017; Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson 2019). For instance, it
may be the case that the share of immigrant stayers (in the linked sample) who were in unskilled jobs
in 1900 was much lower than the share of all immigrants in such jobs in 1900. Because upgrading
from unskilled jobs tended to be greater than from other categories (for stayers and natives), this
might cause us to miss some of the immigrants' upgrading because they left the United States before
we observed them a second time.
        To test whether differential rates of return migration between the two periods might be
responsible for our results, we reweighted the 1900-30 sample based on the 1900 immigrant
population (rather than the 1930 immigrant population, as described in section 3). In practice, this
tends to "upweight" immigrant men in the linked sample who started in unskilled occupations
relative to our baseline analyses. This implies (by construction) a greater initial gap in occupational
status between natives and immigrants in 1900--the coefficient of estimating equation (1) for the
average occupational rank using 1900 weights is -0.052 (Appendix Table C.2), as opposed to -0.015
when using the 1930 weights (Table 5). Of course, we cannot see how much the return migrants
upgraded while they were in the United States, let alone how much they would have upgraded if they
had stayed until 1930. But if we assume that they would have fared the same as (or not much better
than) immigrant stayers who held similar occupations in 1900, then we can use the reweighted
sample to estimate counterfactual upgrading. From this perspective, by all metrics, immigrants'
upgrading relative to natives from 1900 to 1930 would have been very small even when positive--a
narrowing by 0.7 percentiles (Appendix Table C.2) as opposed to our benchmark estimate of a

46
  There is evidence of high rates of return migration in the early twentieth century (Bandiera, Rasul, and
Viarengo 2013). There is less evidence on return migration in the nineteenth century, but it was likely lower.


                                                                                                             23
widening by 2.0 percentiles (Table 5) and the 1850-80 narrowing of 6.9 percentiles.


Changing migrant selection
        Another potential explanation for the difference in upgrading between 1850-80 and 1900-30
is that there was deterioration in migrant selection over time, independent of the source country
hypothesis discussed above. In other words, the greater upward mobility of immigrants in the
nineteenth century may have reflected superior unobservable quality relative to the later period.
Consistent with this hypothesis, Collins and Zimran (2019) provide suggestive evidence of positive
selection among Irish migrants prior to 1850, while Connor (2019) documents neutral selection in the
later nineteenth century. In general, a Roy-Borjas model would predict that in countries that initially
sent positively selected migrants, declining migration costs or growing migrant networks would tend
to select less skilled workers into migration at the margin.47
        It is difficult to measure changes in migrant selection from source countries' historical census
data (Spitzer and Zimran 2018). Nonetheless, there is strong evidence against the hypothesis that
changing migrant selection drives our results. More negative selection of immigrants in the twentieth
century could affect their observed upgrading in two potential ways: (1) the initial occupational
distribution could be more unskilled, and (2) upgrading from specific occupations could be weaker.
First, if more negative selection in the twentieth century worsened the initial occupational status of
immigrants relative to natives (compared to what it would have been with constant migrant
selection), this would tend to drive immigrants into occupations from which workers experienced
greater upgrading. That is, we would expect more, not less, upgrading in 1900-30 if this mechanism
were important. Second, we can assess a counterfactual to rule out the possibility that changes in
occupational upgrading conditional on initial status are quantitatively important to the results. As
shown in column (5) of Table 7, weighting the nineteenth-century conditional upgrading
performance by the 1900 occupational distributions effectively gives the 1900-30 cohort the same
conditional upgrading performance as the earlier and perhaps more positively selected cohort. This
counterfactual estimate still predicts a divergence in occupational status between immigrants and
natives in the 1900-30 period.




47
  In principle, declining transport costs might have led to such a change, but there is little evidence that such a
change took place after the middle of the nineteenth century (e.g., Keeling 2012). Another reason for such a
change might be expanding networks of prior migrants (e.g., McKenzie and Rapoport 2010).


                                                                                                                24
Changing correlates of upward mobility
        Finally, it is possible that personal or location-specific characteristics that were associated
with upward mobility changed between the earlier and later cohorts. Columns (1) to (4) of Table 8
estimate augmented versions of equation (3), including individual-level variables for 1850 literacy,
urban residence, and county-of-residence fixed effects. These initial conditions are not random, and
so we make no causal claims regarding their relationship with occupational changes. Instead, we are
interested in whether including the additional controls diminishes the difference in immigrants'
average upgrading between 1850-80 and 1900-30 cohorts.
        Columns (1) and (2) measure immigrants' gains relative to natives without controlling for
initial occupational status but with the additional covariates mentioned above. As before, the 1850-
80 period is characterized by a sizable amount of upgrading for immigrants (nearly 8 percentiles),
whereas 1900-30 is characterized by a smaller (but now positive) amount of immigrant upgrading
(just under 2 percentiles). Also as before, columns (3) and (4), which control for initial occupational
rank, indicate that immigrants upgraded less than natives who started in similarly ranked
occupations. In sum, the upgrading patterns described in sections 4 and 5 are fairly robust to the
controls for base-year observables: the 1850-80 cohort still has significantly stronger upgrading than
the 1900-30 cohort, and immigrants in both cohorts fail to keep pace with similarly situated natives.
        In columns (5) to (8), we add covariates for whether an individual moved to a new county
between the initial and final year, for whether such a move was to an urban area, and indicators for
the county of residence in the final year. These are "bad controls" in that they may go hand-in-hand
with occupational changes, but their inclusion may reveal whether changing patterns of geographic
mobility underpin the results of sections 4 and 5 (e.g., if immigrants' gains in the 1850-80 period
were strongly tied to internal migration, the coefficient on immigrant in column 5 may diminish).48
In practice, however, the main findings regarding immigrant assimilation are essentially unchanged
in columns (5) to (8); the coefficients on immigrant are very similar to those in columns (1) to (4).


7. Conclusions
        The availability of complete-count census datasets and the ability to link records across those
datasets have enabled scholars to revisit fundamental questions about the first era of mass
immigration to the United States. One of those questions pertains to immigrants' labor market
outcomes, specifically whether immigrants improved their economic status relative to natives as they

48
 Including indicators for destination county is done in the intergenerational mobility literature to determine
whether characteristics of the destination are responsible for findings regarding upgrading (Tan 2019).


                                                                                                                 25
gained experience in the US labor market. Although a clearer picture of migrant assimilation in the
twentieth century has recently emerged as a result of these data advances, the experience of earlier
migrant cohorts is comparatively uncharted territory. In this paper, we provide a more complete
view of the Age of Mass Migration by encompassing both the era's early and later decades and
providing consistent comparisons of immigrants who arrived at different times and from different
sources. We do this by creating new datasets of linked census records for men between the censuses
of 1850 and 1880 and between the censuses of 1900 and 1930.
        From a contemporary perspective, at a time when immigration policy is again at the forefront
of political discourse, this paper's investigation is valuable because many Americans have strongly
held views about the experiences of European immigrants in the Age of Mass Migration and what
they imply about appropriate policy today (Smith et al. 2018; Martin 2019). Anecdotes, family lore,
and wishful thinking have tended to predominate over systematic evidence in forming and sustaining
those views of American history. We offer here new data and analyses that illuminate the Age of
Mass Migration and challenge the notion that European immigrants simply "worked their way up"
the economic ladder in America.
        Our analysis arrives at two main conclusions, each with important implications for
understanding the long history of immigration in the United States. The first is that European
immigrants substantially upgraded their occupational status relative to natives in the nineteenth
century, but not in the early twentieth century. The second main conclusion is that the difference in
immigrants' upgrading between the early and later decades of the Age of Mass Migration was not
rooted in the changing composition of immigrant source countries. Rather, we show that the answer
lies in the collapsing differences in occupational distributions between immigrants and natives over
time, which in turn reflects the structural transformation of the US economy. In 1900, many more
young native men held unskilled occupations than in 1850. Upgrading from unskilled occupations
was more common than from other occupations for both immigrants and natives; moreover, natives'
had a consistent advantage in upgrading conditional on initial occupation. Thus, as young
immigrants' and natives' initial occupational distributions became more similar between 1850 and
1900, immigrants' likelihood of advancing relative to natives eroded. In this sense, the mid-
nineteenth-century immigrants' "catching up" to natives was due primarily to the early timing of
their arrival, not to productive advantages associated with their home countries or personal
characteristics.




                                                                                                       26
References
Abramitzky, Ran and Leah Platt Boustan (2017). "Immigration in American Economic History."
Journal of Economic Literature 55:4, pp. 1311-1345.
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson (2012). "Europe's Tired, Poor,
Huddled Masses: Self-Selection and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration." American
Economic Review 102:5, pp. 1832-1856.
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson (2014). "A Nation of Immigrants:
Assimilation and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration." Journal of Political Economy
122:3, pp. 467­506.
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson (2019). "To the New World and Back
Again: Return Migrants in the Age of Mass Migration." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 72:2,
pp. 300-322.
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, Katherine Eriksson, James J. Feigenbaum, and Santiago Pérez
(2019a). "Automated Linking of Historical Data." Journal of Economic Literature Forthcoming.
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, Elisa Jácome, and Santiago Pérez (2019b). "Intergenerational
Mobility of Immigrants in the US over Two Centuries." NBER Working Paper 26408.
Ager, Philipp, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson (2019). "The Intergenerational Effects of
a Large Wealth Shock: White Southerners After the Civil War." NBER Working Paper 25700.
Aizer, Anna, Shari Eli, Joseph Ferrie, and Adriana Lleras-Muney (2016). "The Long-Run Impacts of
Cash Transfers to Poor Families." American Economic Review 106:4, pp. 935-971.
Alsan, Marcella, Katherine Eriksson, and Gregory Niemesh (2019). "The Rise and Fall of the Know-
Nothing Party." Mimeo., Miami University.
Anbinder, Tyler (1992). Nativism and Slavery: The Northern Know Nothings and the Politics of the
1850s. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bailey, Martha, Connor Cole, Morgan Henderson, and Catherine Massey (2019). "How Well Do
Automated Methods Perform in Historical Samples? Evidence from New Ground Truth." Journal of
Economic Literature Forthcoming.
Bandiera, Oriana, Imran Rasul, and Martina Viarengo (2013). "The Making of Modern America:
Migratory Flows in the Age of Mass Migration." Journal of Development Economics 102, pp. 23-47.
Barde, Robert, Susan B. Carter, and Richard Sutch (2006). "Table Ad106-120: Immigrants, by
country of last residence--Europe, 1820-1997." In Historical Statistics of the United States. Susan B.
Carter, Scott Sigmund Gardner, Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olmstead, Richard Sutch, and Gavin
Wright (eds.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 1.560-1.563.
Beach, Brian, Joseph P. Ferrie, Martin Saavedra, and Werner Troesken (2016). "Typhoid Fever,
Water Quality, and Human Capital Formation." Journal of Economic History 76:1, pp. 41-75.
Benton-Cohen, Katherine (2018). Inventing the Immigration Problem: The Dillingham Commission
and Its Legacy. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Blau, Francine (1980). "Immigration and Labor Earnings in Early Twentieth Century America."
Research in Population Economics 2, pp. 21-41.
Bleakley, Hoyt and Aimee Chin (2010). "Age at Arrival, English Proficiency, and Social
Assimilation among US Immigrants." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2:1, pp. 165-


                                                                                                   27
192.
Borjas, George J. (1985). "Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality, and the Earnings of
Immigrants." Journal of Labor Economics 3:4, pp. 463-489.
Borjas, George J. (2014). Immigration Economics. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Borjas, George J. (2015). "The Slowdown in the Economic Assimilation of Immigrants: Aging and
Cohort Effects Revisited Again." Journal of Human Capital 9:4, pp. 483-517.
Card, David (2005). "Is the New Immigration Really So Bad?" Economic Journal 115, pp. F300-
F323.
Cassidy, Hugh (2019). "Occupational Attainment of Natives and Immigrants: A Cross-Cohort
Analysis." Journal of Human Capital, 13:3, pp. 375-409.
Chiswick, Barry R. (1978). "The Effect of Americanization on the Earnings of Foreign-born Men."
Journal of Political Economy 86:5, pp. 897-921.
Collins, William J. and Marianne H. Wanamaker (2020). "African American Intergenerational
Mobility since 1880." NBER Working Paper 23395.
Collins, William J. and Ariell Zimran (2019). "The Economic Assimilation of Irish Famine Migrants
to the United States." Explorations in Economic History 74, 101302.
Commissioner-General of Immigration (1903). Annual Report of the Commissioner-General of
Immigration for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 1903. Washington: Government Printing Office.
Commissioner of Labor (1903). Eighteenth Annual Report of the Commissioner of Labor.
Washington: Government Printing Office.
Connor, Dylan S. (2019). "The Cream of the Crop? Geography, Networks, and Irish Migrant
Selection in the Age of Mass Migration." Journal of Economic History 79:1, pp. 139-175.
Craig, Jacqueline, Katherine Eriksson, and Gregory T. Niemesh (2019). "Marriage and the
Intergenerational Mobility of Women: Evidence from Marriage Certificates 1950-1910." Mimeo.,
Miami University.
Douglas, Paul H. (1919). "Is the New Immigration More Unskilled than the Old?" Publications of
the American Statistical Association 16, pp. 393-403.
Douglas, Paul H. (1930). Real Wages in the United States, 1890-1926. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Duncan, Otis Dudley and Beverly Duncan (1955). "A Methodological Analysis of Segregation
Indexes." American Sociological Review 20:2, pp. 210-217.
Eichengreen, Barry and Henry A. Gemery (1986). "The Earnings of Skilled and Unskilled
Immigrants at the End of the Nineteenth Century." Journal of Economic History 46:2, pp. 441-454.
Ferrie, Joseph P. (1994). "The Wealth Accumulation of Antebellum European Immigrants to the US,
1840­60." Journal of Economic History 54:1, pp. 1­33.
Ferrie, Joseph P. (1995). "Up and Out or Down and Out? Immigrant Mobility in the Antebellum
United States." Journal of Interdisciplinary History 26:1, pp. 33­55.
Ferrie, Joseph P. (1996). "A New Sample of Males Linked from the Public Use Microdata Sample of
the 1850 US Federal Census of Population to the 1860 US Federal Census Manuscript Schedules."
Historical Methods 29:4, pp. 141-156.



                                                                                                 28
Ferrie, Joseph P. (1997). "The Entry into the US Labor Market of Antebellum European Immigrants,
1840­1860." Explorations in Economic History 34, pp. 295­330.
Ferrie, Joseph P. (1999). Yankeys Now: Immigrants in the Antebellum United States, 1840­1860. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Fisher, Irving (1921). "Impending Problems of Eugenics." Scientific Monthly XIII (September):
214-231.
Gershteyn, Yefim (2000). "Use of SPEDIS Function in Finding Specific Values." Proceedings of the
Twenty-fifth Annual SAS Users Group International Conference, Indianapolis.
Goldin, Claudia (1990). Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American Women.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Goldin, Claudia (1994). "The Political Economy of Immigration Restriction in the United States,
1890 to 1921." In The Regulated Economy: A Historical Approach to Political Economy. Claudia
Goldin and Gary D. Libecap (eds.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 223-258.
Gould, John D. (1980). "European Inter-continental Emigration: The Role of `Diffusion' and
`Feedback.'" Journal of European Economic History 9:2, pp. 267-315.
Greenwood, Michael J. and Zach Ward (2015). "Immigration Quotas, World War I, and Emigrant
Flows from the United States in the Early 20th Century." Explorations in Economic History 55, pp.
76-96.
Haines, Michael R. and Richard Sutch (2006). "Table Aa6-8: Population: 1790-2000 [Annual
Estimates]." In Historical Statistics of the United States. Susan B. Carter, Scott Sigmund Gardner,
Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olmstead, Richard Sutch, and Gavin Wright (eds.). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 1.28-1.30.
Hanes, Christopher (1996). "Immigrants' Relative Rate of Wage Growth in the Late 19th Century."
Explorations in Economic History 33, pp. 35-64.
Hannon, Joan U. (1982). "Ethnic Discrimination in a Nineteenth Century Mining District: Michigan
Copper Mines 1888." Explorations in Economic History 19, pp. 28-50.
Hatton, Timothy J. (1997). "The Immigrant Assimilation Puzzle in Late Nineteenth-Century
America." Journal of Economic History 57:1, pp. 34-62.
Hatton, Timothy J. (2000). "How Much Did Immigrant `Quality' Decline in late Nineteenth Century
America?" Journal of Population Economics 13, pp. 509-525.
Hatton, Timothy J. and Zachary Ward (2019). "International Migration in the Atlantic Economy
1880-1940." In Handbook of Cliometrics. Claude Diebolt and Michael Haupert (eds.). Springer.
Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeffrey G. Williamson (1998). The Age of Mass Migration: Causes and
Economic Impact. New York: Oxford University Press.
Higgs, Robert (1971). "Race, Skills, and Earnings: American Immigrants in 1909." Journal of
Economic History 31, pp. 420-428.
Higham, John (1955). Strangers in the Land: Patterns of American Nativism, 1860-1925. New
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Hourwich, Isaac (1912). Immigration and Labor: The Economic Aspects of European Immigration to
the United States. New York: G.P. Putnam and Sons.



                                                                                                      29
Hutchinson, E.P. (1981). Legislative History of American Immigration Policy 1798-1965.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Inwood, Kris, Chris Minns, and Fraser Summerfield (2019). "Occupational Income Scores and
Immigrant Assimilation. Evidence from the Canadian Census." Explorations in Economic History
72, pp. 114-122.
Jenks, Jeremiah W. and W. Jett Lauck (1912). The Immigration Problem. New York: Funk &
Wagnalls.
Keeling, Drew (2012). The Business of Transatlantic Migration Between Europe and the United
States, 1900-1914. Zurich: Chronos Verlag.
Kelly, John (2018). "Transcript: White House Chief of Staff John Kelly's Interview with NPR"
[Interview]. NPR.org. URL: https://www.npr.org/2018/05/11/610116389/transcript-white-house-
chief-of-staff-john-kellys-interview-with-npr. Accessed September 20, 2019.
Kennedy, John F. (1964). A Nation of Immigrants: Revised and Enlarged Version. New York:
Harper & Row.
Lebergott, Stanley (1964). Manpower in Economic Growth: The American Record since 1800. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Long, Jason and Joseph P. Ferrie (2018). "Grandfathers Matter(ed): Occupational Mobility across
Three Generations in the US and Britain, 1850-1911." Economic Journal 128, pp. F422-F445.
Lubotsky, Darren (2007). "Chutes or Ladders? A Longitudinal Analysis of Immigrant Earnings."
Journal of Political Economy 115:5, pp. 820-867.
Martin, Rachel (2019). "Rule Would Penalize Immigrants to US for Needing Benefits" [Interview].
NPR.org. URL: https://www.npr.org/2019/08/13/750727515/rule-would-penalize-immigrants-to-u-s-
for-needing-benefits. Accessed September 20, 2019.
McGouldrick, Paul F. and Michael B. Tannen. 1977. "Did American Manufacturers Discriminate
Against Immigrants before 1914?" Journal of Economic History 37, pp. 723-746.
McKenzie, David and Hillel Rapoport (2010). "Self-Selection Patterns in Mexico-US Migration: The
Role of Migration Networks." Review of Economics and Statistics 92:4, pp. 811-821.
Minnesota Population Center (2017). North Atlantic Population Project: Complete Count Microdata:
Version 2.3 [Machine-readable dataset]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Minns, Chris (2000). "Income, Cohort Effects, and Occupational Mobility: A New Look at
Immigration to the United States at the Turn of the 20th Century." Explorations in Economic History
37, pp. 326-350.
Pérez, Santiago (2019). "Southern (American) Hospitality: Italians in Argentina and the US during
the Age of Mass Migration." NBER Working Paper 26127.
Preston, Samuel H. and Michael R. Haines (1991). Fatal Years: Child Mortality in Late Nineteenth
Century America. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Ruggles, Steven, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew Sobek (2015).
Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 6.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota.
Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas, and Matthew
Sobek (2019). IPUMS USA: Version 9.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis: University of


                                                                                                    30
Minnesota.
Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas, and Matthew
Sobek (2020). IPUMS USA: Version 10.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota.
Saavedra, Martin H. and Tate Twinam (2020). "A Machine Learning Approach to Improving
Occupational Income Scores." Explorations in Economic History 75, 101304.
Smith, Tom W., Michael Davern, Jeremy Freese, and Stephen Morgan (2018). General Social
Surveys, 1972-2018 [Machine-readable data file]. Chicago: NORC.
Spitzer, Yannay and Ariell Zimran (2018). "Migrant Self-Selection: Anthropometric Evidence from
the Mass Migration of Italians to the United States, 1907-1925." Journal of Development Economics
134, pp. 226-247.
Spitzer, Yannay and Ariell Zimran (2020). "Like an Ink Blot on Paper: Testing the Diffusion
Hypothesis of Mass Migration, Italy 1876-1920." Mimeo., Vanderbilt University.
Tan, Huiren (2019). "A Different Land of Opportunity: The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility
in the Early 20th-Century US." Mimeo., National University of Singapore.
US Congress (1911). Reports of the Immigration Commission, vol. 1. Washington: Government
Printing Office, 61st Congress, 3rd Session, Document No. 747.
Walker, Francis A. (1896). "Restriction of Immigration." Atlantic June 1896.
Ward, Zachary (2017). "Birds of Passage: Return Migration, Self-Selection, and Immigration
Quotas." Explorations in Economic History 64, pp. 37-52.
Ward, Zachary (2020). "The Low Return to English Fluency during the Age of Mass Migration."
European Review of Economic History 24:2, pp. 219-242.
Willcox, Walter F. (1906). "The Distribution of Immigrants in the United States." Quarterly Journal
of Economics 20:4, pp. 523-546.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. (1998). "Labor Markets and Policy Backlash in the Past." Journal of
Economic Perspectives 12, pp. 51-72.
Zolberg, Aristide R. (2006). A Nation by Design: Immigration Policy in the Fashioning of America.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.




                                                                                                 31
Figures

                                                         Figure 1: Descriptive statistics on US immigration history

                                                     Figure 1(a): European immigration as a share of population

                Immigrants as Share of Population   .015




                                                     .01




                                                    .005




                                                         0
                                                             1800                 1850                      1900               1950
                                                                                             Year

                                                             Figure 1(b): European immigration by source country
                                                    1
                                                                               Germany                             Italy

                                                    .8
                Share of European Immigration




                                                    .6                                                                Russia



                                                    .4                                                               Austria
                                                                     Ireland


                                                    .2

                                                                                     Great Britain
                                                    0
                                                         1820         1840           1860            1880          1900        1920
                                                                                            Year

Notes: Population counts are from Haines and Sutch (2006). Immigration counts are from Barde,
Carter, and Sutch (2006). Counts for Austria are from the Barde, Carter, and Sutch (2006) column
"other Central Europe," which is central Europe other than Germany and Poland.




                                                                                                                                      32
                                                                 Figure 2: Immigrant and native occupation shares
                                                     .5




                 Fraction of White Male Employment
                                                     .4



                                                     .3



                                                     .2



                                                     .1


                                                          1840          1860         1880         1900           1920          1940
                                                                                        Census Year

                                                                          Immigrant Farmers              Immigrant Unskilled
                                                                          Native Farmers                 Native Unskilled


Notes: Data are from 1% samples of the 1850-1930 censuses (excluding 1890) provided by Ruggles
et al. (2019). Farming and unskilled occupations defined as in footnote 29. Immigrants restricted to
those from European countries. Both natives and immigrants limited to white males ages 18-65.




                                                                                                                                      33
                                                                 Figure 3: Selection into successful linkage

                 Figure 3(a): Natives, 1850-1880                                                                     Figure 3(b): Immigrants, 1850-1880
  1                                                                                                            1


  .8                                                                                                           .8


  .6                                                                                                           .6


  .4                                                                                                           .4


  .2                                                                                                           .2


  0      e    t        r      e           t       t      e       e                       t    r     )      )
                                                                                                               0      e    t        r      e           t      t      e        e                        t   r     )      )
       Ag Craf Farmarme ld siz teracyidwes theas rativ ealth Scor opertyskilledUrban Wes colla ealth Score          Ag Craf Farmarme ld siz teracyidwes theas rativ ealth Scor opertyskilledUrban Wes colla ealth Score
                  F eho      Li M Nor Ope cc Wf PH l Pr Un                             ite   W H                               F eho      Li M Nor Ope cc Wf PH l Pr Un                              ite  W H
                 Ho
                    us                          of O      o Rea                     Whg(Occ log(P                             Ho
                                                                                                                                 us                         of O      o Rea                      Whg(Occ log(P
                                            n k      a nk                            lo                                                                  nk      a nk                             l o
                                        Ra         R                                                                                                 Ra        R

                                                  All                  Linked                                                                                  All                  Linked




                 Figure 3(c): Natives, 1900-1930                                                                     Figure 3(d): Immigrants, 1900-1930
  1                                                                                                            1


  .8                                                                                                           .8


  .6                                                                                                           .6


  .4                                                                                                           .4


  .2                                                                                                           .2


  0      e    t        r      e           t       t       e       e                      t    r     )      )
                                                                                                               0      e    t        r      e           t      t      e        e                        t   r     )      )
       Ag Craf Farmarme ld siz teracyidwes theas rativ ealth Scor nglishskilledUrban Wes colla ealth Score          Ag Craf Farmarme ld siz teracyidwes theas rativ ealth Scor nglishskilledUrban Wes colla ealth Score
                  F eho      Li M Nor Ope cc Wf PH ks E Un                             ite   W H                               F eho      Li M Nor Ope cc Wf PH ks E Un                              ite  W H
                 Ho
                    us                          of O     k o Spea                   Whg(Occ log(P                             Ho
                                                                                                                                 us                         of O    k o Spea                     Whg(Occ log(P
                                            n k      a n                             lo                                                                  nk      a n                              l o
                                        Ra         R                                                                                                 Ra        R

                                                  All                  Linked                                                                                  All                  Linked




Notes: The bars in each figure reflect the average value of each variable for the successfully linked
sample ("Linked") and for the entire sample that we attempted to link, including both successful and
failed links ("All"). For the 1850-1880 data the baseline sample and the data are from 1850. For the
1900-1930 data the baseline sample and the data are from 1930. In cases where the mean of a
variable is greater than one, we divide that variable by the smallest multiple of 10 needed to generate
a mean smaller than one (e.g., age is divided by 30 for the 1850-1880 data).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            34
                                       Figure 4: Occupational distributions
                         Figure 4(a): 1850                              Figure 4(b): 1880

  .5                                                                      .5


  .4                                                                      .4


  .3                                                                      .3


  .2                                                                      .2


  .1                                                                      .1


  0                                                                       0
       White Collar   Farmer             Craft    Operative   Unskilled        White Collar    Farmer             Craft    Operative   Unskilled
                               Natives           Immigrants                                             Natives           Immigrants




                         Figure 4(c): 1900                                                    Figure 4(d): 1930

  .5                                                                      .5


  .4                                                                      .4


  .3                                                                      .3


  .2                                                                      .2


  .1                                                                      .1


  0                                                                       0
       White Collar   Farmer             Craft    Operative   Unskilled        White Collar    Farmer             Craft    Operative   Unskilled
                               Natives           Immigrants                                             Natives           Immigrants




Notes: These graphs show the occupational distribution of natives and immigrants in each year using
inverse-probability weights to correct for selection into linkage, but making no other corrections.
Occupational categories are defined as in text. Sample limited to individuals with occupations in
both years.




                                                                                                                                                   35
                                                             Figure 5: Change in occupational rank by initial occupation

                                                                              Figure 5(a): 1850-1880
                                                       .6

              Average  Rank (vs Native White Collar)

                                                       .4




                                                       .2




                                                        0




                                                       -.2
                                                              White Collar   Farmer             Craft      Operative   Unskill

                                                                                      Natives       Immigrants



                                                                              Figure 5(b): 1900-1930
                                                       .6
              Average  Rank (vs Native White Collar)




                                                       .4




                                                       .2




                                                        0




                                                       -.2
                                                              White Collar   Farmer             Craft      Operative   Unskill

                                                                                      Natives       Immigrants


Notes: Each figure presents coefficients from regressing the change in the average occupational rank
on nativity-initial occupational category indicators, with native-white collar as the excluded group
and controlling for a quartic in age. Robust 95 percent confidence intervals reported (but are so
small that they do not exceed width of the point estimate markers). Observations weighted to correct
for selection into linkage. Sample limited to individuals with an occupation on both years.



                                                                                                                                 36
                              Figure 6: Average occupational rank by country of origin

                        Figure 6(a): 1850-1880                                             Figure 6(b): 1900-1930
         0                                                         .15


                                                                     .1
       -.05

                                                                   .05
        -.1
                                                                         0

       -.15
                                                                   -.05


        -.2                                                         -.1

                                                                                 ay                   d        y      ly        a       d        n         kia        ia
                                                                            rw           do
                                                                                            m
                                                                                                  lan        an    Ita      ssi     lan     ede                   str
                                                                         No          ing      Ire         rm             Ru       Po      Sw           ova     Au
                                                                                  dK                   Ge                                          osl
       -.25
                                                                            i t e                                                            z ech
                                                                         Un                                                                C
                    Ireland      United Kingdom          Germany

                                  1850            1880                                                               1900                    1930




Notes: Each bar represents a coefficient from estimating equation (1) with separate " coefficients for
each ethnicity and with the average occupational rank measure as the dependent variable. The
excluded group is natives. Robust 95 percent confidence intervals reported. Observations weighted
to correct for selection into linkage. Sample limited to individuals with occupations in both years


                                  Figure 7: Unskilled occupation by country of origin

                        Figure 7(a): 1850-1880                                             Figure 7(b): 1900-1930
  .4                                                               .2



  .3
                                                                    0



  .2
                                                                   -.2


  .1
                                                                   -.4
                                                                           ay                   d         y           ly         a        d           n         kia        ia
                                                                        rw         do
                                                                                      m
                                                                                            lan         an         Ita        ssi      lan       ede                   str
                                                                     No         ng      Ire          rm                     Ru       Po        Sw           ova     Au
  0
                                                                            d Ki                  Ge                                                 ch osl
                                                                        ite                                                                     Cz
                                                                                                                                                   e
              Ireland         United Kingdom             Germany     Un

                               1850            1880                                                                 1900                     1930




Notes: Each bar represents a coefficient from estimating equation (1) with separate " coefficients for
each ethnicity and with an indicator for holding an unskilled occupation as the dependent variable.
The excluded group is natives. Robust 95 percent confidence intervals reported. Observations
weighted to correct for selection into linkage. Sample limited to individuals with occupations in both
years.




                                                                                                                                                                                37
Tables

                                        Table 1: Rates of successful linkage
                                                 Natives                                      Immigrants
                                      (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
  Link                               Start         Searched        Linked           Start        Searched       Linked
  1850­1880                        2,064,491        927,431         238,269         626,320       260,713        35,819
                                                     (0.449)        (0.257)                        (0.416)      (0.137)
                                                                     [0.115]                                     [0.057]
  1900­1930 (Base 1900)            7,447,320      3,237,275         987,619      2,235,798       1,153,700      178,203
                                                    (0.435)         (0.305)                        (0.516)      (0.154)
                                                                     [0.133]                                     [0.080]
  1900­1930 (Base 1930)            7,105,156                      1,005,051      1,642,477                      178,166

                                                                     [0.141]                                      [0.108]
Notes:
  Notes : Numbers
          Data limited   parentheses
                      in to non-southernindicate  the in
                                           white men   fraction of
                                                         the base        Numbersthat
                                                                   the column
                                                                  year.                 was advanced
                                                                                   in parentheses            the the
                                                                                                          from
                                                                                                    indicate      fraction of
 the column that was advanced from the previous step. Numbers in square brackets indicate match rates relative
 to the fullstep.
previous      sampleNumbers
                      in columnsin square
                                   (1) and brackets   indicate
                                            (4). For the        match
                                                          1850­1880,     rates relative
                                                                       numbers           to the
                                                                                 are relative     the sample
                                                                                              to full base year     columns
                                                                                                                in1850.   For
(1)  and (4).
 1900­1930,      For 1850-1880,
               numbers  are relativenumbers    are relative
                                     to the indicated        to the
                                                      base year. Forbase    year 1850.
                                                                     1850­1880             For 1900-1930,
                                                                                  and 1900-1930               numbers
                                                                                                   (Base 1900),           are
                                                                                                                 the sample
relative
 is limitedtoto
              the  indicate base
                 non-southern      year.
                                white  menFor
                                            aged1850-1880    and
                                                  18­40 in the       year. For(Base
                                                                  1900-1930
                                                                base                     1900),
                                                                                  1900­1930   (Base   sample
                                                                                                 the 1930),        limitedis
                                                                                                                is sample
                                                                                                              the
 limited
to  non-southern     white white
          to non-southern          men aged
                             men aged    18-4044­74  in the
                                                 in the     base
                                                         base    year;
                                                              year.  Forin this case links
                                                                            1900-1930      to men
                                                                                          (Base     not aged
                                                                                                 1930),   the 18-40
                                                                                                               samplein 1900
                                                                                                                         is
 are not counted as links.
limited to non-southern white men aged 44-74 in the base year excluding unlinked immigrants
arriving after 1900; in this case, links to men not aged 18-40 in 1900 are not counted as links.




                                                              1




                                                                                                                          38
                                                 Table 2: Summary statistics
                                     1850                        1880                       1900                       1930
                              (1)     (2)                (3)     (4)                 (5)     (6)                (7)     (8)
  Variable                  Native Immigrant           Native Immigrant            Native Immigrant           Native Immigrant
  Age                       27.427    28.409           57.251    58.136            25.843    28.086           55.237    57.710
                             (6.450)   (6.179)          (6.679)   (6.536)           (7.147)   (6.765)          (8.291)   (7.520)
  log(Occ. Wealth)            7.866     7.231            8.132     7.731             7.304     7.298            7.775     7.643
                             (0.922)   (0.961)          (0.868)   (1.019)           (1.036)   (0.961)          (1.024)   (1.029)
  log(PH Occ Score)           6.358     6.261            6.418     6.367             6.211     6.290            6.419     6.398
                             (0.291)   (0.313)          (0.283)   (0.307)           (0.436)   (0.357)          (0.360)   (0.343)
  Unskilled                   0.152     0.381            0.108     0.236             0.389     0.337            0.231     0.275
                             (0.359)   (0.486)          (0.311)   (0.425)           (0.488)   (0.473)          (0.422)   (0.446)
  Farmer                      0.418     0.141            0.509     0.325             0.182     0.118            0.236     0.176
                             (0.493)   (0.348)          (0.500)   (0.468)           (0.386)   (0.323)          (0.425)   (0.380)
  Craft                       0.190     0.216            0.140     0.157             0.137     0.200            0.189     0.215
                             (0.392)   (0.412)          (0.347)   (0.363)           (0.343)   (0.400)          (0.392)   (0.411)
  Operative                   0.128     0.181            0.078     0.145             0.117     0.205            0.090     0.135
                             (0.334)   (0.385)          (0.269)   (0.352)           (0.322)   (0.404)          (0.287)   (0.341)
  White Collar                0.113     0.081            0.165     0.137             0.175     0.140            0.253     0.200
                             (0.317)   (0.272)          (0.371)   (0.344)           (0.380)   (0.347)          (0.435)   (0.400)
  Average Occ Rank            0.515     0.383            0.593     0.524             0.432     0.453            0.529     0.497
                             (0.233)   (0.267)          (0.201)   (0.239)           (0.281)   (0.253)          (0.254)   (0.256)
  Occ. Wealth Rank            0.510     0.335            0.641     0.538             0.427     0.437            0.552     0.515
                             (0.275)   (0.261)          (0.243)   (0.274)           (0.299)   (0.264)          (0.295)   (0.291)
  PH Score Rank               0.519     0.432            0.545     0.510             0.436     0.469            0.506     0.479
                             (0.277)   (0.326)          (0.238)   (0.268)           (0.307)   (0.283)          (0.285)   (0.281)
  Literacy                    0.961     0.917                                        0.979     0.904            0.984     0.933
                             (0.193)   (0.275)                                      (0.145)   (0.294)          (0.125)   (0.251)
  Speaks English                                                                     0.989     0.897            0.997     0.980
                                                                                    (0.107)   (0.304)          (0.057)   (0.140)
  Urban                       0.197          0.494       0.199           0.453       0.355     0.617            0.513     0.677
                             (0.398)        (0.500)     (0.399)         (0.498)     (0.479)   (0.486)          (0.500)   (0.468)
  Midwest                     0.379          0.316       0.428           0.418       0.575     0.452            0.521     0.416
                             (0.485)        (0.465)     (0.495)         (0.493)     (0.494)   (0.498)          (0.500)   (0.493)
  Northeast                   0.580          0.663       0.496           0.482       0.340     0.461            0.334     0.446
                             (0.494)        (0.473)     (0.500)         (0.500)     (0.474)   (0.499)          (0.472)   (0.497)
  South                                                  0.032           0.055
                                                        (0.176)         (0.227)
  West                        0.041          0.021       0.045           0.045       0.085          0.086   0.145               0.137
                             (0.199)        (0.144)     (0.206)         (0.207)     (0.279)        (0.281) (0.352)             (0.344)
  Old Source                                                                                        0.422
                                                                                                   (0.494)
  Years in US                                                                                      13.300
                                                                                                   (8.738)
  Observations             206,557          30,538     206,583          30,537    551,776          98,959 566,599             101,462
Notes: For 1850 and 1880, the table includes white males linked from 1850 to 1880 who were ages
  Notes : Table includes white males linked from 1850 to 1880 who were ages 18-40 in 1850, who had an occupation in both years, and who
 did not live in the south in 1850, or who were white males linked from 1900 to 1930 who were ages 18-40 in 1900, who had an occupation
18-40 in 1850, who had an occupation in both years, and who did not live in the South in 1850. For
 in both years, and who did not live in the south in either year. Observation numbers are the minimum with data for all variables except
1900 and 1930, the table includes white males linked from 1900 to 1930 who were ages 18-40 in
 literacy, old source, and years in US; dierent observation numbers for the same cohort across years are due to occupations that could
 not be scored. Statistics weighted to correct for selection into linkage.
1900, who had an occupation in both years, and who did not live in the South in either year.
Observation numbers are the minimum with data for all variables except literacy, old source, and
years in US. Different observation numbers for the same cohort across years are due to occupations
that could not be scored. Observations weighted to correct for selection into linkage. Standard
deviations in parentheses.                       1



                                                                                                                                        39
                   Table 3: Occupational category differences, immigrants vs. natives
                                          1850­1880                            1900­1930
                                 (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
           Variable             1850        1880         Di.         1900        1930         Di.
           Unskilled             0.238a      0.128a       0.111a      0.005       0.046a       0.041a
                                (0.004)     (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.004)
           Farmer                0.278a      0.187a       0.091a      0.107a      0.084a       0.024a
                                (0.003)     (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)
           Craft                 0.023a      0.018a       0.006c      0.053a      0.031a       0.022a
                                (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.003)
           Operative             0.053a      0.068a       0.015a      0.092a      0.054a       0.038a
                                (0.003)     (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.003)
           White Collar          0.037a      0.026a       0.011a      0.043a      0.048a       0.005c
                                (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.003)
Significance            levels : a bp
              levels: a p<0.01,
          Significance                <0.01, bc p
                                     p<0.05,      <0.05, c p<0.1
                                                p<0.1
          Notes  : Robust  standard    errors in parentheses.
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Sample All          specifications
                                                               limited           include
                                                                       to individuals    a quartic
                                                                                       with        in age in both
                                                                                             occupations
         and are weighted by inverse linkage probability, as described in text. Columns (1), (2),
years. All specifications include a quartic in age and are weighted by inverse linkage probability, as
         (4), and (5) present estimates of t from equation (1) for the each year with the listed
described  in text.on
         variable   Columns      (1), (2),
                      the left-hand        (4),
                                       side. Columns     present
                                                and (5)(3)       estimates
                                                                    presentof
                                                            and (6)            " fromof
                                                                             estimates equation
                                                                                           t
                                                                                                  (1) for each
                                                                                                t 30 .
year with the listed variable on the left-hand side. Columns (3) and (6) present estimates of " -
"#$% .

                     Table 4: Dissimilarity indices between natives and immigrants
                                           (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)
                                          1850       1880       1900      1930
                      Dissimilarity      0.3148      0.2133    0.1500     0.1315
                                        (0.0037) (0.0039) (0.0027) (0.0027)
                      Observations 237,203 237,203 668,061 668,061
Notes: Dissimilarity Notes
                      indices between
                            : Robust     natives'
                                       standard    and immigrants'
                                                  errors               occupational
                                                          in parentheses.             distributions
                                                                           Dissimilarity  in-       in each
                     dices between  natives'  and  immigrants'    occupational distributions
year, controlling for a quartic in age as described in equation (2). Robust delta method standard
                     in each year, controlling for age as described in text. Observations
errors in parentheses.  Observations
                     weighted           weighted
                               to correct           to correct
                                          for selection         for selection into linkage. Sample limited to
                                                         into linkage.
individuals with occupations in both years.




                                                                                                              40
                     Table 5: Occupational income differences, immigrants vs. natives
                                            1850­1880                    1900­1930
                                         (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)
           Variable                     1850        1880        Di.        1900         1930        Di.
           Average Occ. Rank             0.138a      0.069a     0.069a      0.015a       0.035a      0.020a
                                        (0.003)     (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)
           log(Occ. Wealth)              0.661a      0.404a     0.257a      0.151a       0.164a      0.013
                                        (0.010)     (0.013)    (0.009)     (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.008)
           log(PH Occ. Score)            0.107a      0.049a     0.059a      0.027a       0.021a      0.048a
                                        (0.004)     (0.002)    (0.004)     (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.003)
           Occ. Wealth Rank              0.183a      0.105a     0.078a      0.032a       0.046a      0.014a
                                        (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)
           PH Score Rank                 0.094a      0.034a     0.060a      0.002        0.024a      0.025a
                                        (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)
Significance   levels: a
          Significance         : a pb
                          p<0.01,
                        levels      <  0.01, b p<
                                      p<0.05,   c 0.05, c p<0.1
                                                  p<0.1
          Notes : Robust standard errors in parentheses. All specifications include a quartic in age and
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Sample limited to individuals with occupations in both
         are weighted by inverse linkage probability, as described in text. Columns (1), (2), (4), and
years. All
         (5)specifications
              present estimatesinclude   a quartic
                                  of t from    equation  (1)and
                                                    in age       are each
                                                             for the  weighted  by inverse
                                                                          year with            linkage
                                                                                      the listed        probability,
                                                                                                 variable on the     as
described   in text.side.
         left-hand    Columns
                           Columns(1),  (2),
                                      (3) and(4),
                                               (6)and (5) present
                                                   present estimates estimates
                                                                       of t    of   .
                                                                               t 30 "  from   equation  (1) for each
year with the listed variable on the left-hand side. Columns (3) and (6) present estimates of " -
"#$% .

                       Table 6: Human Capital Differences, Immigrants vs. Natives
                                                1850­1880                           1900­1930
                                     (1)           (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
           Variable                 1850          1880        Di.         1900         1930         Di.
           Literacy                  0.044a                                0.072a       0.052a       0.020a
                                    (0.002)                               (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)
           Numeracy                  0.083a        0.102a      0.019a      0.017a       0.025a       0.008a
                                    (0.003)       (0.003)     (0.005)     (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.003)
           Speaks English                                                  0.091a       0.016a       0.075a
                                                                          (0.002)      (0.001)      (0.002)
              levels: a levels : b    0.01, c
                                a           b            c
Significance
          Significance  p<0.01,    p<0.05,
                                  p<          pp<0.1
                                               <0.05, p<0.1
Notes: Robust standard errors in errors
          Notes  : Robust  standard          in parentheses.
                                      parentheses.   Sample All   specifications
                                                              limited            include
                                                                       to individuals    a quartic
                                                                                       with        in age in both
                                                                                             occupations
         and are weighted by inverse linkage probability, as described in text. Columns (1), (2), (4),
years. All
         andspecifications   include of
              (5) present estimates    a quartic in age and are weighted by inverse linkage probability, as
                                          t from equation (1) for the each year with the listed variable
described  in text. Columns     (1), (2), (4),
         on the left-hand side. Columns (3) andand (5) present
                                                     (6) presentestimates
                                                                 estimatesof of"t from  equation (1) for each
                                                                                      t 30 .
year with the listed variable on the left-hand side. Columns (3) and (6) present estimates of " -
"#$% .




                                                                                                                    41
                                                  Table 7: Conditional changes in rank
                                    (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)            (8)
  Variables                      1850­1880      1900­1930       1850­1880       1900­1930       1850­1880       1900­1930       1900­1930      1900­1930
  Immigrant                            0.069a         0.018a          0.040a          0.029a          0.044a          0.082a          0.017a         0.034a
                                      (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.004)         (0.002)         (0.003)        (0.002)
  Initial Avg. Occ. Rank                                              0.781a          0.712a                                                         0.713a
                                                                     (0.007)         (0.004)                                                        (0.004)
  Old Source                                                                                                                          0.003          0.012a
                                                                                                                                     (0.003)        (0.002)
  Observations                      237,016         667,717         237,016        667,717         237,011         659,693         667,717         667,717
  R-squared                            0.028           0.100          0.470           0.427           0.068           0.077           0.100          0.427
  Weights                                                                                         1900            1850
 Significance levels : p<0.01,a p<0.05, p<
                     a          b         c
                                                b 0.1          c
 Notes : Dependent levels:
Significance                       p<0.01,
                      variable is change          p<0.05,
                                         in average  occupationalp<0.1
                                                                  rank. Robust standard errors in parentheses. All specifications include a quartic in age and
Notes:     Dependent
are weighted                  variable
              by inverse linkage            is
                                   probability. change
                                                Excluded    in
                                                          group average
                                                                 in all specifications
occupational distribution of the year listed in the last row of the table.
                                                                               occupational
                                                                                       are natives. rank.    Robust
                                                                                                    Weights indicate    standard
                                                                                                                     that the data areerrors   into match the
                                                                                                                                      reweighted

parentheses. All specifications include a quartic in age and are weighted by inverse linkage
probability. Excluded group in all specifications are natives. Weights indicate that the data are
reweighed to match the occupational distribution of the year listed in the last row of the table, for
immigrants and natives separately. Sample limited to individuals with occupations in both years.


                                                  Table 8: Correlates of change in rank
                                    (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)
  Variables                      1850­1880       1900­1930      1850­1880       1900­1930       1850­1880       1900­1930      1850­1880       1900­1930
  Immigrant                            0.078a          0.018a         0.049a          0.038a          0.071a          0.017a         0.055a          0.041a
                                      (0.003)         (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.003)         (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.002)
  Initial Avg. Occ. Rank                                              0.789a          0.741a                                         0.794a          0.745a
                                                                     (0.003)         (0.003)                                        (0.003)         (0.003)
  Literate in Initial Year             0.056a          0.015b         0.052a          0.059a          0.055a          0.015a         0.051a          0.059a
                                      (0.005)         (0.006)        (0.004)         (0.005)         (0.004)         (0.006)        (0.004)         (0.004)
  Urban in Initial Year                0.022a          0.083a         0.023a          0.024a          0.020a          0.076a         0.027a          0.034a
                                      (0.003)         (0.003)              1
                                                                     (0.002)         (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.002)         (0.002)
  Moved to Urban                                                                                      0.013a          0.025a         0.028a          0.039a
                                                                                                     (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.003)         (0.003)
  Moved County                                                                                        0.007a          0.014a         0.030a          0.025a
                                                                                                     (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.001)         (0.002)
  Observations                      211,847         667,717         211,847        667,717         211,626         667,712         211,626        667,712
  R-squared                            0.068           0.151          0.473           0.448           0.095           0.171          0.496           0.466
  Initial County FE                      Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
  Final County FE                         No              No             No              No              Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
 Significance levels : p<0.01,a p<0.05, pb
                     a          b          c
                                                              c
Significance
 Notes : Dependentlevels:          p<0.01,
                      variable is change          p<0.05,
                                                <0.1
                                         in average occupationalp<0.1
                                                                 rank. Robust standard errors in parentheses. All specifications include a quartic in age and
Notes:     Dependent
are weighted                  variable
              by inverse linkage            is change
                                   probability.            in average
                                                Excluded group                occupational
                                                                in all specifications are natives. rank. Robust standard errors in

parentheses. All specifications include a quartic in age and are weighted by inverse linkage
probability. Excluded group in all specifications are natives. Sample limited to individuals with
occupations in both years.




                                                                            1


                                                                                                                                                          42
