                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE EFFECTS OF FINANCIAL AID GRANT OFFERS ON
                   POSTSECONDARY EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES:
                       NEW EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM
                       THE FUND FOR WISCONSIN SCHOLARS

                                        Deven E. Carlson
                                          Felix Elwert
                                        Nicholas Hillman
                                         Alex Schmidt
                                        Barbara L. Wolfe

                                      Working Paper 26419
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26419


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




We thank the Executive Director and Board of the Fund for Wisconsin Scholars, the Wisconsin
Department of Public Instruction, The University of Wisconsin System, Higher Educational Aids
Board and the Institute for Research on Poverty for their cooperation with this project including
making the data available. We thank FFWS for funding the cleaning and merging of data
elements. We also gratefully acknowledge use of the services and facilities of the Center for
Demography and Ecology at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, funded by NICHD Center
Grant P2C HD047873. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Deven E. Carlson, Felix Elwert, Nicholas Hillman, Alex Schmidt, and Barbara L.
Wolfe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Financial Aid Grant Offers on Postsecondary Educational Outcomes: New
Experimental Evidence from the Fund for Wisconsin Scholars
Deven E. Carlson, Felix Elwert, Nicholas Hillman, Alex Schmidt, and Barbara L. Wolfe
NBER Working Paper No. 26419
November 2019
JEL No. I20,I24

                                           ABSTRACT

In this pre-registered study, we analyze the effects of need-based financial aid grant offers on the
educational outcomes of low-income college students based on a large-scale randomized
experiment (n=48,804). We find evidence that the grant offers increase two-year persistence by
1.7 percentage points among four-year college students. The estimated effect on six-year
bachelor's degree completion is of similar size--1.5 percentage points--but is not statistically
significant. Among two-year students, we find positive--but not statistically significant--effects
on persistence and bachelor's degree completion (1.2 and 0.5 percentage points, respectively).
We find little evidence that effects vary by cohort, race, gender or the prior receipt of food
stamps. However, further exploratory results do suggest that the offers reduce associate's degree
completion rates for two-year community college students by around 3 percentage points, with no
statistically significant evidence of effects on technical college students. We also estimate that the
effects of actually receiving grant money are very similar, though slightly greater than the effects
of merely receiving a grant offer. Overall, our results show only very small effects of the need-
based grant offers on college students' trajectories towards degree completion.

Deven E. Carlson                                  Alex Schmidt
University of Oklahoma                            University of Wisconsin-Madison
Department of Political Science                   8128 Social Science Bldg.
205 Dale Hall Tower                               Madison, WI 53706
455 W. Lindsey St.                                ajschmidt6@wisc.edu
Norman, OK 73019
decarlson@ou.edu                                  Barbara L. Wolfe
                                                  3458 Social Science Building
Felix Elwert                                      University of Wisconsin
University of Wisconsin-Madison                   Madison, WI 53706
4426 Sewell Social Sciences                       and NBER
Madison, WI 53706                                 BWolfe@wisc.edu
elwert@wisc.edu

Nicholas Hillman
University of Wisconsin-Madison
1000 Bascom Mall, 249
Madison, WI 53706
nwhillman@wisc.edu


A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/3198
                                                                                                      3


      The Effects of Financial Aid Grant Offers on Postsecondary Educational Outcomes:

               New Experimental Evidence from the Fund for Wisconsin Scholars

Introduction

       A college education can be a path to upward mobility for children born into low-income

families. But over the past few decades, college access and completion gaps have widened

between low-income and high-income students (Bailey & Dynarski, 2011), and disparate

graduation rates between colleges have garnered attention (Leonhardt & Chinoy, 2019). Finances

and students' ability to pay the rising price of tuition are candidate explanations for these gaps.

Since 2000, the average tuition at public four-year colleges has doubled to $10,230 (Ma, Baum,

Pender, & Libassi, 2018). To help cover rising expenses, states and the federal government

invest over $35 billion annually in "need-based" aid targeted to low-income students, but this aid

is not keeping pace with rising tuition levels. For example, the federal Pell Grant is the nation's

primary need-based aid program, yet its average award ($3,700) covers a small and shrinking

share of tuition (Baum, Ma, Pender, & Bell, 2015). To supplement these efforts, some colleges

and private philanthropic organizations (e.g., Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Susan

Thompson Buffet Foundation, etc.) offer additional financial aid for low-income students.

       This study presents a randomized evaluation of the effects of a financial aid program for

low-income students in Wisconsin. Created in 2007 with a philanthropic gift of $167 million

from John and Tashia Morgridge, the Fund for Wisconsin Scholars (FFWS) provides

scholarships to Pell-eligible students attending public postsecondary institutions in Wisconsin.

Since Pell Grants only cover a portion of the total costs of Wisconsin public colleges (see Table

1), the objective of the FFWS program is to provide financial relief in order to increase

persistence and graduation rates among low-income students who are already enrolled.
                                                                                                      4


                                        [Insert Table 1 here]

       In contrast to most other studies of financial aid programs, the randomization of the

FFWS offer among eligible students allows for the identification of the causal effects of the

FFWS program on subsequent outcomes. In this study, our primary aims are to determine

whether the grant offered by the FFWS program, and the aid actually received by students,

increased students' probability of persisting into the second year and completing a bachelor's

degree within six years. As secondary aims, we also examine whether the effects on these

primary outcomes varied by student characteristics, and we explore effects on secondary

outcomes, including three-year associate's degree completion, transferring to a four-year

university, and four-year bachelor's degree completion.

       All analyses reported in this paper follow our detailed pre-analysis plan, which was

registered with the American Economic Association prior to the receipt of outcomes data. 1 All
                                                                                             0F




deviations from the pre-registered plan are explicitly noted in the text or endnotes.

       In the following, we first describe the FFWS program and experimental design and

review past research on financial aid programs. We then describe our choices for variable

creation and statistical analysis. We report two broad sets of results: first, our experimental

evaluation of the effect of receiving an FFWS grant offer; second, instrumental variables

estimates of the effect of actually receiving FFWS aid.

The Fund for Wisconsin Scholars

      The FFWS intervention is an offer of need-based financial aid for Pell-eligible Wisconsin

college students. Around 550 to 650 two- and four-year students are randomly selected to receive

the grant offer every year, starting in 2008. Students in public two-year colleges (e.g., technical

college or community colleges) can receive up to $1,800 per academic year. Early in the
                                                                                                   5


program, students attending four-year universities could receive up to $3,500 per academic year;

recently, that amount increased to $4,000 (in the 2015-16 school year). Students can receive

FFWS awards for a maximum of five years. On average, two-year college students receive

$1,232 during their first year (2009-2015 cohorts) and $3,253 over five years (2009-2012

cohorts), while four-year college students receive $2,914 during their first year (2009-2015

cohorts) and $9,512 over five years (2009-2012 cohorts).

      To be eligible for the grant offer, a student must be a Wisconsin resident who graduated

from a public high school in the state and is under 21 years old. Students must also be pursuing a

first-degree program (unless moving from an associate's degree program to a bachelor's

program) and they must be enrolled full-time in a two-year college in the Wisconsin Technical

College System (WTCS) or a two- or four-year college in the University of Wisconsin System

(UWS). Finally, students must be eligible for the federal Pell Grant, which means they must

complete the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) and be identified for FFWS

eligibility by their campus' financial aid office. After receiving a written grant offer, the

following additional conditions must be met in order to receive FFWS funds: 1) students must

accept the grant offer and provide additional information to confirm their eligibility, and 2)

students must have remaining unmet financial need (described further below). Students remain

eligible to receive FFWS funds every semester for 10 semesters as long as they continue to fulfill

the above eligibility requirements, refile the FAFSA each year, and meet the college's

satisfactory academic progress standards. Students remain eligible when they transfer to another

eligible public two-/four-year college (UWS or WTCS).

      The randomization process for the grant offers begins when college financial aid offices

send lists of eligible students to the Wisconsin Higher Educational Aids Board (HEAB) at the
                                                                                                      6


beginning of each school year. HEAB compiles all eligible four-year students into one pool, and

all eligible two-year students into another pool, and conducts a blocked randomization within

each pool. In each randomization block, HEAB randomly selects between 550 and 650 students

for the treatment condition with the goal that 500 students accept the award. From 2009 through

2015 (the cohorts under study), 48,804 students were entered into the randomization pool and

8,407 were randomly selected to receive the grant offer.

       Using this sample of students, we evaluate the effects of the FFWS offer on the primary

outcomes of persistence and degree completion. This focus is justified because the FFWS

offer--not the receipt of FFWS aid--is the main intervention. The FFWS only provides aid to

students with remaining unmet need, where unmet need is equal to total cost of attendance minus

Expected Family Contribution (EFC) and aid from other grant or scholarship programs. The

FFWS grant offer cannot supplant any other form of grant aid, and the dollar amount of a

student's FFWS grant cannot exceed her unmet need. If a student's tuition bill is already

covered, then the FFWS award can either be paid directly to the student to be used for allowable

non-tuition expenses including books, supplies, transportation, room and board, and dependent

care, or it can be used to replace loans in the student's aid package. If a student's need is fully

met by other grant aid in a given semester, he does not receive FFWS funds in that semester but

remains eligible to receive FFWS funds in future semesters, as long as he continues to meet

eligibility requirements.

Contributions to the Literature

       Most financial aid programs do not randomly assign students to aid, which greatly

complicates the identification of causal effects of financial aid on college students' success

(Dynarski & Scott-Clayton, 2013). In the existing literature, researchers attempt to surmount the
                                                                                                     7


non-random selection problem with quasi-experimental techniques, typically using regression

discontinuity designs comparing students just above or below a specified eligibility threshold--

usually set by standardized test scores, family income, expected family contribution, or high

school grade point averages. Several of these observational studies find positive effects of need-

based financial aid on persistence and degree completion (Bettinger, Gurantz, Kawano,

Sacerdote, & Stevens, 2019; Castleman & Long, 2016; Denning, Marx, & Turner, 2019). The

estimated effect on bachelor's degree completion across these studies is an increase of 3 to 5

percentage points, with the annual aid amounts ranging from approximately $700 to $3,500 (i.e.,

a similar range as FFWS grant offers). 2
                                       1F




       There are a small number of experimental studies of need-based aid programs. Only

one--an unpublished study of the Nebraska-based Susan Thompson Buffet Foundation (STBF)

scholarship program (Angrist, Hudson, & Pallais, 2016)--examined a need-based aid program

other than the FFWS. The STBF scholarship program is similar to the FFWS in that both

randomize low-income students to scholarship offers in order to encourage college completion.

The two major differences are 1) that the STBF randomizes eligible applicants at the end of high

school, while the FFWS randomizes eligible students in their first semester of college, and 2)

that the FFWS has no application process. The latter difference is potentially important, because

prior research has identified application requirements as a major hurdle to receiving aid

(Dynarski & Scott-Clayton, 2006).

       Despite these differences, the estimated impacts of the STBF and FFWS need-based

grant offers are quite similar. Existing evaluations of both programs find no statistically

significant evidence of impacts on persistence into the second year or degree completion for two-

year students (Anderson, Broton, Goldrick-Rab, & Kelchen, 2018; Anderson & Goldrick-Rab,
                                                                                                       8


2018; Angrist et al., 2016). 3 Studies report that four-year college students in both programs are
                            2F




more likely to persist until their second year, with the STBF study estimating a 6 percentage

point increase (Angrist et al., 2016) and an FFWS study estimating a 2.2 percentage point

increase in the second and third cohorts--2009-10 and 2010-11 (Goldrick-Rab, Kelchen, Harris,

& Benson, 2016). The major differences in impacts are in degree completion for four-year

students. Angrist et al. (2016) find that the STBF offers actually reduced four-year bachelor's

degree completion rates by 5.9 percentage points, while Goldrick-Rab et al. (2016) find that the

FFWS offers increased bachelor's degree completion rates by 4.7 percentage points in the first

cohort (2008-09). To add further uncertainty, there is only a small--0.7 percentage points--and

statistically not significant effect on any degree/certificate completion within six years when

examining the first four cohorts of four-year FFWS students (Anderson et al., 2018).

       Given the consistent inability to reject null effects for two-year students and contradictory

estimates of effects on degree completion for four-year students, our goal is to use additional

data to further assess the impacts of need-based financial offers in the FFWS. Our study has four

advantages in comparison to previous experimental evaluations. First, our study follows up to

seven cohorts of FFWS students for up to six years following randomization (n=48,804). The

next largest FFWS study--Anderson et al.'s (2018) unpublished report--follows four cohorts of

students and has less than half the sample size (n=20,718). Specifically, we use seven cohorts of

data for two-year estimates (e.g., persistence), six cohorts of data for three-year estimates (e.g.,

associate's degree completion and transfers), and five cohorts of data for four-year estimates

(e.g., four-year bachelor's degree completion).

       The second advantage is our ability to separately estimate effects for technical college

students and community college students. The previous FFWS studies of two-year students
                                                                                                         9


(Anderson et al., 2018; Anderson & Goldrick-Rab, 2018) only included the first cohort of

technical college students and did not explore differences in effectiveness by college type. It is

possible that the null effects estimated in past studies may be masking heterogeneous effects

between community college and technical college students.

         Our measures of degree completion are a third advantage. The most recent FFWS

evaluations (Anderson et al., 2018; Anderson & Goldrick-Rab, 2018) assess combined impacts

on any type of certificate or degree completion. Distinguishing between degree types may be

important, especially for two-year students. Among students who began at two-year schools, the

STBR study found a negative relationship between the grant offer and associate's degree

completion, and a positive relationship between the grant offer and bachelor's degree

completions (Angrist et al., 2016). Neither relationship is statistically significant, but the results

suggest that need-based financial aid offers may increase bachelor's degree completion among

two-year college students at the cost of associate's degree completion. In this paper, we estimate

separate impacts on associate's degree completions and bachelor's degree completions.

         Finally, our analysis evaluates not only the effects of the grant offer, but also the effects

of grant aid receipt, which have not yet been studied in an FFWS evaluation of degree

completion and persistence. Because a sizeable portion of the treatment group does not receive

grant funds, the effects of receiving grant funds necessarily differ from the effects of receiving an

offer.

Data & Methods

Data collection and matching

         The data for this evaluation were collected from multiple administrative records sources

and matched by the University of Wisconsin Madison's Institute for Research on Poverty (IRP).
                                                                                               10


HEAB provided the list of all students (names, birth dates, and Social Security numbers) who

were eligible to be randomized to the grant, as well as indicators of randomized control or

treatment group membership. IRP linked the records of eligible students to three main data

sources: the University of Wisconsin System (UWS) enrollment records, the Multi-Sample

Person File (MSPF), and the Department of Public Instruction database.

       IRP used Social Security numbers to link eligible students to UWS and MSPF data. The

UWS records provide enrollment dates, credit completion, Pell Grant amounts, and other records

for students enrolled in UWS two- and four-year schools. Note that these records do not include

Wisconsin Technical College System (WTCS) students, which limits our ability to use these data

for our main analyses. The MSPF is a list of names and anonymized IDs compiled by IRP that

includes Wisconsin residents who are found in one of seven administrative databases. One of

these databases is the Client Assistance for Re-Employment and Economic Support (CARES)

system, which contains means-tested benefits receipt records (e.g., Supplementary Nutrition

Assistance Program, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, etc.) linked to household heads

and children in their households. Because MSPF records are linked to all Wisconsin residents

who have entered one of the seven contributing administrative databases, students from both the

UWS (two- and four-year schools) and WTCS are matched to these records.

       The Department of Public Instruction (DPI) records include background information on

K-12 school achievement (we use data from the last recorded enrollment), demographics (e.g.,

race, gender, English language abilities), and post-secondary outcomes data on college

enrollments and degree completions as reported by the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC),

which are purchased annually by DPI. IRP matched the FFWS student records to the DPI data

using two methods. The first method exactly matched FFWS student records to DPI records
                                                                                                 11


using students' names and birth dates and then "fuzzily" matched on names and birth dates for

the remaining unmatched cases--around 4 percent of cases. 4 The second method matched FFWS
                                                            3F




student records indirectly to DPI data by first matching to the MSPF by social security number

and then using a pre-existing, annually-updated comprehensive match between the MSPF and

DPI data. IRP combined these two methods to increase the overall match rate. The DPI records

include information on any student who attended a public Wisconsin school, so both UWS (two-

and four-year) and WTCS students were matched to baseline and outcomes data found in the

DPI database.

        We have near-complete matches between the full sample of 48,804 unique students

eligible to be randomized to receive an FFWS grant offer from the 2009-10 through 2015-16

cohorts and the UWS data (99.9 percent), the MSPF data (100 percent), and the DPI/NSC data

(98.7 percent). Although only 86.7 percent of eligible students were found in the MSPF, a

student will only appear in the MSPF if he or she (or their household head) ever received means-

tested benefits in Wisconsin. We are treating an absence of records in the MSPF as indicating no

receipt of means-tested benefits, which accounts for the 100 percent match rate.

       Because some of the matching between the FFWS student sample and the DPI/NSC data

relied on names and birthdates, a small portion (2.5 percent) of students in the FFWS student

sample were matched to multiple records in the DPI/NSC data with similar names and birthdates.

To address these multiple matches in our analysis, we randomly select one of the matched

DPI/NSC records. We also re-estimate each of our analyses by dropping all cases matched to

multiple DPI/NSC records to ensure robustness. (Results did not appreciably change; available

upon request.)

Analytic dataset
                                                                                                      12


       HEAB provided us with 48,804 unique students from the 2009-10 through 2015-16

cohorts entered into the population of FFWS-eligible students. Approximately 2 percent of these

students appear in the data more than once due to administrative errors in the randomization

process. Although students were only supposed to be eligible for randomization in their first

post-secondary enrollment, 2.01 percent of students were entered into the randomization pool

twice, and less than 0.1 percent were randomized three times. Discussions with the FFWS

governing board indicated that these erroneous re-randomizations could have occurred when

students transferred to a new school that either did not possess students' previous enrollment

records or neglected to remove these ineligible students from the eligibility pool. 54F




       The manner in which the FFWS dealt with these erroneous re-randomizations depended

on the previous randomization of the student. Since the FFWS does not know which students

were randomized to control, a control student who was re-randomized from control to treatment

would be offered a grant if administrators did not detect her ineligibility in the final post-

randomization screening process. However, if a student had previously been randomized to

treatment, their previous grant arrangement would remain in place regardless of whether the new

randomization resulted in a control or treatment assignment as long as he or she continued to

meet the eligibility criteria. 6 To preserve the experimental design, we treat each student's
                            5F




randomization as a unique observation, yielding 49,807 observations in our analytic dataset. 7   6F




The number of observations varies across analyses, as shown in the results tables and Appendix

1 Table A3. For example, the analysis of six-year bachelor's degree completion models uses

three cohorts of data, while the analysis of two-year persistence uses seven cohorts of data.

Measures
                                                                                                  13


       The primary treatment variable in this paper is the indicator of being randomized to

receive an FFWS grant offer, coded as "1" for students randomized to receive an offer and coded

as "0" for students randomized not to receive an offer. As mentioned above, the FFWS made

around 550 to 650 offers each year to students in each of the two- and four-year student samples.

These students serve as the treatment group for each cohort, with the remainder of the eligible

sample serving as the control group. This variable is used for our intent-to-treat (ITT) estimates

of the effect of an FFWS grant offer on student outcomes. However, not all FFWS offer

recipients actually received FFWS grant funds for the reasons discussed above (e.g., failing to

accept the offer). In order to estimate the effect of actually receiving grant aid on student

outcomes, we conduct a treatment-on-the-treated (TOT) analysis using an instrumental-variables

approach. Students who received any FFWS funds in their first semester according to UWS

records are coded as "1" while the others are coded as "0." (Very few students who do not

receive aid in the first semester receive aid at a later time; see Appendix 2 Table A4.).

       The primary outcomes of interest for all students (regardless of initial enrollment in two-

or four-year institutions) are persistence into the second academic year (i.e., third academic

semester) and six-year bachelor's degree completion. We measure two-year persistence as

having an NSC enrollment record in each of the two semesters following the fall semester of

randomization (i.e. January-March of the first academic year and August-October of the next

academic year). 8 We measure six-year bachelor's degree completion as having a completed
                 7F




bachelor's degree in the NSC data during or prior to the sixth summer following initial

randomization.

       Secondary outcomes include three-year associate's degree completion (for the two-year

student sample) and four-year bachelor's degree completion (for the four-year student sample),
                                                                                                       14


which we measure using the same coding scheme based on the NSC data. We also explore

whether two-year beginners who receive a grant offer are more likely to transfer to a four-year

college within three years of initial enrollment. We code a two-year student as a transfer if he or

she has an NSC enrollment in a four-year college by the third August following initial

randomization. To better measure transfers (as opposed to enrollments for single classes or

summer classes), we only classify an enrollment as a transfer if it indicated full-time student

status from January to March or August to October. These latter requirements were not pre-

registered, but are necessary to differentiate transfers from other types of enrollments.

       We model two- and four-year college enrollees separately and include fixed effects for

randomization cohort to account for blocked randomization by school type and cohort. We

control for race, gender, English language learner (ELL) status, and Supplementary Nutrition

Assistance Program (SNAP) receipt to increase statistical efficiency. We measure race, gender,

and ELL status using a student's last recorded high school enrollment year in the DPI data. DPI

records gender as "Male" or "Female" (baseline category). DPI also records seven levels of ELL

abilities, with 7 indicating a student was never classified as an ELL and 1-6 indicating different

levels of English language proficiency. We code this measure into the binary categories of

"Never ELL" (baseline) and "Ever ELL." Finally, DPI records seven racial categories, which we

recode into three categories: "White" (baseline), "Underrepresented" (African American,
                                                                                                       9
Hispanic, Native American, and Pacific Islander--latter not present in our data), and "Asian."    8F




       We coded a student as receiving SNAP if he or she had any recorded household SNAP

receipt in the CARES database in the two calendar years prior to initial enrollment. Otherwise,

we code a student as receiving no SNAP funds (baseline). 10 36 percent of two-year students and
                                                           9F
                                                                                                   15


25 percent of four-year students were members of households that received SNAP in the two

years prior to randomization.

       Finally, the technical college indicator is a binary measure of whether a student was

randomized at a technical college (i.e., in the Wisconsin Technical College System). We only use

this measure in the two-year college student models.

Analytic strategy

       We estimate the causal ITT effect of receiving an FFWS grant offer on each outcome

using a linear probability model, which we estimate via ordinary least squares (OLS) separately

for two- and four-year enrollees:

                                  =  +  +  +  +  ,

where  represents the outcome of interest (e.g., two-year persistence, six-year bachelor's

degree completion, etc.) for student  in cohort j;  represents a student's treatment status;  is

a cohort fixed effect to account for the blocked randomization; and  represents a vector of

student-level covariates to increase the efficiency of our models (race, gender, English language

learner status, receipt of SNAP funds prior to college enrollment, and--for the models of two-

year college beginners only--a technical college indicator). We compute Huber-White HC3

heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors to account for the inevitable heteroscedasticity in linear

probability models (Gordon, 2010). Because randomization occurred at the individual level, we

do not cluster standard errors (Abadie, Athey, Imbens, & Wooldridge, 2017).

       Additionally, we explore the causal effects of actually receiving FFWS aid. The effects of

grant receipt may differ from the effects of receiving a grant offer since 16.0 percent (2009-15

four-year sample) to 26.5 percent (2009-15 two-year UWS sample) of students who were offered

FFWS did not receive any FFWS aid in their first semester of enrollment. (The two-year student
                                                                                                       16


sample for the TOT analysis only uses UWS and not WTCS students due to data limitations.)

The main reasons for not receiving aid among students who were offered aid were students'

failure to accept the grant offer, ineligibility due to insufficient unmet need, part-time student

status, or a failure to meet initial eligibility criteria (e.g., graduating from a private high

school). According to FFWS administrators, the latter reason is quite rare--approximately 35-40

cases per year--and occurred only when an ineligible student was mistakenly entered into the

randomization pool. 11 Additional reasons include that the student may have dropped out or
                     10F




transferred out of the system before receiving aid.

        Since aid receipt was not itself randomized, we use the randomization of the grant offer

as an instrumental variable (IV) to identify the causal effect of aid receipt in the first semester.

We assume that it meets the usual two IV conditions for IV identification: Randomization

strongly affects aid receipt ("relevance"), and randomization is plausibly associated with student

outcomes only via the effect of aid receipt ("exclusion"). We present a sensitivity analysis for

possible exclusion violations in Appendix 2. Since "non-compliance" with the randomized offer

of aid receipt is one-sided--FFWS aid is unavailable to students who were not offered to receive

it--the IV estimator identifies the effect of aid receipt on those who receive aid (effect of

treatment on the treated, TOT).

        One minor complication of our TOT analysis is that conventional two-stage least squares

IV estimation identifies a weighted average of the individual-level effects if the analysis contains

covariates. Because we are interested in the unweighted effect of aid receipt on students who

receive aid, and because we control for cohort to account for blocked randomization, we employ

the IV estimator of Frölich and Melly (2013, p. 9), which produces an unweighted TOT

estimate. 12
         11F
                                                                                                     17


Findings

Balance and attrition

       Table 2 presents mean pre-treatment characteristics of our treatment and control groups

for two- and four-year college students. While there are slight discrepancies between groups on

gender that reach statistical significance among four-year students, we adjust for this difference

in our statistical models. Data are missing for only about 3 percent of cases, with no evidence of

differential missingness between the treatment and control groups. Therefore, we follow the

advice of the What Works Clearinghouse and take no further action to address attrition in our

analysis (U.S. Department of Education, 2017).

                                         [Insert Table 2 here]

Main effects of the FFWS grant offer on primary and secondary outcomes (intent to treat)

       Table 3 presents estimates for the ITT effects of the FFWS grant offer on the primary and

secondary outcomes. We estimate that the FFWS offer increases persistence into the second

academic year by 1.2 percentage points for students initially enrolled in two-year colleges (95%

CI: [-0.37, 2.77], p=0.138) and 1.7 percentage points for students initially enrolled in four-year

universities (95% CI: [0.33, 3.07], p=0.011). Only the estimate for students who initially enrolled

in four-year colleges is statistically significant. The estimated effect on six-year bachelor's

degree completion is of a similar magnitude for four-year beginners (1.5 percentage points; 95%

CI: [-1.05, 4.05], p=0.254), but this estimate is not statistically significant. For two-year

beginners, the estimated causal effect on six-year bachelor's degree attainment is very close to

zero (0.5 percentage points; 95% CI: [-1.07, 2.07], p=0.545). Considered together, we find

evidence that the FFWS grant offer slightly increases college persistence for four-year beginners,

but only statistically insignificant evidence that the grant offer increases bachelor's degree
                                                                                                   18


completion for any students in the long term. 13 We obtain very similar results in robustness
                                              12 F




checks using UW Systems enrollment/graduation data instead of the National Student

Clearinghouse data (Appendix 1 Table A2).

                                        [Insert Table 3 here]

        We find no statistically significant effects of the FFWS grant offer on secondary

outcomes. For three-year associate's degree completion (two-year beginners), transferring to a

four-year college within three-years (two-year beginners), and four-year bachelor's degree

completion (four-year beginners), the estimated treatment effects are almost exactly zero and not

statistically significant (Table 3). Most of the results are similar when using the UWS data

(Appendix 1 Table A2). The only exception is a negative, but not statistically significant, effect

on associate's degree completion for UWS (i.e., not technical college) two-year students (-2.2

percentage points; 95% CI: [-4.94, 0.54]; p=0.11). We examine this subgroup-specific effect

further below.

Testing for heterogeneities in the effect of the FFWS grant offer

        Although we find no statistically significant evidence that the FFWS grant has any effect

on six-year bachelor's degree completion on average, it is possible that these estimates mask

meaningful effect heterogeneity across groups. To explore variation in the treatment effects on

the main outcomes, we re-estimated the models described above, now including an interaction

between the treatment variable and one of the characteristics of interest: cohort, race, gender,

SNAP receipt, and technical-college status (we did not pre-register testing for heterogeneity by

the latter two variables).

        Tables 4 and 5 show the subgroup-specific treatment effects on persistence and

bachelor's degree completion. In terms of persistence (Table 4), we find some fluctuations in
                                                                                                       19


estimated treatment effects across cohorts. The impact on persistence for four-year students

appears to be driven primarily by the 2013-14 cohort. In this year, receiving an FFWS offer was

associated with a 4-percentage point increase in persistence (95% CI: [0.96, 7.24]; p=0.01).

However, the differences in effects between years are relatively minor and not statistically

significant (based on the F-test) for either two- or four-year beginners.

       With regard to race and gender, the effect of the FFWS offer on two-year persistence

among four-year beginners appears to be driven by the effect on white students (2.1 percentage

points, 95% CI: [0.73, 3.47]; p=0.005) and male students (2.1 percentage points, 95% CI: [0.02,

4.27]; p=0.048). However, differences in the effects of the FFWS offer across racial and gender

groups are minor and not statistically significant for two-year or four-year beginners based on the

F-tests. There are also no statistically significant differences in persistence effects for students

who received SNAP in the two-years prior to college or technical college students.

                                             [Insert Table 4 here]

       For two-year beginners, Table 5 presents some evidence that the treatment effects on

bachelor's degree completion for the 2010-11 cohort and 2011-12 cohort are each different from

the treatment effect of the 2009-10 cohort (p<0.05 in both cases). The estimated treatment effect

for the 2009-10 cohort is a 2.4 percentage point reduction in six-year bachelor's degree

completion rates (95% CI: [-5.14, 0.34]), compared to an approximately 1.7 percentage point

increase for the two later cohorts (95% CIs: [-1.14, 4.34] and [-0.94, 4.54]). However, none of

the cohort-specific treatment-effect estimates are statistically significant, and the F-test does not

provide statistically significant evidence that the effect varies across cohorts. For four-year

beginners, the effects are consistent with an upward trend over time, but there are no statistically

significant cohort-specific effects on six-year bachelor's degree completion within any of the
                                                                                                     20


three cohorts considered, and we find no statistically significant evidence of treatment effect

differences by cohort.

                                          [Insert Table 5 here]

        Among two-year beginners, we also find no differences in effects on bachelor's degree

completion by race, gender, prior SNAP receipt, or technical college status. The subgroup-

specific treatment effects are all close to zero and not statistically significant, and we find no

evidence that these effects differ from one another based on the F-tests. The same conclusion

holds for four-year beginners. While there is some indication that treatment effects are smaller

for Asian students and larger for males, neither the differences between groups nor the subgroup-

specific intent-to-treat effects of the grant offer are statistically significant.

        Because past research on the FFWS two-year student population was unable to examine

more than a single cohort of technical college students (Anderson et al., 2018; Anderson &

Goldrick-Rab, 2018), we also investigated whether effects on three-year associate's degree

completion and transfer differed between technical college students and UWS two-year students.

These analyses are exploratory as they were not pre-registered. We find the FFWS offer reduced

three-year associate's degree completion by 2.8 percentage points for UWS two-year students

(95% CI: [-5.5, -0.06]; p=0.039) and no strong evidence of an effect on technical college

students (0.8 percentage points; 95% CI [-0.6, 2.2]; p=0.234). The difference in effect sizes is

statistically significant (3.6 percentage points; 95% CI [0.7, 6.5]; p=0.017). Although differential

college transfer rates are a possible explanation, we find no strong evidence that effects on

transfer vary between groups (p=0.35). In addition, the two-year UWS student subsample is well

balanced (p=0.90) with no strong evidence that the treatment and control groups differ on any of

the six demographic variables we test (see Table 2 for the list of characteristics).
                                                                                                   21


Effects of FFWS aid receipt on primary outcomes (treatment on the treated)

       We next present the estimated TOT effects on our primary outcomes--two-year

persistence and six-year bachelor's degree completion. The estimated TOT effects of receiving

any grant funds in the first semester on persistence into the second year (Table 6) are slightly

larger than the ITT impacts--2.0 versus 1.2 percentage points for two-year beginners and 2.2

versus 1.7 percentage points for four-year beginners. As in the ITT analysis, only the TOT

estimate of two-year persistence among four-year beginners is statistically significant (two-year

beginners 95% CI: [-1.9, 5.9], p=0.323; four-year beginners 95% CI: [0.6, 3.7], p=0.007).

        The TOT impact on four-year students' bachelor's degree completion is also

(mechanically) larger than the ITT impact, suggesting that the graduation rates of students who

receive FFWS funds in the first semester are around 2.5 percentage points higher than non-

recipients (95% CI: [-0.7, 5.6]; p=0.128). On the other hand, the TOT estimate of bachelor's

degree completion for two-year students is still almost zero (0.3 percentage points; 95% CI: [-

5.5, 6.1]; p=0.919). Neither TOT effect on bachelor's degree completion reaches statistical

significance at the pre-specified 0.05 level, thereby implying the absence of statistically

significant evidence that receiving any FFWS funds in the first semester improves six-year

bachelor's degree completion rates.

                                       [Insert Table 6 here]

       The consistency of these TOT estimates depends on two assumptions: randomization

meaningfully affects aid receipt ("relevance"), and randomization is associated with student

outcomes only via the effect of aid receipt ("exclusion"). The relevance assumption is satisfied in

our data. A regression of aid receipt in the first semester on treatment status among the 2009-15

cohorts reveals a strong relationship for both the two-year UWS samples (F=11,225, p<0.001)
                                                                                                       22


and four-year samples (F=102,756, p<0.001), since the majority of treated students--and none of

the control students--receive first-semester aid (see Table A4 in Appendix 2). However, the

exclusion assumption is potentially violated if randomization directly affects student outcomes

through the receipt of a grant offer, even if an offer recipient never received any FFWS aid.

Appendix 2 develops an argument that our TOT estimates may be upwardly biased if students

who received and accepted a grant offer were more likely to persist because they felt more

financially secure (even if they did not receive money in the first semester). Appendix 2 also

suggests, however, that, regardless of its direction, the absolute size of the bias is likely small.


Conclusions

        Because of non-random selection, it is generally difficult to assess the impact of financial

aid on educational outcomes. The FFWS scholarship program removes this difficulty by

assigning grant offers at random within a pool of eligible students who are already enrolled. This

paper estimates the causal effect of being offered an FFWS grant on college persistence and

college completion for all available cohorts of the FFWS other than the inception cohort (not

present in our data), using a pre-registered analysis plan. Following students for up to six years

after college entry, our results suggest that recipients of grant offers at four-year institutions

persist into their second academic year at higher rates (1.7 percentage point increase). The

positive effect on persistence for four-year students is similar to the effect found for the inception

cohort of the FFWS (Goldrick-Rab et al., 2016), suggesting the effect persists in later cohorts

and is robust to using national--as opposed to within-system--data. Like the previous

evaluations of two-year students (Anderson et al., 2018; Anderson & Goldrick-Rab, 2018), we

fail to find statistically significant impacts on college persistence while using additional cohorts

(seven versus three and four cohorts, respectively), multiple cohorts of technical college
                                                                                                     23


students, and tracking students both within and outside of the public Wisconsin college systems.

Unlike the past studies of two-year students, we separately assess specific impacts on associate's

and bachelor's degree completion. We find no statistically significant effects on associate's

degree completion over three years or bachelor's degree completion over six years, even when

including degree completions outside of the public Wisconsin college systems. It is also

noteworthy that the effect sizes we estimate tend to be smaller than the previous observational

studies of financial aid, many of which use regression discontinuity designs. The discrepancy in

effect sizes may be due to the fact that regression discontinuity designs estimate effects for the

limited group of students on either side of a discontinuity (e.g., students with financial need

immediately above and below the cutoff in a grant formula).

       The largest discrepancy between our findings and prior FFWS evaluations is our failure

to find an effect on bachelor's degree completions among four-year college students. Using data

from the first FFWS cohort (2008), Goldrick-Rab et al. (2016) report a statistically significant

4.7 percentage point increase in four-year bachelor's degree completion among FFWS offer

recipients at four-year colleges. Using the next five FFWS cohorts (2009-2013), we find no

statistically significant evidence of impacts on four-year bachelor's degree completion, nor do

we find statistically significant evidence of impacts on six-year bachelor's degree completion

using the next three FFWS cohorts (2009-2011), although our point estimates are consistently

positive. These results hold regardless of whether we use national NSC data or within-system

UWS data (see Appendix 1 Table A2). Since we do not have access to the 2008 cohort's data, we

cannot account for this difference between Goldrick-Rab et al.'s (2016) results and our own.

However, Goldrick-Rab et al. (2016, p. 1803) report that some financial aid officers may have

improperly administered the program during the first cohort. The recent unpublished assessment
                                                                                                     24


of the first four FFWS cohorts (Anderson et al., 2018) provides additional information. They find

that an impact on any degree/certificate completion in the 2008 cohort of four-year students

disappears by the fifth year after randomization, with the control group actually completing

degrees/certificates at higher rates by the seventh year (p. 25). Anderson et al. (2018) similarly

find no statistically significant impact on any degree or certificate completion within five years

when pooling the 2008-2011 cohorts of four-year students.

       Although we find no statistically significant evidence of impacts on bachelor's degree

completions, our exploratory analysis of heterogeneous effects in three-year associate's degree

completion suggests that the FFWS grant offer was detrimental to two-year UWS students.

FFWS students within this population completed associate's degrees at lower rates (a 2.8

percentage point reduction). In comparison, we found no statistically significant evidence of

(positive or negative) effects on technical college students. The effect on two-year UWS students

is similar using UWS data (see Appendix 1 Table A2), but does not reach statistical significance.

In the previous FFWS study of two-year students (Anderson et al., 2018; Anderson & Goldrick-

Rab, 2018), the authors report that the grant offer reduced any degree/certificate completion rates

by around 1 percentage point, but these effects were not statistically significant. The STBF study

(Angrist et al., 2016) reports a larger--but still not statistically significant--reduction of 12

percentage points in associate's degree completions for two-year students. Angrist et al. (2016)

suggest that financial aid offers could push students away from associate's degrees and towards

bachelor's degrees. However, we find no differential effects on four-year college transfer or

bachelor's degree completion between UWS and technical college students.

       At least four mechanisms may explain why FFWS grant offers do not appear to increase

degree completion. First, in addition to simply offering more money, it is possible that the FFWS
                                                                                                       25


offer's effectiveness would be greater if coupled with other student support services. For

example, previous research suggests that financial aid incentives combined with mentoring and

academic support programs are effective in improving academic performance (Angrist, Lang, &

Oreopoulos, 2009), but additional mentoring services were not part of the FFWS cohorts

evaluated in this study. Some FFWS-eligible campuses began to offer these supports in the 2016-

17 school year, so it is possible that future evaluations will find larger effects over time as data

become available for more recent cohorts.

       Second, it is possible that the grant is not effective for the target population or

investigated subpopulations, but is effective for yet-to-be discovered subgroups of students. In

this paper, we analyzed five potential sources of heterogeneous effects: cohort, race, gender,

receipt of SNAP, and attending a technical college versus a community college. We find some

indications that FFWS grant effectiveness is concentrated among male, white, four-year college

students, and that effectiveness has increased over time. However, none of these differences is

statistically significant. Future studies should further explore of heterogeneous treatment effects

of the FFWS program.

       Third, the program's effectiveness could be limited if many students either 1) fail to

accept the initial grant offer or 2) do not receive grant funds after accepting the offer (for the

reasons discussed above). Although we do not have access to data measuring grant acceptance,

we show that 16 percent of four-year students and 26.5 percent of two-year students do not

receive FFWS grant funds in their first semester, suggesting the issue of take-up is potentially

important. We investigated this issue using a treatment-on-the-treated analysis that allowed us to

estimate impacts on students who received grant funds in the semester of randomization. Our
                                                                                                      26


estimated TOT impacts are slightly larger, but again only provide statistically significant

evidence of effects on persistence and not on bachelor's degree completion.

       Fourth, the sample size for estimating six-year effects is relatively small (see Table A3 in

Appendix 1). The estimated effect on six-year bachelor's degree completion for four-year

students (1.5 percentage points) is only slightly smaller than the statistically significant estimated

effect on two-year persistence (1.7 percentage points). We use seven cohorts of data to estimate

the effect on persistence compared to only three cohorts of data for bachelor's degree

completion, which yields increased power for detecting effects of this size. The minimum

detectable effect size (5 percent level with 80 percent power) for persistence is 2.0 percentage

points, compared to 3.6 percentage points for six-year bachelor's degree completion.

       In sum, we find evidence that FFWS grant offers lead to small increases in persistence for

four-year college students, allowing these students to make the often challenging transition

between freshman and sophomore year. The effect on six-year bachelor's degree completion for

four-year students is of a similar magnitude (in percentage point terms), but not statistically

significant. Future work should further explore whether FFWS grant offers could be more

effective if targeted at specific subgroups of students, and also use additional cohorts of data to

re-estimate effects on persistence and degree completion with greater precision.
                                                                                              27


References

Abadie, A., Athey, S., Imbens, G., & Wooldridge, J. (2017). When should you adjust standard
      errors for clustering? National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper (24003).
      Retrieved from https://www.nber.org/papers/w24003

Anderson, D. M., Broton, K. M., Goldrick-Rab, S., & Kelchen, R. (2018). Experimental
      Evidence on the Impacts of Need-Based Financial Aid: Longitudinal Assessment of the
      Wisconsin Scholars Grant. The Hope Center. Retrieved from
      https://hope4college.com/wp-
      content/uploads/2018/09/Anderson_et_al_2018_Experimental-Evidence-on-the-Impacts-
      of-Need-Based-Financial-Aid_Longitudinal-Assessment-of-the-Wisconsin-Scholars-
      Grant.pdf

Anderson, D. M., & Goldrick-Rab, S. (2018). Aid after enrollment: Impacts of a statewide grant
      program at public two-year colleges. Economics of Education Review, 67, 148-157.

Angrist, J., Hudson, S., & Pallais, A. (2016). Evaluating post-secondary aid: Enrollment,
       persistence, and projected completion effects. National Bureau of Economic Research
       Working Paper (23015). Retrieved from https://www.nber.org/papers/w23015

Angrist, J., Lang, D., & Oreopoulos, P. (2009). Incentives and services for college achievement:
       Evidence from a randomized trial. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
       1(1), 136-163.

Bailey, M. J., & Dynarski, S. (2011). Inequality in Postsecondary Education. In G. J. Duncan &
        R. J. Murnane (Eds.), Whither Opportunity? Rising Inequality, Schools, and Children's
        Life Chances. New York, NY: Russell Sage.

Baum, S., Ma, J., Pender, M., & Bell, D. W. (2015). Trends in Student Aid 2015. Trends in
      Higher Education. College Board. Retrieved from
      https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED572541.pdf

Bettinger, E., Gurantz, O., Kawano, L., Sacerdote, B., & Stevens, M. (2019). The Long-Run
       Impacts of Financial Aid: Evidence from California's Cal Grant. American Economic
       Journal: Economic Policy, 11(1), 64-94.

Castleman, B. L., & Long, B. T. (2016). Looking beyond enrollment: The causal effect of need-
       based grants on college access, persistence, and graduation. Journal of Labor Economics,
       34(4), 1023-1073.

Denning, J. T., Marx, B. M., & Turner, L. J. (2019). ProPelled: The effects of grants on
      graduation, earnings, and welfare. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
      11(3), 193-224.

Dynarski, S., & Scott-Clayton, J. (2006). The Cost Of Complexity In Federal Student Aid:
      Lessons From Optimal Tax Theory And Behavioral Economics. National Tax Journal,
      59(2), 319-356.
                                                                                                28


Dynarski, S., & Scott-Clayton, J. (2013). Financial aid policy: Lessons from research. The
      Future of Children, 23(1), 67-91.

Frölich, M., & Melly, B. (2013). Identification of Treatment Effects on the Treated with One-
       Sided Non-Compliance. Econometric Reviews, 32(3), 384-414.

Goldrick-Rab, S., Kelchen, R., Harris, D. N., & Benson, J. (2016). Reducing income inequality
       in educational attainment: Experimental evidence on the impact of financial aid on
       college completion. American Journal of Sociology, 121(6), 1762-1817.

Gordon, R. A. (2010). Regression analysis for the social sciences: Routledge.

Heckman, J., Smith, J., & Taber, C. (1998). Accounting for dropouts in evaluations of social
     programs. Review of Economics and Statistics, 80(1), 1-14.

Leonhardt, D., & Chinoy, S. (2019, May 23). The College Dropout Crisis. The New York Times.
      Retrieved from https://nyti.ms/2HN8FSv

Lin, W. (2013). Agnostic notes on regression adjustments to experimental data: Reexamining
       Freedman's critique. The Annals of Applied Statistics, 7(1), 295-318.

Ma, J., Baum, S., Pender, M., & Libassi, C. (2018). Trends in College Pricing, 2018. Trends in
        Higher Education Series. College Board. Retrieved from
        https://trends.collegeboard.org/sites/default/files/2018-trends-in-college-pricing.pdf

U.S. Department of Education. (2017). What Works Clearinghouse Standards Handbook,
       Version 4.0. What Works Clearinghouse. Washington, D.C. Retrieved from
       https://ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/Docs/referenceresources/wwc_standards_handbook_v4.pdf
                                                                                            29


Tables

Table 1:
Enrollment, Pell Grants, and Tuition at Wisconsin Public Colleges and
Universities, 2016-17
                            Undergraduate        Pell      Percent    Average    Tuition
                             enrollment       recipients    Pell       Pell      and fees
                            Two-year colleges: Wisconsin Technical College System
                                   and the University of Wisconsin Colleges
Blackhawk                        2,034          1,275        63%       $3,029     $4,107
Chippewa Valley                  6,640          1,959        30%       $3,315     $4,238
Fox Valley                      11,759          2,146        18%       $3,340     $4,436
Gateway                          8,722          2,591        30%       $3,288     $4,152
Lakeshore                        2,640           826         31%       $4,367     $4,125
Madison Area                    15,638          3,809        24%       $3,213     $4,281
Mid-State                        2,764          1,164        42%       $3,497     $4,321
Milwaukee Area                  15,057          6,914        46%       $3,258     $4,426
Moraine Park                     6,041          1,135        19%       $2,935     $4,340
Nicolet Area                     1,083           475         44%       $3,557     $4,642
Northcentral                     4,212          1,561        37%       $3,376     $4,313
Northeast Wisconsin              9,742          2,819        29%       $3,305     $4,355
Southwest Wisconsin              2,010           655         33%       $3,825     $4,340
UW Colleges                     11,940          2,944        25%       $3,651     $5,159
Waukesha County                  7,947          1,459        18%       $3,125     $4,340
Western                          4,272          1,587        37%       $3,624     $3,776
Wisconsin Indianhead            2,944           1,225        42%       $3,395     $4,598
                              Four-year universities: University of Wisconsin System
UW-Eau Claire                  10,085          2,309       23%       $3,897     $8,812
UW-Green Bay                    6,757          1,831       27%       $3,743     $7,878
UW-La Crosse                    9,751          1,967       20%       $3,879     $9,091
UW-Madison                     30,958          3,891       13%       $4,078 $10,488
UW-Milwaukee                   20,968          7,194       34%       $4,093     $9,493
UW-Oshkosh                     12,484          2,757       22%       $3,932     $7,544
UW-Parkside                     4,248          1,680       40%       $4,090     $7,367
UW-Platteville                  7,861          1,913       24%       $3,926     $7,484
UW-River Falls                  5,494          1,552       28%       $3,925     $7,981
UW-Stevens Point                8,297          2,683       32%       $4,041     $8,159
UW-Stout                        8,412          2,207       26%       $3,857     $9,395
UW-Superior                     2,367           845        36%       $3,834     $8,088
UW-Whitewater                  11,409          3,000       26%       $4,008     $7,650
Source: U.S. Department of Education Integrated Postsecondary Data Education System
                                                                                                      30


Table 2:
Pre-treatment covariate balance and attrition due to missing data, 2009-10 through 2015-16
cohorts
                                    Two-year beginners                  Four-year beginners
                             Control Treatment         p-value     Control Treatment p-value
White (%)                     78.29       77.96         0.696       76.74      76.68     0.990
Underrepresented race (%)     15.07       15.92         0.622       14.83      15.17     0.636
Asian (%)                      6.64        6.13         0.160        8.44       8.16     0.550
Male (%)                      47.58       49.28         0.079       43.39      40.77     0.003
Ever ELL (%)                   8.07        8.15         0.592        8.59       8.88     0.632
Received SNAP funds (%)       35.56       37.78         0.163       25.35      25.27     0.475

Total Obs.                       14,644        4,618                     26,552       3,993
Missing any data (%)               2.55         2.45         0.981         2.08        2.08        0.898
F-test                             1.46                      0.199         2.27                    0.045
Notes: This table uses the sample from the two-year persistence models (2009-10 through 2015-
16 cohorts). The F-tests represent tests of the amount of variation in treatment status accounted
for by the four baseline covariates (race, gender, ELL status, and SNAP receipt) in models that
regressed the treatment group indicator on all baseline covariates and cohort, using HC3 standard
errors. P-values refer to statistical significance (two-tailed t-tests) of individual coefficients, from
the same models.
                                                                                                         31


Table 3:
Estimated intent-to-treat effects of FFWS grant offers on primary and secondary outcomes (percentage point
changes)
                         Cohorts             Two-year beginners                     Four-year beginners
                                   Control     Treatment    p-              Control Treatment     p-
                                    Rate         Effect    value     N       Rate     Effect     value          N
Primary outcomes
Two-year persistence     2009-15   50.1%          1.20     0.138   18,775   79.5%       1.70     0.011        29,910
                                                 (0.80)                                (0.70)
Six-year bachelor's      2009-11   10.3%          0.50     0.545   8,519    53.4%       1.50     0.254        13,660
                                                 (0.80)                                (1.30)
Secondary outcomes
Three-year associate's   2009-14   15.1%         -0.30     0.693   16,736     --        --        --           --
                                                 (0.60)                                 --
Transfer to four-year
within three years       2009-14   16.7%          0.00      0.965 16,736       --        --         --        --
                                                 (0.70)                                  --
Four-year bachelor's    2009-13       --           --        --      --      21.6%      0.00      0.998 21,929
                                                   --                                  (0.80)
Notes: Models estimate outcomes using the model described above. Huber-White HC3 adjusted standard errors are
shown in parentheses.
                                                                                                32


Table 4:
Subgroup-specific ITT effects of FFWS grant offers on two-year persistence rates (percentage
point changes) estimated from interacted models (2009-10 through 2015-16 cohorts)
                                Two-Year Beginners                    Four-Year Beginners
                           Coefficient  S.E.    p-value         Coefficient   S.E.      p-value
By cohort
2009-10                       -0.70        2.40       0.784        1.20          1.80         0.512
2010-11                       1.00         2.20       0.656        1.60          1.80         0.376
2011-12                       3.50         2.20       0.103        1.20          1.70         0.461
2012-13                       -1.80        2.20       0.410        -0.50         1.70         0.765
2013-14                       1.70         2.10       0.429        4.10          1.60         0.012
2014-15                       3.10         2.20       0.153        1.90          1.80         0.293
2015-16                       1.60         2.30       0.485        2.40          1.90         0.200
F-test (of interactions)      0.76                    0.602        0.62                       0.712
By race
White                         0.90         0.90       0.344        2.10          0.70         0.005
Underrepresented              2.90         2.10       0.159        1.80          1.90         0.362
Asian                         1.30         3.30       0.702        -2.00         2.50         0.412
F-test (of interactions)      0.39                    0.678        1.34                       0.262
By gender
Female                        1.00         1.20       0.384        1.40          0.80         0.101
Male                          1.50         1.20       0.217        2.10          1.10         0.048
F-test (of interactions)      0.08                    0.779        0.30                       0.583
By SNAP receipt
Prior (last two years)        1.90         1.40       0.157        1.60          1.50         0.263
None prior                    0.80         1.10       0.433        1.70          0.70         0.021
F-test (of interactions)      0.42                    0.519        0.00                       0.969
By technical college
UW System (two-year)          1.00         1.50        0.479         ­              ­           ­
Technical college             1.30         1.00        0.190         ­              ­           ­
F-test (of interactions)      0.03                     0.874         ­              ­           ­
Notes: We present the estimated treatment effect of FFWS grant offers for each subgroup
calculated as the linear combination of the baseline treatment effect and the interaction terms. All
models include the same baseline covariates as in Table 3, with equivalent sample sizes. (See
Table A3 in Appendix 1 for subgroup sample sizes.) For each model, the F-value tests the
improvement in model fit associated with the inclusion of the interaction terms. We provide the
Huber-White HC3 standard errors for the subgroup-specific treatment effects.  Indicates that this
heterogeneous variable/subgroup was not pre-registered and is exploratory.
                                                                                                33


Table 5:
Subgroup-specific ITT effects of FFWS grant offers on six-year bachelor's degree completion
rates (percentage point changes) estimated from interacted models (2009-10 through 2011-12
cohorts)
                                Two-Year Beginners                    Four-Year Beginners
                           Coefficient  S.E.    p-value         Coefficient   S.E.      p-value
By cohort
2009-10                       -2.40        1.40       0.076        0.60          2.30         0.788
2010-11                       1.60         1.40       0.236        0.80          2.30         0.732
2011-12                       1.80         1.40       0.181        2.80          2.10         0.189
F-test (of interactions)      2.93                    0.054        0.31                       0.734
By race
White                         0.50         0.90       0.548        1.80          1.40         0.221
Underrepresented              -0.30        1.70       0.872        1.60          3.50         0.651
Asian                         1.20         3.30       0.719        -1.80         4.70         0.703
F-test (of interactions)      0.08                    0.921        0.27                       0.760
By gender
Female                        -0.30        1.20       0.775        0.30          1.70         0.868
Male                          1.30         1.10       0.213        3.10          2.00         0.120
F-test (of interactions)      1.13                    0.289        1.19                       0.275
By SNAP receipt
Prior (last two years)        0.10         1.20       0.958        1.70          3.00         0.565
None prior                    0.70         1.00       0.515        1.40          1.40         0.322
F-test (of interactions)      0.12                    0.730        0.01                       0.925
By technical college
UW System (two-year)          0.10         2.20        0.947         ­              ­           ­
Technical college             0.60         0.70        0.406         ­              ­           ­
F-test (of interactions)      0.07                     0.796         ­              ­           ­
Notes: We present the estimated treatment effect of FFWS grant offers for each subgroup
calculated as the linear combination of the baseline treatment effect and the interaction terms. All
models include the same baseline covariates as in Table 3, with equivalent sample sizes. (See
Table A3 in Appendix 1 for subgroup sample sizes.) For each model, the F-value tests the
improvement in model fit associated with the inclusion of the interaction terms. We provide the
Huber-White HC3 standard errors for the subgroup-specific treatment effects.  Indicates that this
heterogeneous variable/subgroup was not pre-registered and is exploratory.
                                                                                           34


Table 6:
Treatment-on-the-treated (TOT) estimates for the effect of receiving any FFWS aid in the
first semester on the primary outcomes (percentage point changes)
                                         Two-year beginners        Four-year beginners
                        Cohorts         TOT Est.      p-value       TOT Est.    p-value
Two-year
persistence            2009-2015          1.97          0.323          2.16       0.007
                                         (1.99)                       (0.80)
Six-year bachelor's    2009-2011          0.30          0.919          2.46       0.128
                                          (2.95)                       (1.61)
Notes: Estimates based on Frölich and Melly's (2013, p. 9) weighted specification.
Sample sizes for four-year beginners are equivalent to those found in Table 3. Two-year
beginner models only use UWS students due to a lack of FFWS aid receipt data for
technical college students. The two-year UWS (i.e., community college) sample sizes are
shown in Appendix 1 in Tables A2 and A3. Bootstrapped (10,000 replications) standard
errors in parentheses.
                                                                                                              35


         Appendix 1: Additional Tables

Table A1:
Estimated intent-to-treat effects of FFWS grant offers on primary and secondary outcomes (percentage point
changes) using Lin's (2013) approach
                         Cohorts               Two-year beginners                          Four-year beginners
                                     Control    Treatment                        Control    Treatment
                                      Rate        Effect     p-value     N        Rate        Effect     p-value      N
Primary outcomes
Two-year persistence     2009-15      50.1%        1.20       0.169    18,775    79.5%         1.70       0.011    29,910
                                                  (0.80)                                      (0.70)
Six-year bachelor's      2009-11      10.3%        0.40       0.584    8,519     53.4%         1.40       0.270    13,660
                                                  (0.80)                                      (1.30)
Secondary outcomes
Three-year associate's   2009-14      15.1%       -0.40       0.558    16,736      --          --          --         --
                                                  (0.70)                                       --
Transfer to four-year
within three years       2009-14      16.7%       -0.10       0.914    16,736      --           --         --         --
                                                  (0.70)                                        --
Four-year bachelor's     2009-13        --          --         --        --      21.6%        -0.10       0.909    21,929
                                                    --                                        (0.80)
Notes: Models estimate outcomes by interacting treatment assignment with all of the mean-centered covariates (Lin, 2013).
Huber-White HC3 adjusted standard errors are shown in parentheses.
                                                                                                              36


Table A2:
Estimated intent-to-treat effects of FFWS grant offers on primary and secondary outcomes (percentage point
changes) using University of Wisconsin Systems data versus National Student Clearinghouse data
                                                         Two-Year Beginners
                         Cohorts                 UWS data                                   NSC data
                                   Control Treatment                         Control Treatment
                                    Rate     Effect      p-value      N       Rate     Effect       p-value        N
Primary outcomes
Two-year persistence     2009-15   65.5%       0.30       0.820     5,715    50.1%        1.20      0.138     18,775
                                              (1.50)                                     (0.80)

Six-year bachelor's      2009-11   24.4%      -0.50       0.830     2,374    10.3%        0.50      0.545     8,519
                                              (2.20)                                     (0.80)
Secondary outcomes
Three-year associate's   2009-14   22.7%      -2.20       0.111     5,073    15.1%       -0.30      0.693     16,736
                                              (1.40)                                     (0.60)
Transfer to four-year
within three years       2009-14   29.8%       0.10       0.926     5,073    16.7%        0.00      0.965     16,736
                                              (1.50)                                     (0.70)
Four-year bachelor's     2009-13     --         --          --        --       --         --           --       --
                                                --                                        --
                                                         Four-Year Beginners
                         Cohorts                 UWS data                                   NSC data
                                   Control Treatment                         Control Treatment
                                    Rate     Effect      p-value      N       Rate     Effect       p-value        N
Primary outcomes
Two-year persistence     2009-15   81.0%       2.30       0.000     29,910   79.5%        1.70      0.011     29,910
                                              (0.60)                                     (0.70)
Six-year bachelor's      2009-11   56.2%       2.10       0.102     13,660   53.4%        1.50      0.254     13,660
                                              (1.30)                                     (1.30)
Secondary outcomes
Three-year associate's   2009-14     --         --          --        --       --         --           --       --
                                                --                                        --
Transfer to four-year
within three years       2009-14     --         --          --        --       --         --           --       --
                                                --                                        --
Four-year bachelor's     2009-13   21.2%        0.20        0.793     21,929 21.6%         0.00      0.998     21,929
                                               (0.80)                                     (0.80)
Notes: Models estimate outcomes using the model described in the methods section. Note that the two-year models only
include students from UW Systems two-year colleges because technical college students do not have records in the UW
Systems database. As such, persistence and graduation rates tend to be higher in the UW Systems two-year models
compared to the NSC models. Huber-White HC3 adjusted standard errors are shown in parentheses.
                                                                                                    37



Table A3:
Subgroup sample sizes by college type and length of follow up
                                      Two-Year Beginners                     Four-Year Beginners
                              Two-Year Three-Year Six-Year             Two-Year Four-Year     Six-Year
                              Outcomes      Outcomes      Outcomes     Outcomes   Outcomes    Outcomes
Cohort
2009-10 Cohort                  2,643         2,643         2,643         4,010        4,010         4,010
2010-11 Cohort                  3,011         3,011         3,011         4,950        4,950         4,950
2011-12 Cohort                  2,865         2,865         2,865         4,700        4,700         4,700
2012-13 Cohort                  2,794         2,794            --         4,029        4,029           --
2013-14 Cohort                  3,046         3,046            --         4,240        4,240           --
2014-15 Cohort                  2,377         2,377            --         4,096          --            --
2015-16 Cohort                  2,039           --             --         3,885          --            --
Gender
Male                            9,010         7,995         4,078        12,875         9,458        5,983
Female                          9,765         8,741         4,441        17,035        12,471        7,677
Race
White                          14,684        13,154         7,001        22,950        17,041       10,683
Underrepresented                2,868         2,489           985         4,448         3,046        1,839
Asian                           1,223         1,093           533         2,512         1,842        1,138
Ever ELL
No                             17,257        15,420         7,930        27,331        20,104       12,592
Yes                             1,518         1,316           589         2,579         1,825        1,068
SNAP receipt
None prior                     11,999        10,803         6,082        22,332        16,910       11,020
Prior (last two years)          6,776         5,933         2,437         7,578         5,019        2,640
Two-Year College Type
Community                       5,715         5,073         2,374          --            --            --
Technical                      13,060        11,663         6,145          --            --            --

Total                            18,775        16,736        8,519        29,910         21,929        13,660
Notes: The table shows the sample sizes of each of the subgroups by college type and the length of follow-up.
For example, the "Two-Year Outcomes" columns present sample sizes for models of outcomes measured two
years after randomization, such as two-year persistence. Students with missing data are removed so the sample
sizes correspond to the sample sizes used in Tables 3-6.
                                                                                                   38


Appendix 2: Assessing Bias in the TOT Estimate


       This appendix develops a formal argument and supplementary empirical evidence for the

sign and size of bias resulting from possible violations of the exclusion assumption in our TOT

analysis, following a similar strategy as Heckman, Smith, and Taber (1998). Our instrumental

variable analysis for the treatment effect of receiving any FFWS aid in the first semester, R,

assumes that randomization of the grant offer, S, does not affect the outcomes, Y, by any

mechanism other than receiving FFWS aid. This exclusion assumption would be violated if

randomization affects the outcomes via other mechanisms, such as grant acceptance, A, net of

the actual disbursement of aid to the student. Here, we consider two possible mechanisms. First,

students who accept the grant offer, but do not qualify for funds during their first semester, might

still receive funds when they qualify in later semesters. Second, the mere possibility of receiving

aid in the future might affect outcomes by fostering a sense of security, even if students never

receive funds.

                                                         d
                    a                      b                          c
       S                        A                        R                        Y
                                                                     U
Figure A1. Graphical representation of the assumed data generating process. Because
randomization, , may affect the outcomes, , via grant acceptance, , net of the effect via grant
receipt in the first semester,  ,  may not be a valid instrumental variable for the treatment effect
of  on . The lower-case letters (, ,  , ) represent structural parameters (path coefficients).

       Here, we offer arguments and empirical evidence to bound the true treatment effect of

receiving FFWS aid on outcomes when exclusion is violated by these mechanisms. For

simplicity, we assume a linear and homogenous model. Figure A1 is a graphical representation

of the assumed structural equations, where all variables are defined as above,  is randomized,
                                                                                                          39


    and U is a vector of unmeasured confounders possibly affecting A, R and Y. Without loss of

    generality, assume that all variables are standardized, such that the structural parameters are

    inside the interval [-1,1]. (Adding the blocking variables does not change the argument.)

                                                                                           (,)
           The usual instrumental variables estimator for the effect of  on  is  =             .     If
                                                                                           (, )


    grant acceptance does not affect the outcomes,  = 0, then this estimator is consistent and

                                                                 
    converges in probability on the true treatment effect,         
                                                                      =  . If, by contrast, grant

    acceptance affects the outcome directly,   0, then the instrumental variables estimator is

                                          +                        
    inconsistent and converges on            
                                                 =  + , where  is the bias term.

                                                                                
           Since we do not observe , we cannot directly estimate  , , or  . But because the effect

    of grant acceptance on grant receipt is certainly positive,  > 0, and the direct effect of grant

    acceptance on the outcome is, by the arguments above, likely positive,  > 0, the bias term is

                           
    likely positive, too,  > 0. Hence, our results for the effect of actually receiving FFWS funds on

    the outcomes are likely upwardly biased.

Table A4:
Number of students who received grant offers and subsequently received grant funds
                                   2009-2012 Cohorts                          2009-2015 Cohorts
                             Two-Year              Four-Year            Two-Year           Four-Year
                           N         %           N        %           N         %        N        %
Received the grant offer      714     100%       2,296      100%        1,387      100%        3,993           100%
Received grant funds in
the first semester            503     70%        1,902       83%        1,019       73%        3,356           84%
Received grant funds
within 5 years                503     70%        1,912       83%          --         --         --              --
Notes: The sample sizes are calculated using the full set of available data from the UW System two- and four-
year treatment group samples.
                                                                                                    40


        The size of the bias, however, may be small because  is likely much larger than  . We

discuss this logic using the example outcome of persistence into the second year for four-year

students, but the logic and conclusions are the same for other outcomes and two-year students.

First, we bound . Table A4 shows the relationship between the randomized grant offer and

disbursement of grant funds. In four-year institutions, 84.0 percent of students who were

randomized to a grant offer received funds during the first semester. If all students who were

randomized to offer receipt accepted the offer, the lower bound for  is 0.84. If some students

who were randomized to receive an offer did not accept the offer, the upper bound for  is 1.00.

       Next, we bound . Since Table A4 also shows that virtually all students who ever

received funds received them during their first semester, the possible direct effect of grant

acceptance on outcomes would have to operate via psychological mechanisms rather than the

receipt of funds in later semesters. It is plausible that the effect of these psychological

mechanisms on college persistence, , is small, and certainly no larger than the effect of

                                                                             
receiving $3,500 to $4,000 dollars in aid on the treated, , such that 0      
                                                                                 1.

       To calculate bias-corrected estimates of the effect of receipt of FFWS aid in the first

semester ( ), we use the following formula, which is derived from the equation above after

substituting  = :

                                                   
                                               =
                                                    + 

            
where  =  , the ratio of the direct effect of grant acceptance to the effect of grant aid receipt, 

is equal to the effect of grant acceptance on grant receipt in the first semester, and  is the IV

estimate of the effect of grant receipt in the first semester on the outcome.
                                                                                                         41


        Figure A2 shows bias-corrected estimates for the effect of receiving funds during the first

semester on persistence into the second year of college among students in four-year institutions.

The estimates range across values of  for different assumptions about the ratio between the

                                                                                             
direct psychological effects and financial effects of grant acceptance on the outcome,  . We see

that --the effect of grant acceptance on the receipt of grant funds in the first semester--has

very little impact on the estimate over the range of possible values of . The main mechanism

that could bias the estimated TOT effect is  --the direct effect of grant acceptance on the

outcome. If the exclusion restriction holds (i.e., there is no direct effect of grant acceptance and



   = 0), the estimate is unbiased (a 2.2 percentage-point increase in persistence). If we assume

that the direct effect of grant acceptance on the outcome is equal to the effect of the receipt of

                                         
grant aid in the first semester (i.e.,   
                                            = 1), then our reported instrumental-variables estimate is

upwardly biased by a factor of 2 and the actual treatment effect of grant receipt is as low as a 1

percentage point increase in persistence. However, it seems unlikely that the psychological effect

of accepting a grant offer could equal the monetary impact of $3,500 to $4,000 of aid. Even if we

allow  to be 20 percent of , the treatment effect of grant receipt is still almost 1.8 percentage

points, and the 95 percent confidence interval (based on the standard errors of the TOT

analysis--see Table 6) does not include 0. In fact,  can be up to 33 percent of  and the biased-

corrected estimate would remain statistically significant at the 0.05 level. This exercise,

therefore, suggests that the substantive conclusions of our TOT analysis are robust to reasonable

violations of the exclusion restriction.
                                                                                                 42




Figure A2. The figure provides bounded bias-corrected estimates for the TOT effect (c) on
persistence for four-year students over different values of d and b. As discussed in the text, d
represents the direct effect of grant acceptance on student outcomes and b represents the effect of
grant acceptance on grant aid receipt in the first semester. For this analysis, we assume that d is
positive. (I.e., we assume that, if anything, grant acceptance causes an increase in persistence and
degree completion.) We allow the size of d to vary in relation to the size of c. The values range
from 0 (the ratio of d to c equals 0--there is no direct effect of grant acceptance on the outcome)
to 1 (the ratio of d to c equals 1--the direct effect of grant acceptance on the outcome is equal to
the effect of the receipt of grant aid in the first semester on the outcome). We also allow b to
vary over all possible values. Because around 84 percent of students receive grant aid in the first
semester, the relationship between grant acceptance and grant receipt in the first semester must
be greater than or equal to 0.84.
                                                                                                                    43


Endnotes
1
 American Economic Association's registry for randomized control trials RCT ID number: AEARCTR-0003198.
Registered on September 18, 2018.
2
  Note that Bettinger et al. (2019) examine the Cal Grant, which provides financial assistance to low-income
students who meet minimum GPA requirements in high school (currently a GPA of 3.0).
3
  Because the STBF study randomizes high school students prior to college enrollment, the study samples are
actually 1) students who intended to attend two-year schools and 2) students who intended to attend four-year
schools. Here, we call them two- and four-year college students for simplicity. Angrist et al. (2016) also found that
the STBF program improved college enrollment rates for both samples of students.

4
     Email correspondence with the data-linking team at the Institute for Research on Poverty (June 18, 2019).

5
     Email correspondence with the Fund for Wisconsin Scholars (June 18, 2019).

6
    Email correspondence with the Fund for Wisconsin Scholars (June 18, 2019).
7
  The pre-analysis plan specified 49,823 observations. Subsequent inspection revealed that some observations were
identical duplicates. Removal of duplicates yields a final sample of 49,807 observations referring to 49,807
randomizations of 48,804 students.
8
  This coding scheme differs from the pre-specified document in that we pre-registered the use of semester-by-
semester records to code the persistence variable. Because records were only available by enrollment date, we used
the above scheme to measure enrollment in a given semester.
9
  DPI records do not separately identify Hmong students, who are considered an underrepresented group in
Wisconsin. Hmong students are thus presumably included in the "Asian" category. In addition, we originally pre-
registered an "Other" racial category to include Asian students and students in the "two or more" category.
However, our data include no students in the latter category.

10
   This coding scheme differs slightly from our pre-analysis plan, which proposed measuring SNAP receipt in the
last two years of high school. Since not all students had clearly defined high school graduation dates in the DPI data,
we measured SNAP receipt during the two years prior to randomization. For example, for students randomized in
the 2009-10 school year, we measure whether their household of residence received any SNAP funds in 2007 or
2008.
11
     Email correspondence with the Fund for Wisconsin Scholars (June 18, 2019).
12
  Our pre-analysis plan specified that we would estimate the probability of being in the treatment group conditional
on cohort, race, gender, and ELL status. However, we decided to estimate the probability conditional on only cohort
because treatment status is independent of race, gender, and ELL status in the population due to randomization.

13
   The pre-registered primary specification shown in Table 3 assumes constant effects across groups defined by the
covariates. If the treatment effect varies across groups, and if--by chance--the proportion of treated students varies
across groups, then our specification would give a variance-weighted, rather than an unweighted, average treatment
effect across students. To test the robustness of our results, we also estimate Lin's (2013) estimator
that fully interacts treatment with mean-centered covariates and then averages across groups. Results (Appendix
Table A1) are quantitatively very similar and qualitatively unchanged.
