                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF CALIFORNIA'S 2004
                   PAID FAMILY LEAVE ACT ON WOMEN'S CAREERS:
                          EVIDENCE FROM U.S. TAX DATA

                                        Martha J. Bailey
                                         Tanya S. Byker
                                           Elena Patel
                                        Shanthi Ramnath

                                      Working Paper 26416
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26416


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




The views expressed in this article are the authors' and should not be interpreted as those of the
Department of the Treasury or the National Bureau of Economic Research. This work was
generously supported by the National Science Foundation (1757063), the Center for Equitable
Growth, and the NICHD training program (T32 HD0007339). We gratefully acknowledge the use
of the services and facilities of the Population Studies Center at the UM (NICHD Center Grant
R24 HD041028).

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Martha J. Bailey, Tanya S. Byker, Elena Patel, and Shanthi Ramnath. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Long-Term Effects of California's 2004 Paid Family Leave Act on Women's Careers:
Evidence from U.S. Tax Data
Martha J. Bailey, Tanya S. Byker, Elena Patel, and Shanthi Ramnath
NBER Working Paper No. 26416
October 2019
JEL No. J08,J1,J13

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper uses IRS tax data to evaluate the short- and long-term effects of California's 2004
Paid Family Leave Act (PFLA) on women's careers. Our research design exploits the increased
availability of paid leave for women giving birth in the third quarter of 2004 (just after PFLA was
implemented). These mothers were 18 percentage points more likely to use paid leave but
otherwise identical to multiple comparison groups in pre-birth demographic, marital, and work
characteristics. We find little evidence that PFLA increased women's employment, wage
earnings, or attachment to employers. For new mothers, taking up PFLA reduced employment by
7 percent and lowered annual wages by 8 percent six to ten years after giving birth. Overall,
PFLA tended to reduce the number of children born and, by decreasing mothers' time at work,
increase time spent with children.

Martha J. Bailey                                 Elena Patel
University of Michigan                           University of Utah
Department of Economics                          Department of Finance
611 Tappan Street                                1731 E Campus Center Drive, Suite 3400
207 Lorch Hall                                   Salt Lake City, UT 84112
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                         USA
and NBER                                         Elena.Patel@eccles.utah.edu
baileymj@umich.edu
                                                 Shanthi Ramnath
Tanya S. Byker                                   Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
403 Warner Hall                                  sramnath@gmail.com
303 College Street
Middlebury College
Middlebury, VT 05753
USA
tbyker@middlebury.edu




An Online Appendix is available at
http://www-personal.umich.edu/~baileymj/Bailey_Byker_Patel_Ramnath_apps.html
         The last fifty years have witnessed a remarkable transformation in U.S. women's social
and economic roles. Despite substantial gains in employment and earnings, large pay and
employment gaps remain between U.S. women and their male counterparts. 1 Increasing evidence
suggests that these gaps do not grow gradually over women's careers but, even today, emerge
abruptly at motherhood. Mirroring findings in surveys, Figure 1 shows the striking 40 percent gap
that first emerges in annual wage earnings in U.S. tax data after a woman's first child is born
(Byker 2016, Goldin and Mitchell 2017, Kleven, Landais, and Søgaard 2018).
         A multitude of articles by academics, policymakers, and the media argue that policies
mandating paid leave for childbearing--now enacted in six U.S. states--could help narrow the
gender gaps in pay and employment. The theoretical support for this argument is that paid leave
policies enable workers to take short-term leave instead of dropping out of the labor force (Council
of Economic Advisors 2014). Remaining in the labor force and with one's pre-birth employer
should help mothers retain job- and firm-specific human capital and reduce job search--both
factors that should tend to increase women's wages and narrow the gender gap in pay.
         Studies of other OECD countries provide insights for the expected effects of paid leave on
U.S. women's careers (Olivetti and Petrongolo 2017, Rossin-Slater 2018), but country differences
in labor markets, the social safety net, and the generosity of paid leave limits generalizability to
the U.S. At the same time, studies of state-level paid leave in the U.S. have been limited by data
availability and the dearth of policy variation. The small size of surveys like the Current Population
Survey and administrative data from small states (Rhode Island) yield suggestive but imprecise
conclusions about the effects of paid leave on women's career outcomes (Rossin-Slater, Ruhm,
and Waldfogel 2013, Campbell, Chyn, and Hastings 2018). Recent work by Bana, Bedard, and
Rossin-Slater (2018) use large-scale, administrative data on California paid leave claimants to help
fill this gap. Their innovative use of a regression-kink design shows that an increase in paid leave
benefits had no detectable effect on short-term leave duration and subsequent employment among
women earning the equivalent of $80,000 to $100,000 per year. However, the design leaves open



1
  In 1950, women composed less than one third of employees (Toossi 2002), but today they make up almost half of
total U.S. employment (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 2014). Fifty years ago women earned around 60 percent of
what men did, but today this figure hovers around 80 percent (Blau and Kahn 2016). Women are also underrepresented
in the highest levels of leadership, composing less than ten percent of corporate boards and less than two percent of
CEOs (Matsa and Miller 2011), and earn substantially less than men in very high earning jobs (Bertrand and Hallock
2001, Bertrand 2010, Guvenen, Kaplan, and Song 2014)




                                                         1
the question of how paid leave impacts lower earning mothers. No study to date examines the long-
term cumulative impact of U.S. paid leave policies on women's careers, a key parameter of interest
for evaluating their impact on the gender gap.
        This paper uses large-scale, administrative tax data from the Internal Revenue Service
(IRS) to evaluate the effects of California's 2004 Paid Family Leave Act on women's careers--in
both the short and long term. Beginning July 1, 2004, this Act offered mothers six weeks of
partially paid leave to bond with a newborn. 2 IRS tax filings allow us to study the employment,
wage earnings, and employer transitions for individual California women from 2001 to 2015.
These micro-data are two orders of magnitude larger than previously available surveys. Moreover,
these data contain information on the career trajectories of California women giving birth before
and after the policy was implemented, which allows our analysis to test for selection into take-up
(on both observed and unobserved characteristics) and analyze changes in career trajectories over
a decade after the policy was implemented.
        Because almost all working California women became eligible for California's 2004 Paid
Family Leave Act when it was implemented, a key challenge for this analysis is determining an
appropriate comparison group. We build on the differences-in-differences approach of previous
studies, which have compared women giving birth in California after 2004 to women giving birth
in earlier years and in other states. Our research design refines this strategy using the month a child
is born, which we identify by linking IRS tax data to Social Security Administration (SSA) records.
Specifically, our empirical strategy contrasts the outcomes of women who were eligible for paid
leave and were unconstrained in their ability to take it up (i.e., gave birth in the third quarter of
2004) to women who were technically eligible for six weeks of paid leave but were constrained in
their ability to take it up (i.e., gave birth in the first quarter of 2004). 3 For these first-quarter
mothers, taking paid leave in July 2004 would have meant leave without the job protection of the
Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) or deferring their maternity leave to start in July when
their child was 3 to 6 months old--a pattern of leave that would not conform well to the demands
of breastfeeding and other care requirements of newborns.



2
 The Act also allowed individuals to take six weeks of leave to care for a family member.
3
 Women who gave birth as early as January 1, 2004 were eligible for paid leave under the Act, but they had to wait
until July 1, 2004 to take it.




                                                        2
         The 1099-G tax form reports of paid leave compensation and supports the importance of
this constraint. 4 Paid leave take-up increased sharply among mothers giving birth in the third
quarter of 2004 relative to mothers giving birth in the first quarter of 2004--a pattern absent for
mothers giving birth in the third quarter of 2003 as well as in 2005 and 2006. This sharp change
in take-up suggests that 18 percent of all mothers and 26 percent of working mothers took up paid
leave immediately after it was introduced, which is similar to Bedard and Rossin-Slater (2016)
estimates from administrative claims data from the California Employment Development
Department (CEDD). Take-up among eligible women was likely higher, but data limitations limit
an exact quantification of this parameter. 5
         Because the 2004 California Paid Leave Act was passed in 2002 and set to take effect July
1, 2004, strategic mothers could have delayed their childbearing from 2003 to 2004 to benefit from
the policy. Vital statistics and the tax data permit three additional tests of this threat to the internal
validity of our research design. First, the Vital Statistics show no evidence that birth rates were
depressed in the last half of 2003 nor significantly elevated in 2004, suggesting that shifts in birth
timing in response to the policy were minimal. Second, after adjusting for typical seasonal patterns
in the characteristics of mothers in 2003, 2005 and 2006 (Buckles and Hungerman 2013), mothers
giving birth in the third quarter of 2004 are statistically indistinguishable from our comparison
groups in a variety of pre-birth outcomes. That is, women giving birth in the third quarter of 2004
do not appear to be selected on observed demographic or labor-force characteristics such as
employment or wages. Finally, exploiting the fact that 2003 mothers who delayed childbearing
should be selected in the opposite manner as 2004 mothers, we find no evidence that third quarter
2004 mothers were selected on time-varying, unobserved characteristics. In fact, accounting for
selection on time-varying unobservables in this way strengthens our main results.
         Our results run contrary to claims that California's 2004 Paid Leave Act improved
women's short- or long-term career outcomes. The local average treatment effect of the policy can
rule out an improvement in employment that is greater than 1.8 percentage points within the first



4
  California paid family leave benefits are subject to federal tax and reported by the CEDD on IRS Form 1099-G.
5
  Only 68 percent of mothers were working in 2003 (the year before birth) and, therefore, likely eligible, and only 60
percent of eligible women had jobs covered under the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), which requires that
individuals have worked a minimum of 1,250 hours in the last 12 months and have been with the same employer for
at least 12 months. Even accounting for these factors, however, take-up was not 100 percent, in part due to lack of
awareness about the program (Applebaum and Milkman 2011).




                                                          3
five years after childbirth (what we call "the short run") and an increase of 0.90 percentage points
six to eleven years after childbirth ("the long run"). Our analysis also separately examines new
mothers, who may respond differently to paid leave than women with children. This choice follows
from the observation that women learn how to manage motherhood when they have their first
child, developing both benchmarks (e.g., when to go back to work, how long to nurse) as well as
childcare and work routines. For this group, paid leave is associated with a statistically significant
short-run decrease in employment of 2.1 percentage points and a long-run decrease of 4.1
percentage points. Moreover, we find little evidence that California's 2004 Paid Family Leave Act
increased women's wage earnings. New mothers taking up paid leave experienced a large and
statistically significant decrease in annual wages of 5.1 percent per year in the short run ($1,613
in 2016 dollars) and 7.9 percent in the long run ($2,522). Our analysis of alternative income
sources in the tax data indicate that some of the decline in annual wages is offset by increases in
self-employment income, suggesting that paid leave encourages women to transition to more
flexible working arrangements.
       Contrary to predictions that paid leave policies increase attachment to pre-birth employers
(and, thus, help women retain valuable firm-specific human capital), women who had access to
paid leave were no more likely to remain with their pre-birth employer than women without paid
leave access, both in the short and long run. Our results are robust and often made stronger by (1)
including individual mother fixed effects, which account for both observed and unobserved time-
invariant characteristics; (2) using other states to adjust the comparison group; and (3) adjusting
for time-varying selection on observed or unobserved characteristics. In short, these estimated
effects appear to be due to the implementation of the 2004 California Paid Leave Act itself.
       Complementary analyses explore several mechanisms for these findings. First, we find
little evidence that the 2004 California Paid Family Leave Act increased household specialization
in the short or long term, as measured by husband's earnings. Second, we find long-term reductions
in employment and annual wages for new mothers who were married and unmarried, although the
effects are larger for unmarried women. Finally, there is little evidence of differences by age at
first birth (before versus after age 30) or for women in different pre-birth wage quartiles. In short,
the negative employment and wage effects appear for many different groups.
       In terms of mechanisms, the tax data and additional analysis with the Survey of Income
and Program Participation show that greater access to paid leave reduced the number of children




                                                  4
born but tended to increase investments in children-consistent with standard economic quantity-
quality models (Becker and Lewis 1973). This finding squares well with evidence that paid leave
increased the duration of breastfeeding (Pac et al. 2019), time spent with children after mothers
return to work (Trajkovski 2019), father involvement (Bartel et al. 2016, Baum and Ruhm 2016),
and better parental mental health and children's outcomes beyond those outcomes measured in the
tax data (Baker and Milligan 2008, Liu and Skans 2010, Washbrook et al. 2011, Avendaño et al.
2015, Rossin-Slater 2017, Bullinger 2019).
        The lack of U.S. paid leave policy is often cited as a cause of the gender gap. This analysis,
however, suggests that even less generous paid leave policies (relative to European standards) may
have the unintended effect of reducing labor-market equality between the sexes. Because our
research design differences out any general equilibrium changes in employer behavior in hiring
and firing women (i.e., statistical discrimination), these findings understate the potentially larger
(negative) labor-market consequences of the California Paid Leave Act increasing statistical
discrimination. Notwithstanding, California's 2004 Paid Family Leave Act may have benefitted
families and children--even if it did not reduce the gender gap in wages or pay.

               I. A BRIEF HISTORY OF FAMILY LEAVE LEGISLATION IN THE U.S.
        Changes in parental leave in the United States arrived in three waves. The first policy wave
began with changes in pregnancy discrimination legislation, culminating with the 1978 Pregnancy
Discrimination Act. Interacting with state-level temporary disability insurance (TDI), the
Pregnancy Discrimination Act created almost universal paid leave in five states (California,
Hawaii, New Jersey, New York and Rhode Island) and Puerto Rico after 1978.
        The second policy wave began with the enactment of job protection for maternity leave.
This happened first in 13 states between 1972 and 1992 (Baum 2003) and was codified at the
federal level with the 1993 Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA). 6 FMLA provides 12 weeks
of unpaid leave to eligible workers at covered firms and applies to public and private employers
with at least 50 employees within 75 miles of the worksite. Workers are eligible if they have
worked for a covered employer for at least 1,250 hours within the last 12 months (United States




6
  These states include California, Connecticut, DC, Maine, Minnesota, Massachusetts, New Jersey, Oregon, Rhode
Island, Tennessee, Vermont, Washington, and Wisconsin.




                                                      5
Department of Labor 2016). 7
        The third wave of policy changes (and the focus of this paper) began almost one quarter of
a century after the Pregnancy Discrimination Act. In September 2002, California became the first
state to provide six weeks of partially paid leave--in addition to its TDI coverage--for parents to
bond with a newborn or newly adopted child or to provide care to a seriously ill family member.
Effective July 1, 2004, workers were eligible for paid family leave at the rate of 55 percent of their
pre-birth earnings up to a weekly cap if they had earned $300 in TDI taxable wages in the five to
18 months prior to the claim. The weekly cap was $603 per week in benefits in 2004 (nominal
dollars) which increased to $1,104 per week in 2015. Because there were no firm size restrictions,
California workers in the private sector were almost universally eligible for paid leave benefits.
Because FMLA did not apply universally as described above, more women became eligible for
paid leave than were eligible for job protection. California's Paid Family Leave is funded through
a payroll tax; employee contributions were limited to $64 per year in 2005 (Fass 2009).
        California's 2004 Paid Family Leave Act brought the total of paid leave for a normal birth
in California to 16 weeks: four weeks before the birth through California's TDI, six weeks after
the birth through California's TDI, and another six weeks through the California's Paid Family
Leave Act, which also used California's TDI wage replacement rates. 8 Notably, California's Paid
Family Leave also applied to men. Using survey data and differences-in-differences designs,
Rossin-Slater, Ruhm, and Waldfogel (2013) estimate that California's 2004 Paid Family Leave
Act increased the duration of leave for all mothers by around 3 weeks, and Baum and Ruhm (2016)
estimate that the law increased the duration of leave by five weeks for the average eligible mother
and two to three days for the average eligible father. Our Online Appendix uses the tax data to
estimate that the California Paid Leave Act increased the duration of leave by around five weeks,
which squares well with previous evidence.
        Although generous by U.S. standards, sixteen weeks of partially paid family leave in
California is still less generous than other OECD countries where the average duration of parental


7
  The Department of Labor estimates that in 2012, 59 percent of U.S. workers were both covered and eligible, and that
16 percent of those workers had taken an FMLA leave in that year (Klerman, Daley, and Pozniak 2012). Prior to
FMLA, 13 states required some form of unpaid parental leave, and currently 18 states offer unpaid leaves with less
restrictive coverage and/or eligibility restrictions, and in a few cases slightly longer durations. See
http://www.ncsl.org/research/labor-and-employment/state-family-and-medical-leave-laws.aspx ( July 19, 2016).
8
  Caesarian births as well as other circumstances entitle women to longer DI benefits.




                                                         6
leave in OECD countries (excluding the U.S.) is 57 weeks and partially paid in every case (Blau
and Kahn 2013) . Following California, both New Jersey and Rhode Island enacted their own paid
leave laws in 2009 and 2014, respectively. New York, Washington, and Washington D.C. have
very recently passed paid leave laws that will become effective by 2020. 9 Evaluating the effects
of California's 2004 Paid Leave Act, therefore, is especially relevant for understanding the
implications of these less generous U.S. policies on labor markets and the gender gap in
employment and pay.

       II. EVIDENCE REGARDING THE EFFECTS OF PAID LEAVE AND JOB PROTECTION
         A large and growing literature examines the labor market impacts of parental leave policies
in other advanced economies. Rossin-Slater (2017) provides a comprehensive survey of the
literature on the impacts on women and children of the wide variety of family leave policies across
Europe and North America. She concludes that shorter leaves of less than one year can improve
women's job continuity, while longer leaves may negatively impact career advancement. In
addition, she suggests that the enactment and expansion of work-family policies in 21 non-U.S.
countries over the 20 years from 1990 to 2010 may explain up to a third of the recent relative slow-
down in U.S. female labor-force participation rates compared to other advanced countries.
         In a recent addition to the literature, Stearns (2018) finds that different components of
parental leave laws in Great Britain had opposing effects. Whereas pay (wage replacement) tended
to increase short-term employment, laws granting job protection (which tends to increase leave
duration and employment) tended to impact career advancement negatively in the longer-term.
The intuition for this finding is that while paid family leave policies may increase labor-force
participation in the short-term, they could also increase statistical discrimination and occupational
segregation in the longer term. This finding is consistent with the fact that women in other OECD
countries who have more generous paid leave are more likely to work part-time and less likely to
hold management positions than U.S. women (Blau and Kahn 2013).
         Studies of paid leave in the U.S have been more limited, largely reflecting the lack of paid
leave policy changes as well as data to study them. In terms of job protection in the U.S., several


9
 The state of Washington initially passed a paid leave law in 2007 that was not implemented due to a lack of
funding. But in July 2017 the Washington state legislature passed the most generous paid leave law in the US
providing up to 18 weeks of paid leave set to go into effect July 2020. The New York law will start at eight weeks of
paid leave in 2018 and will increase to 12 weeks by 2021. The Washington D.C. goes into effect in 2020 and will
provide 6 weeks of paid leave.




                                                         7
papers exploit variation in the timing of FMLA's implementation. Whereas FMLA appears to have
increased leave-taking--mostly among more educated, married women, unpaid leave laws had
little measurable impact on wage earnings or employment (Waldfogel 1999, Han, Ruhm, and
Waldfogel 2009, Baum 2003). Recent research using the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics (PSID)
finds that, while FMLA increased women's employment, it also reduced their likelihood of
promotion (Thomas 2016).
       Studies of wage replacement in the U.S. have focused on the early period of expansion as
part of the 1978 Pregnancy Discrimination Act as well as on discontinuities in eligibility associated
with later legislation. In terms of the former, Timpe (2019) exploits the state-level expansion of
paid leave through TDI and pregnancy anti-discrimination legislation and finds increases in
women's leave-taking and subsequent reductions in women's wages by 5 to 7 percent over the
next decade. For the latter, Campbell, Chyn, and Hastings (2018) exploit a discontinuity in
eligibility for Rhode Island's paid leave through the TDI system using two decades of
administrative data. However, the small population of Rhode Island and the data demands of a
regression-discontinuity design yield imprecise estimates of paid leave's impact on employment,
social safety-net participation, and health outcomes for low-income mothers.
       A more recent wave of studies examines the impact of increasing wage replacement under
California's 2004 Paid Family Leave Act (Table 1). These studies use survey data and differences-
in-differences research designs and generally find that California's 2004 Paid Leave Act improved
employment and wage outcomes in the short-term (Rossin-Slater, Ruhm, and Waldfogel 2013,
Baum and Ruhm 2016, Byker 2016), although Das and Polachek (2015) find increases in
unemployment and the duration of unemployment. While suggestive, small sample sizes have
limited the strength of conclusions about the medium and long-term impacts of this policy.
       Addressing this gap in the literature, Bana, Bedard, and Rossin-Slater (2018) use large-
scale administrative CEDD data to examine the impact the California's Paid Family Leave Act.
Because CEDD only provided information on individuals filing bonding claims, the paper
employes a regression-kink methodolgy to compare women just above the TDI earnings cap
(where the wage replacement rate would be zero) to those just below this threshold (where the
wage replacement rate was 55 percent). Since the earnings cap was set at around the equivalent of
$80k to $100k in annual wage earnings before having a child this analysis studies women in the




                                                 8
top five to 10 percent of female earners. 10 The paper finds that changes in the wage replacement
rate is not associated with an increase in leave or an increase in post-birth employment. However,
increases in wage replacement lead to a small short-term increase in the likelihood of returning to
the same employer (conditional on returning to work) and making a future paid leave claim.
         These results provide credible evidence that an increase in wage replacement under
California's Paid Family Leave Act had little positive or negative benefit for high-earning mothers.
However, Bana, Bedard, and Rossin-Slater (2018) also point out the limitations of generalizing
their findings. Greater wage replacement may be less consequential for this highly skilled set of
mothers, because they had more access to wage replacement from their employers (rendering the
policy cap less effective) or because higher incomes (and higher earning spouses) minimize the
impact of wage replacement on their behavior. That is, these select mothers may respond less to
increases in publicly provided wage replacement than the average California mother.
         In summary, the literature shows that the availability of wage replacement in the U.S.--
either through California's paid leave statute or Rhode Island's DI--tends to increase leave taking
for mothers on average and high-earning mothers, which corresponds to findings in other countries
(Dahl et al. 2016, Stearns 2018, Rossin-Slater 2017, Olivetti and Petrongolo 2017). However, data
limitations have limited the precision and conclusiveness of these studies. Moreover, little is
known about the long-run effects of paid leave on women's careers. This paper uses large-scale
IRS tax data, linked with SSA data, to examine the short-and long-run impacts of California's
2004 Paid Family Leave Act on the average mother to address this gap in the literature.

      III. USING TAX DATA TO CHARACTERIZE MOTHER'S TAKE-UP OF PAID LEAVE
         IRS tax returns have both the scale and the detail to overcome several data limitations. A
primary advantage of the IRS tax data is that they contain the universe of individual tax returns
and most third-party reporting forms. We focus on tax years spanning 2001 through 2015. For
2004 births alone, our sample consists of over 153,000 observations of women with any birth and
over 74,000 first births in California when the Paid Leave Act passed. 11 By comparison, even large



10
   The kink is based on quarterly earnings thresholds ($19,803 in 2005 and $25,385 in 2014) determined by the
worker's maximum quarterly earnings two to five quarters before the claim. The location of the kink varies slightly
as the benefit cap adjusts each year.
11
   These sample sizes reflect several additional restrictions. We limit our sample to women who were at least 18 years
old in 2001 when we first observe them; whose mailing address on the 1040 form is California and who either (1) do




                                                          9
samples such as the Current Population Survey (CPS) and the Survey of Income and Program
Participation (SIPP) each contain only around 100 California first births in 2004; the American
Community Survey (ACS) contains 1,150 California births; and the National Longitudinal Survey
of Youth (NLSY) contains 35 California births in 2004. These large samples of tax data can
improve precision and permit novel sub-group analyses.
         A second advantage is that the IRS tax data contain individual identifiers in each year. This
feature permits a longitudinal analysis of women's career outcomes before and after they give
birth as well as the outcomes of their spouses. Longitudinal coverage allows us to account for time-
invariant, unobserved characteristics that impact women's outcomes, examine the role of selection,
and quantify the long-term effects of the policy for over a decade.
         A third advantage of the tax data is that their administrative information on employment
and wage earnings ameliorate measurement error due to self-reporting and recall errors in surveys.
Our primary employment outcomes are based on income measures from third-party information
returns or from IRS Form 1040, including the sum of all wages on W-2 forms for each tax year as
well as alternative sources of income such as self-employment income. Wage earnings are
converted to 2016 dollars using the CPI-U. We define employment as equal to 1 in the tax year if
the individual earns at least $1,000 in wages. 12 Attachment to one's pre-birth employer is equal to
1 if the worker continues employment in subsequent tax years with the same employer as in the
year before she gave birth, as measured by observation of the same EIN on her highest earning W-
2. We observe the same outcomes for spouses identified on Form 1040.
         Similar to the CPS, NLSY, and CEDD, the IRS tax data also allow an examination of take-
up of paid leave. In the IRS tax data, take-up of paid leave is captured by "unemployment
compensation" reported on Form 1099-G. 13 The CEDD, the administrative data source used by
Bedard and Rossin-Slater (2016), provide very accurate counts regarding claims of leave in




not work (i.e., had zero income) or (2) who work in California or a neighboring state according to their W2. See
Appendix I for a more detailed summary of the sample and data.
12
   The $1,000 cutoff is meant to exclude W2s with de minimis amounts as they are likely not attributable to meaningful
employment.
13
   California Paid Family Leave benefits are subject to federal income tax and flow through the federal 1099-G
form. Temporary Disability Insurance, on the other hand, is not taxable allowing us to capture the incremental take-
up of PFL separate from the long-standing TDI policy for pregnant women. See
https://www.edd.ca.gov/disability/FAQ_Employers_Benefits.htm.




                                                         10
calendar year time. However, the CEDD do not contain information on when a mother gave birth. 14
This is a potentially crucial detail: even though the Paid Leave Act was passed in 2004, its
provisions allowed eligible California parents with infants born as early as January 1, 2004, to file
a bonding claim. To the extent that women giving birth in the six months prior to July 1, 2004,
were also affected by the policy, this data limitation would lead prior analyses to misstate the
impact of the policy. Linking the IRS tax records to SSA information on the exact date of birth for
each member of the household allows this analysis to quantify both a mother's eligibility for the
policy and her take-up by her infant's month of birth. The following sections show how these data
features facilitate a novel research design and also allow us to quantify the impact of the California
Paid Family Leave Act on eligible mothers.

     IV. RESEARCH DESIGN AND TAKE-UP OF PAID LEAVE FOR CHILDBIRTH IN CALIFORNIA
         Take-up of paid leave can be quantified using Box 1, "unemployment compensation," on
Form 1099-G. Although this form combines paid leave income with unemployment compensation,
the absence of concurrent changes in California's unemployment policy allows us to use
contemporaneous changes in Box 1 income to quantify the take-up of paid family leave.

         A. Descriptive Evidence from Tax Records on Take-Up of Paid Leave in California
Figure 2A plots the share of California mothers with Box 1 by the month in which they give birth.
Consistent with Box 1 income remaining stable across quarters in the absence of policy changes,
the series changes little between quarter 1 (Q1) and quarter 3 (Q3) births in 2003, before the
effective date of California's Paid Family Leave. For this period, the share of women receiving
Box 1 income remained flat around 7 percent. 15 For women giving birth from March to June 2004,
receipt of Box 1 income rises dramatically before leveling off around 24 percent (solid line) for
Q3. This pattern suggests greater take-up of paid leave for mothers with younger infants on July
1, 2004, when the Paid Leave Act became effective, and a leveling off for women with access to
the policy from the time their child was born. Consistent with Box 1 reflecting shifts in the take-



14
   Bedard and Rossin-Slater (2016) note that the CEDD tax branch data contain the universe of California employees
in every year but have no information on their children's births or adoptions. To compute take up, they use data on
the annual number of births in California from the National Vital Statistics system (NVSS) natality database to
calculate the ratio of annual bonding claims to births. These birth data do not, however, contain information on whether
or not the parents are employed.
15
   Months 1-9 are from 1099-G returns with a tax year corresponding to year of birth. Months 10-12 are from 1099-G
returns for the tax year after birth to align timing of the receipt of PFL benefits with the relevant tax year.




                                                          11
up of paid leave, the level of Box 1 reporting in 2005 and 2006, when the policy was fully
implemented, remain higher at roughly 25 percent and varies little across birth month. Finally,
Figure 2A shows that having Box 1 income increased only slightly beyond 2004 take-up levels for
women who gave birth in 2005 and 2006, as awareness about the policy grew, underscoring the
rapidity of take-up in 2004, which is consistent with trends reported in the administrative claims
data (Bedard and Rossin-Slater 2016, Figure 1).
        The empirical pattern in 2004 is consistent with job protection and childcare imposing
binding constraints on take-up. Consider, for instance, a mother who gave birth on March 15, 2004.
Under FMLA, she could have taken a job-protected leave for 12 weeks immediately after the birth.
To maintain her job, she would have been required to return to work by June 15. Filing a bonding
claim on July 1, 2004, for an additional 6 weeks of paid leave would have been funded, but the
second leave would not have job protection. In addition, caring for a newborn is not
intertemporally fungible or easy to outsource. For instance, nursing is more intensive in the first
three months. Continuity in childcare arrangements would also make taking a delayed (paid) leave
difficult. For example, it would be difficult for new mothers to work between childbirth and three
months afterwards, and then take a leave from months 3 to 6 to align job protection with the
availability of paid leave. Suspending childcare arrangements--either daycare or a nanny--also
tends to be difficult if not infeasible.

                     B. The Relevance and Robustness of the Research Design
        The following event-study specification formalizes these comparisons between mothers
giving birth in quarter 3 of 2004 and control groups (Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan 1993,
McCrary 2007),
                                11

(1)                   =   =3,=2004  +  +  +  +  ,
                              =-3

where  is a binary variable equal to 1 if woman  giving birth in quarter q in year b observed
in calendar year t had any Box 1 income.  ,  , and  are a full set of quarter-of-birth/birth-
year fixed effects (where q=1, 3, and b=2003-2006), calendar year of observation (tax year,
t=2001-2014), and birth-year/calendar-year fixed effects.  is a binary variable equal to one if
a woman gave birth in Q3-2004, and  is a set of event-year fixed effects, where  measures
years elapsed between the year the mother gave birth, b, and the year of observation, t, or  =  -




                                                12
. Two years prior to birth, t = -2, is omitted as the reference category. The estimates of 0 describe
the take-up of paid leave when the policy became effective in July 2004 among all women as the
difference between the third and first quarter for birth year 2004 that is concentrated in tax year
2004 (y=0) and adjusted for time-invariant birth-quarter/birth-year effects, time-varying effects by
quarter of birth, and time-varying effects by birth year.
       Two additional specifications examine the robustness of our results. First, we use
comparisons to other states as follows,
                                11

(1)                   =   =3,=2004  = +  +  +  +  ,
                              =-3

where  ,  , and  are a full set of quarter-birth-year-state, quarter-state-calendar-year, and
birth year-state-calendar-year fixed effects,  is a binary variable equal to 1 if the individual
lives in California, and other notation remains as previously defined. Second, we include
individual fixed effects to account for time-invariant unobserved mother characteristics, or
                               11

(1)                    =   =3,=2004  +  +  +  +  ,
                              =-3

where  captures individual fixed effects (quarter-birth-year fixed effects are omitted), and other
terms remain as previously defined. In all specifications, standard errors are corrected for
heteroscedasticity and serial correlation within individual tax filers across tax years (Arellano
1987, Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan 2004).
       Our results, plotted in Figure 2B, show how robust these comparisons are. Consistent with
the descriptive series in Figure 2A, which shows a change from 7 percent (Q1 2004 births) to 25
percent of women having Box 1 income (Q1 2004 births) for and increase around 18 percentage
points, Figure 2B shows Q3-2004 California mothers were roughly 18 percentage points more
likely to take up paid leave than the model-based counterfactual. This estimate is precise and robust
to using other states or individual mother fixed effects as in equations (1) and (1), and is almost
identical to Bedard and Rossin-Slater (2016)'s estimate of around 20 percent take-up in the second
half of 2004 in the California administrative records. Accounting for the fact that 68 percent of
mothers would have been employed (and therefore eligible), the take-up of paid leave among likely
eligible mothers was 25 percent. The take-up rates for first-time moms are even higher at 21.5
percent overall and 28 percent for new mothers working in the year before birth. Less than 100




                                                 13
percent take up is consistent with the fact that only 60 percent of U.S. workers were eligible for
job protection under FMLA (Klerman, Daley, and Pozniak 2012) and awareness of the program
was not universal (Applebaum and Milkman 2011).
       These patterns are consistent with Q1 2004 mothers being constrained in their take up of
paid leave, either due to FMLA or childcare arrangements. They also suggest California women
giving birth in 2003, 2005, and 2006 could provide a reasonable comparison group. The next
section examines the internal validity of these comparisons using a rich set of balance tests.

                           C. Internal Validity of the Research Design
       For equation (1) to recover the causal effects of California's Paid Leave Act from other
factors, access to paid leave should be the only reason why career outcomes differ between Q3-
2004 mothers and the comparison group. Selection, induced by deliberate delays in childbearing
to take advantage of the July 2004 availability of paid leave, would violate this assumption. If
women with greater commitment to their careers (and higher wages) disproportionately delayed
childbearing from late 2003 until Q3-2004, the wages and wage growth for Q3-2004 mothers
would tend to be higher--generating the spurious finding of positive wage effects when the policy
had none. The converse is also possible: if women with less career attachment (and lower wages)
disproportionately delayed childbearing to Q3-2004, the wages and wage growth for Q3-2004
mothers would tend to be lower than expected--creating the spurious negative policy effect.
       We test for selection in several ways. First, we use the National Vital Statistics System
(NVSS) natality files to examine changes in California birth rates. Because we do not have
identifiers for individual mothers across years, we estimate a restricted version of equation (1):
(2)             log(births ) = =3,=2004,= +  +  +  +  .
The outcome is logged number of births in quarter q in year b to mothers residing in state s; 
and  are a set of quarter- and birth-year fixed effects by mother's state of residence;  captures
national patterns in births by quarter and year; and other notation remains as defined. The
parameter of interest, , quantifies the elevation in California births in Q3-2004 relative to the
expected pattern based on 2003, 2005, and 2006. In our analysis, California's birth rate in Q3-
2004 was not statistically or economically different than the model-based counterfactual based on
all states (estimate= 0.009, s.e.=0.016). When using only California births in 2003-2006, birth rates
appear to be slightly lower than expected (though not significantly so) in Q3-2004
(estimate= -0.013, s.e. 0.015).



                                                 14
         Although the NVSS data do not support the claim that women delayed childbearing to gain
access to paid leave, serial correlation in birth rates limits the precision of these estimates.
Moreover, the composition of mothers could change even if birth rates do not. Therefore, we
additionally test for selection using the following cross-sectional version of equation (1):
(3)                                       = =3,=2004 +  +  +  .
 is a pre-birth characteristic of individual i giving birth in quarter q in year b, and  and 
are a set of quarter- and birth-year fixed effects, and standard errors are corrected for
heteroscedasticity (Huber 1967, White 1980). Other notation and samples remain as previously
defined. Our selection test is embedded in , which captures pre-birth differences in individual
characteristics, employment, and wage earnings--after using the model to adjust for quarter of
birth patterns and birth year differences using mothers of children born in 2003, 2005, and 2006.
If Q3-2004 mothers were positively selected on career outcomes relative to the comparison group,
we would expect them to be older, have slightly fewer children, be more likely to work, and earn
higher salaries.
         The data rejects this hypothesis. Without adjusting for birth seasonality using equation (3),
Table 2A shows that the characteristics of women giving birth in 2004 in Q1 (col. 2) and Q3 (col.
3) are statistically different (col. 4 presents the raw difference and standard error of this difference).
This is not surprising, as quarter of birth is known to be correlated with a variety of socio-economic
outcomes (Buckles and Hungerman 2013). After accounting for this seasonality using equation
(3), pre-birth outcomes for Q3-2004 moms are not different than expected (col. 5). Before they
gave birth, Q3-2004 mothers are similar in age at first birth, marital status, number of children,
employment, wage earnings, spouses' wage earnings, household adjusted-gross income, and their
likelihood of working with the same employer in the two years before birth. 16 Correcting these
comparisons for multiple hypothesis testing using the Bonferroni-Holmes method yields larger p-
values (Holm 1979, Duflo, Glennerster, and Kremer 2007). 17




16
  There also appears to be no differences for Q3-2004 mothers in their likelihood of filing taxes.
17
  In addition, to balance tests for individual covariates, we use heteroscedasticity robust F-test for goodness of fit for
the regression to evaluate the joint significance of all Table 2 covariates. For all births, we fail to reject the null
hypothesis that, after adjusting for the quarter and year fixed effects, the model with covariates predicts having a Q3-
2004 birth as well as the intercept-only model (p-value=0.422). For first births, we fail to reject the null as well (p-
value=0.855).




                                                           15
         Our analysis also examines new mothers, who may respond differently to paid leave than
women with children. Theoretically, this follows from the observation that women learn how to
manage motherhood when they have their first child, developing both benchmarks (e.g., when to
go back to work, how long to nurse) as well as childcare routines. The availability of paid leave
may, therefore, have a greater impact on new mothers than on women who have already
established their childcare and work routines. Moreover, women with children who remained at
work (making them eligible for paid leave) may be selected on career attributes. Because new
mothers are a focus of our subsequent analysis, Table 2B repeats this balance test for the subsample
of first births. As in the overall sample, we find no evidence of selection on observed pre-birth
characteristics. Table 2 is reassuring because we expect unobserved characteristics of concern to
be correlated with the observed characteristics (Oster 2017, Altonji, Elder, and Taber 2005). In
summary, balance across a rich set of observed characteristics in the tax data supports the internal
validity of our research design. 18
         Beyond these balance tests, our analysis takes several additional steps to account for
selection. First, to the extent that unobserved characteristics are still a concern, our analysis
includes individual mother fixed effects as in equation (1) to account for time-invariant, mother
characteristics that are not contained in the tax data. Second, the analysis attempts to quantify the
extent to which Q3-2004 mothers are selected on time-varying, unobserved characteristics. If this
were the case, pre-birth characteristics in Table 2 would not be correlated with childbearing in Q3-
2004 even though the effects of these unobserved characteristics change after childbearing and
compromise the internal validity of our research design. As we will show, our analysis finds little
evidence of time-varying selection on unobserved characteristics.

                   D. Quantifying the Local Average Treatment Effect of Paid Leave
         Using equation (1) with labor-market outcomes as dependent variables, we estimate the
reduced-form (or intention-to-treat, ITT) effects of California's Paid Leave Act averaged over all
California mothers--even those that do not take up the policy. A related question asks what the



18
   If women giving birth in Q3-2004 were selected on greater pre-birth commitment to staying home with children--
an unobserved characteristic that could threaten the internal validity of our research design, then we would also expect
them to have lower annual pre-birth wage earnings, because we expect them to anticipate opting out of the labor
market at motherhood. The ACS allows us to examine balance in demographic characteristics that cannot be measured
with IRS tax data. Although precision is limited by small sample sizes, the Online Appendix shows that these
characteristics also appear balanced across treatment and control mothers for race and ethnicity as well as education.




                                                          16
effect of Paid Leave is on the eligible women who take it up? Because take-up may vary across
women with different characteristics, this parameter is especially important for comparing the
effects of the Paid Leave Act across subgroups.
       To answer this question, we estimate the following two-stage least squares (2SLS) model,
where the first-stage equation uses Paid Leave (any 1099-G Box 1 income in year b) as the
dependent variable, or
(4)                        = =3,=2004 +  +  +  .
and the second stage equation is a close variant of equation (1),
                                 11

(4)                       =     +  +  +  +  ,
                                =-3

with Y being a labor-market outcome. Estimating this model using two-stage least squares, the
estimate of  is given by the ratio of the reduced form and first stage coefficients ( /).
       The causal interpretation of the 2SLS estimate relies on two main identifying assumptions:
the implementation of California's Paid Leave Act on July 1, 2004, was both (1) relevant for
women's leave taking and (2) that childbearing in Q3-2004 is exogenous and excludable. Section
IV.B shows relevance, and Section IV.C argues that childbirth in Q3-2004 appears to be as good
as randomly assigned. Further, it seems plausible that the excludability assumption is met, such
that a Q3-2004 birth effect only impacts women's career outcomes by increasing their paid leave.
Under these assumptions, we interpret the 2SLS estimate as the local average treatment effect, or
LATE (Imbens and Angrist 1994). The 2SLS estimate,  , identifies the causal effect of increasing
the available duration of paid leave by six weeks among the women who increase their leave taking
as a consequence of the 2004 California Paid Leave Act and who would not have increased their
leave taking in the absence of the Act.

V. RESULTS: THE IMPACT PAID FAMILY LEAVE ACT ON WOMEN'S CAREERS AND FAMILIES
       The IRS tax data permit a rich characterization of the dynamics of mothers' careers in the
years immediately before and up to 11 years after the enactment of California's 2004 Paid Family
Leave Act. Longitudinal coverage allows us to track individual mothers from 2001 through 2015
in multiple dimensions, including annual wage earnings, employment history and unique employer
identifiers, enabling the study of employer transitions.
       We present our analyses in two ways. First, Figure 3 presents the ITT estimates using our




                                                  17
preferred specification (equation 1) that includes mother fixed effects,  , to account for selection
on time-invariant characteristics for mothers. (The Online Appendix shows that our results are
robust to the expansion of our control group to include mothers in other states as well as to
alternative specifications using alternative years). These estimates provide a description of the
evolution of mothers' career outcomes in the first decade after the policy was implemented relative
to the model-based counterfactual. Importantly, the magnitudes and signs of  for t<0 allow us to
test for differential trends in labor-market outcomes before women gave birth. (Recall, Table 2's
balance test compares only pre-birth outcome levels.)
       To complement this analysis, Table 3 summarizes these ITT effects using two post-period
dummy variables (rather than dummy variables for each event-year). We call these periods "short
term" (years 1 to 4 after birth, or 2005-2008 for 2004 mothers) and "long term" (years 5 to 11 after
birth, or 2009-2015 for 2004 mothers). In addition, Table 3 presents the LATE that quantifies the
effects of the Paid Leave Act on women who took up the additional paid leave it offered.

                                   A. Effects of Paid Leave on Employment
       The event-study series in Figure 3 highlights the strength of the research design as well as
the absence of a positive treatment effect of the policy on outcomes. We consider the impact of
California's Paid Family Leave Act for two groups of mothers. First, we analyze all mothers who
gave birth between 2003 and 2006 (solid line, no series markers). In addition, we focus on the
subsample of mothers who had their first birth between 2003 and 2006, who may have benefited
from paid leave for all of her childbearing years.
       For all mothers, the design shows the absence of a pre-trend in employment and wage
earnings in the years before birth. The regression-adjusted employment of women with access to
six more weeks of paid leave was on average 0.2 percentage points lower than expected five to 11
years after birth, although this estimate is not statistically different from zero (panel B.1, ITT, col.
1). The upper 95-percent confidence interval rules out positive short-term effects for the cohort of
new mothers greater than 0.4 percentage points. Using the two-stage least-squares approach in
equation (4) and estimates of take-up in panel A, we can rule out a 2.2 percentage-point increase
among women taking up the program (LATE, panel B.2, 1-sided test at the 95-percent level). In
the long run, the data rule out positive employment effects of greater than 1.3 percentage points
(LATE, panel C.2).




                                                  18
       These short-term and long-term effects are absolutely and relatively larger for women
giving birth for the first time. Event-study estimates in Figure 3A (circle markers) show that
employment fell sharply for new mothers with access to 6 more weeks of paid leave relative to the
model-based counterfactual. In the first four years after first giving birth, employment was 6
percent lower for the cohort overall (-4.6 percentage points/76, ITT, Table 3, panel B1, col. 3) in
the short term. Five to eleven years after first giving birth, employment of new mothers was 1.2
percent lower (-0.9/76 percentage points, ITT, panel B.1, col. 3). These effects reflect much larger
impacts among new mothers taking up the additional leave under the California Paid Leave Act.
For this group, employment fell by 2.8 percent (-2.1 percentage points/76, LATE, panel B.2, col.
3) in the short term and by a sizable and statistically significant 5.4 percent (-4.1 percentage
points/76, LATE, panel B.2, col. 3) eleven years later.
       Mother fixed effects, which are included in all specifications in Table 3, account for the
selection of mothers based on time-invariant characteristics into childbearing in Q3-2004. Because
the California Paid Family Leave Act was implemented with a lag after its passage, an alternative
interpretation of our estimates is that women who wanted to opt out of the labor force after
becoming mothers were disproportionately likely to delay childbearing (from 2003 to 2004) to
take full advantage of the policy. If this type of selection were driving our results, we would expect
new mothers giving birth in Q3-2004 to be more likely to remain out of the labor force following
childbirth. A corollary of this hypothesis is that new mothers giving birth in 2003 would be less
likely to opt out of the labor force following childbirth. Using this selected set of 2003 mothers in
the comparison group, this logic should lead us to find a negative employment effect--even if the
California Paid Family Leave Act did not cause a reduction in employment. However, eliminating
2003 mothers from the comparison group tends to make the estimates more negative, increasing
the negative estimates by 25 to 30 percent in absolute value (cols. 2 and 4). This implies that time-
varying selection on unobserved characteristics tends to attenuate our estimates.
       Theoretical predictions suggest that a primary mechanism through which paid leave helps
women is by facilitating their attachment to the labor market and return to work with their pre-
birth employers. Panel C of Table 3 examines this mechanism using information from tax returns
about women's employers in every year relative to the pre-birth employer. The dependent variable
is equal to 1 if a woman is employed with the same employer as in the year before she gave birth.
The 18 percent of mothers taking up the additional paid leave, however, are 2 percent more likely




                                                 19
to remain with pre-birth employers in the short term and long term (LATE, 1.5 and 1.3 percentage
points/66, panel C.2, col. 1). For new mothers, there is a 1.3 percent decrease in employment with
pre-birth employers the short term (LATE, -0.9 percentage points, panel C.2, col. 3) and a
statistically insignificant 2 percent decrease in the long term (LATE, -1.3 percentage points/65,
panel C.2, col. 3). Consistent with the results for employment, eliminating 2003 from the
comparison group makes the estimates more negative, suggesting that the true effects on
attachment to pre-birth employer are closer to zero for all women and more negative for new
mothers. In short, the data are inconsistent with the prediction that the California Paid Family
Leave Act helped mothers maintain attachment to the same employer. Women taking up paid leave
were no more likely to remain with their pre-birth employer.

                           B. Effects of Paid Leave on Wage Earnings
       Table 2 shows that women giving birth in Q3-2004 are not significantly different than their
counterparts in a variety of observed characteristics, after adjusting for birth seasonality (col. 4).
In terms of their annual earnings, mothers giving birth in Q3-2004 earned a statistically
insignificant 0.5 percent, or $150/$27,518, more than their Q1 counterparts. Mothers first giving
birth in Q3-2004 earned a statistically insignificant 0.8 percent, or $242/$32,097, less than their
counterparts. That is, the annual wage earnings of women with unconstrained access to paid leave
looked very similar to their counterparts before they gave birth.
       How did the wage trajectories of these otherwise similar women change after giving birth?
Figure 3B summarizes the event-study (ITT) estimates for the first decade after childbirth from
our preferred specification that includes mother fixed effects (and, therefore, accounts for even the
very small differences in pre-birth outcomes in Table 2). For all mothers and new mothers, annual
wage earnings fall in the year of birth by an amount that roughly equals the change we see in
1099G Box 1 income, which is consistent with wage replacement coming from the CA PFL. While
annual wage earnings for all mothers return to pre-birth levels, annual wages for new mothers
remain lower. Table 4 summarizes these ITT estimates in the short- and long-term for wage levels
(Table 4A.1) and wages in logs (Table 4B.1) and also quantifies the respective LATEs. The
magnitude of the reduction in annual wage earnings for all mothers is a statistical zero of, at most,
$528 (Table 4A.2, cols. 1 and 2). Annual wage earnings of new mothers taking up paid leave were
$1,600 to $2,600 lower in the short term and $2,500 to $3,700 in the long run (Table 4A.2, cols. 3
and 4). The results for the log of women's wage earnings tell a similar story, with the decline in



                                                 20
the earnings of new mothers exceeding 6 percent in the short run and ranging from 5 to 8 percent
in the long-term (Table 4B.2, cols. 3 and 4).
       Importantly, these results are not explained by selection on time-invariant unobservables,
because the longitudinal data allow us to account for these unobserved characteristics using
individual fixed effects. Could these results be driven by women with lower (unobserved) earnings
potential delaying their childbirth to Q3-2004 to take full advantage of the policy? Following the
logic presented previously, this type of selection implies that mothers giving first birth in 2003
would have higher (unobserved) earnings potential whereas mothers giving first birth in 2004
would have lower (unobserved) earnings potential. Under this type of selection, eliminating 2003
mothers from our comparison group should reduce the magnitudes of the negative wage impacts.
In fact, the reverse appears to be the case: excluding 2003 mothers (cols. 2 and 4) increases the
magnitudes of the negative effects relative to including 2003 mothers (cols. 1 and 3). Ignoring
statistical significance, Q3-2004 mothers appear differentially selected on having higher earnings
potential, which ceteris paribus should tend to offset negative effects of the policy on wages,
leading the analysis to understate the wage effects. The negative wage effects, therefore, appear
driven by real changes in the intensity of work or by different types of jobs, but not by switching
from pre-birth employers (Table 3C).
       To understand the mechanisms for these effects, we examine whether California's Paid
Leave Act encouraged parents to specialize more, with men working more for pay and women
working more in the home with children. If this were the case, the spouses of women taking up
paid leave would earn more on an annual basis than those of women not taking up paid leave.
Contrary to this prediction, Table 4C finds little evidence that this was the case. In fact, the annual
wages of spouses of women taking up paid leave were slightly (but insignificantly) lower in both
the short and long term­not higher as anticipated by this theory. Table 4D also examines whether
self-employment income for mothers increased as a result of the policy. The tax data show that
new mothers taking up paid leave increased their earnings from self-employment by nearly 50
percent in the long-term, suggesting that access to paid leave may lead some women to transition
to more flexible working arrangements. The Online Appendix presents a supplemental analysis of
alternative income sources in the tax data, which we omit here for brevity.
       In summary, our estimates suggest that women who had access to paid leave experienced
post-birth employment rates and annual wages that were no higher than their counterparts without




                                                  21
access to the policy, both in the short- and long-term. Among all women, the tax data show that
the positive effects on women's employment are as small as 0.2 percentage points from 1 to 4
years after birth--much smaller than in recent studies using survey data (see Table 1). However,
these aggregate effects mask significant declines in employment and wage earnings among new
mothers, which differ from those with children at the 5 percent level. 19 For new mothers, our
estimates rule out even a 1 percent increase in employment in the short term and decisively reject
positive effects in the long term. Ten years after becoming mothers, our estimates show that
women with greater access to paid leave had statistically significant reductions in employment of
between 5 to 7 percent and their annual wages were between 5 and 8 percent lower.

       C. Heterogeneity in Employment Effects for New Mothers: Differences by Demographic
                            Characteristics and Pre-Birth Wage Earnings
           Differences in these patterns across subgroups inform our understanding of potential
mechanisms for these negative effects for new mothers. (The Online Appendix includes
heterogeneity tests for the sample of all mothers.) Figure 4 reports this heterogeneity by marital
status of mothers, age at which she had her first birth, whether she worked in the year prior to her
birth, and her age-adjusted pre-birth wage quartile (see Online Appendix tables for estimates,
standard errors, and exact sample sizes). Figure 4A shows how take up of paid leave varied across
groups. Take-up was similar for unmarried and married mothers (22.4 versus 21.2 percentage
points), but it was significantly smaller among mothers under age 30 compared to those over age
30 (19.4 percentage points versus 23.8 percentage points).
           We also examine heterogeneity in the effects by mothers' pre-birth earnings. This could be
important because higher income mothers are more likely to have had access to paid leave from
their firm in the absence of a state mandate, which might lead California's Paid Family Leave
Act's effects to be smaller for this group. On the other hand, higher earning women also tend to
be more educated and, therefore, be better informed about the policy or are more likely to be able
to afford to take time off with less than full wage replacement. Consistent with the latter
hypothesis, take-up is higher for the higher earners relative to the lowest earners, with take-up
ranging from 37 to 19 percent points, respectively.
           Figure 4B shows that take-up of paid leave was associated with a reduction in subsequent



19
     This test estimates equation (1) augmented with an indicator for first birth with Q3-2004 dummy.




                                                           22
employment for nearly all subgroups, with the largest short- (circle marker, filled) and long-term
effects (circle marker, no fill) among mothers who were unmarried when they gave birth.
Unmarried mothers taking up paid leave are 8 percent less likely to be working in the long term.
The magnitude of this impact is almost twice as large as the 4 percent employment decline among
married mothers. Note that marital status in the tax records is a legal definition, and some
unmarried mothers may be cohabitating with long-term partners and not single mothers (Cherlin
2014). Although the short-term reduction in employment is similar for mothers giving birth before
and after age 30, older mothers taking up the policy were 7-percent less likely to be employed in
the long-term versus a 4-percent reduction in employment for younger mothers. Interestingly, the
LATEs for employment by pre-birth earnings quartile vary little and are not statistically different
from one another.
       Figure 4C shows similar patterns for impacts on log wage earnings. Unmarried mothers
taking up paid leave earned around 19 percent less in annual wages, whereas married mothers
taking up paid leave earned an insignificant 2.7 to 1.7 percent less in the short- and long-run. As
with employment, the short-term reduction in annual wages is similar for mothers giving birth
before and after age 30, but older mothers experienced a smaller change in annual wages than
younger mothers (4.4 percent versus 6.1 percent). Although the LATE for annual wage earnings
is negative for new mothers who worked before birth, this impact is heterogeneous across the
earnings distribution. Although the estimates are not statistically different at conventional levels,
the effects range from an increase of 21 percent for quartile one mothers in the long-term to a
decrease of 14 percent for quartile two. All specifications contain individual fixed effects to
account for time-invariant selection on unobservables, so these effects may be driven by time-
varying shifts in work intensity (such as hours worked), shifts in the type of job, or selection on
time-varying characteristics).
       The tax data allow analysis of only one of these factors: employer switching. As we found
in aggregate, Figure 4D shows little evidence that new mothers taking up paid leave were more
likely to switch from their pre-birth employers. The estimates in the short and long-term are
statistically indistinguishable from zero and not statistically different across sub-groups in all
cases. The Online Appendix also shows that, for this outcome, selection on time-varying
characteristics appears to matter little and spousal earnings appear no lower or higher in the short
or long-term for new mothers overall or by subgroup.




                                                 23
                                     VI. CONCLUSION
       Paid leave policies in the U.S. lag behind other OECD countries, where the average
duration of parental leave is 57 weeks, and at least partially paid in every case (Blau and Kahn
2013). Many scholars, policy-makers, and businesses have advocated for paid leave in the U.S. to
advance women's careers and help close the gender gap in pay.
       This paper evaluates the impact of California's 2004 Paid Family Leave Act--the first such
policy passed in the U.S.--on women's careers over the last decade using the universe of IRS tax
data. Although the Act was modest relative to typical paid leave policies in European countries,
we find its implementation led to statistically significant and economically large declines in the
employment and wage earnings of new mothers. For this group, employment fell by 7 percent and
annual wage earnings fell by 8 percent over a decade. In addition, the policy does not appear to
have led to greater attachment to pre-birth employers.
       These results do not appear to be driven by selection. They are robust and often made
stronger by (1) including individual mother fixed effects, which account for both observed and
unobserved time-invariant characteristics; (2) using other states to adjust the comparison group;
and (3) adjusting comparisons for time-varying selection on observed or unobserved
characteristics. The tax records show no evidence of increased household specialization of women
in childrearing and men in market work (leading husbands to earn more). Rather, the effects on
annual wage earnings appear to be driven by reductions in mothers' work intensity (i.e., working
fewer hours and weeks) and changes in jobs (i.e., working in jobs with lower wages and potentially
greater non-wage compensation), including shifts to self-employment.
       This paper's estimates imply that the annual wage earnings of new mothers taking up paid
leave were $1,600 to $2,600 lower in the short term and $2,500 to $3,700 in the long run (Online
Appendix Table 4A.2, cols. 3 and 4). The results for log of women's wage earnings tell a similar
story, with the short-term decline in the earnings of new mothers exceeding 6 percent in the short
run and ranging from 5 to 8 percent in the long run (Table 4B.2, cols. 3 and 4). Cumulatively, new
mothers with access to paid leave under California's 2004 Paid Family Leave Act could expect to
receive around $1,833 in wage replacement for one year but approximately $25,681 lower earnings




                                               24
over the next decade, for a net 10-year loss of $24,000. 20
         These empirical findings are difficult to square with standard economic models of labor
supply or demand. Not only are the labor-market returns to a few weeks of additional experience
minimal in most professions, but wages are downwardly (nominally) rigid by law (employers can't
legally reduce the wages of new mothers after they return to account for skill depreciation). In
other words, the wage offers should be identical for women regardless of whether she returns to
work after six weeks or after five additional weeks of leave with partial wage replacement.
         Two alternative models may explain these results. On the demand side, differential
employer discrimination against mothers giving birth in Q3-2004 could lower future wage offers,
reduce work intensity, and even decrease women's willingness to remain employed. To explain
this paper's results, this discrimination-induced nudge out of paid employment would need to be
large enough to reduce women's employment and wage earnings up to 10 years after she had her
first child. Importantly, any demand-side impacts of the California Paid Family Leave Act on the
hiring or compensation of women more broadly (i.e., impacts experienced by women giving birth
in 2003, 2005, or 2006) are differenced out by our research design.
         A second explanation operates by impacting women's supply of labor to the market.
Specifically, if investment in parenting is increasing in time spent with infants, similar to models
with increasing returns to consumption (Becker and Murphy 1988, O'Donoghue and Rabin 2001),
additional leave may encourage women to invest more in their children (and less in their careers)--
even if treatment by employers at the time they return to work is the same. Moreover, it may
encourage greater specialization in childcare by the partner taking leave. Under this model of
parenting and labor supply, women themselves may reduce their labor-force investments following
a longer leave, thereby reducing their longer-term employment and annual wage earnings.
         Although these competing models have identical predictions in terms of employment and
annual wage earnings, they have different welfare interpretations. If the demand-side model holds,
paid leave legislation could be responsible for a discrimination-induced reduction of wage
earnings of $24,000. If the supply-side model holds, paid leave legislation could be responsible



20
  The calculation of benefits is a present discounted value, using an interest rate of 4 percent and cumulates the $2,559
and $3,685 over 10 years from the year of birth. We calculate the expected replacement wages from 6 weeks of paid
leave at 50 percent the annual wage earnings for the average 2004 California mother (Table 2, col. 1). For new mothers,
this calculation is $1,833, or around 11 percent, 6/52, of one's annual wages earnings.




                                                           25
for an increase in investment of $24,000 worth of mothers' time in children. Disentangling these
two explanations in the IRS tax data is difficult, but two pieces of evidence point to a labor-supply
effect. First, unless firm-level discrimination were specific to new mothers (and not higher parity
mothers), the discrimination-based explanation should yield similar employment and wage effects
for new mothers and women with older children. However, the analysis finds little effect for
mothers giving birth a second or later time, but large effects concentrated among new mothers.
The larger effect on new mothers implies that the Act may lead to different parenting and work
behaviors on the part of parents, which is consistent with the labor-supply explanation.
         The effects of the 2004 California Paid Family Leave Act on completed childbearing
reinforce this interpretation. If the Act increased investments in children, then standard economic
models posit the number of children should fall, because increases in child "quality" (i.e.,
investment in children) increases the shadow price of child quantity (Becker and Lewis 1973).
Table 5A.2 shows this was the case, with the number of children falling by 2 percent for all mothers
(-0.06/2.31, col. 2) and 5 percent for new mothers (-0.10/1.81, col. 4) over the next decade. The
2004 and 2008 SIPP suggest that paid leave increased maternal time investments in children,
raising the time parents read to their children, took them on outings, and had breakfast with them. 21
Although small sample sizes limit certainty about the magnitudes of these estimates, seemingly
unrelated regression rejects that the results are jointly zero. Consistent with the findings from other
recent studies (Baker and Milligan 2008, Liu and Skans 2010, Washbrook et al. 2011, Avendaño
et al. 2015, Bartel et al. 2016, Rossin-Slater 2017, Pac et al. 2019, Trajkovski 2019, Bullinger
2019), these results suggest that California's 2004 Paid Family Leave Act may have benefitted
families and children--even if the policy did not reduce the gender gap.

                                            VII. REFERENCES
Altonji, Joseph G, Todd E Elder, and Christopher R Taber. 2005. "Selection on Observed and Unobserved
          Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools." Journal of Political Economy 113 (1):151-
          184. doi: 10.1086/426036.
Applebaum, E., and R. Milkman. 2011. "Leaves that Pay: Employer and Worker Experiences with Paid Family
          Leave in California." CEPR Discussion Paper.
Arellano, Manuel. 1987. "Computing Robust Standard Errors for Within-Groups Estimators." Oxford Bulletin of
          Economics and Statistics 49 (4):431-434.
Avendaño, M., LF. Berkman, i A. Brugiavin, and G. Pasini. 2015. "The long-run effect of maternity leave benefits
          on mental health: evidence from European countries." Social Science & Medicine 132:45-53.


21
  Although the SIPP does not permit the rich specification testing or subgroup analyses as the IRS tax data, it allows
the same quarter-of-birth based comparisons for roughly 6,000 births (equation 3). See Online Appendix for a detailed
description of the methodology used in the SIPP analysis.




                                                         26
Baker, Michael, and Kevin Milligan. 2008. "Maternal employment, breastfeeding, and health: Evidence from
         maternity leave mandates." Journal of Health Economics 27 (4):871-887.
Bana, Sarah, Kelly Bedard, and Maya Rossin-Slater. 2018. "The Impacts of Paid Family Leave Benefits: Regression
         Kink Evidence from California Administrative Data." National Bureau of Economic Research Working
         Paper Series No. 24438. doi: 10.3386/w24438.
Bartel, Ann P., Maya Rossin-Slater, Christopher Ruhm, Jenna Stearns, and Jane Waldfogel. 2016.
Baum, Charles L. 2003. "The effect of state maternity leave legislation and the 1993 Family and Medical Leave Act
         on employment and wages." Labour Economics 10 (5):573-596.
Baum, Christopher, and Christopher Ruhm. 2016. "The Effects of Paid Family Leave in California on Labor Market
         Outcomes." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 35 (2):333-356.
Becker, Gary S., and H. Gregg Lewis. 1973. "On the Interaction between the Quantity and Quality of Children."
         Journal of Political Economy 81 (2):S279-S288.
Becker, Gary S., and Kevin M. Murphy. 1988. "A Theory of Rational Addiction." Journal of Political Economy 96
         (4):675-700.
Bedard, Kelly, and Maya Rossin-Slater. 2016. The Economic and Social Impacts of Paid Family Leave in
         California: Report for the California Employment Development.
Bertrand, Marianne. 2010. "New Perspectives on Gender." In Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4B, edited by
         Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, 1545-1592. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. "How Much Should We Trust Differences-in-
         Differences Estimates?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (1):249-275.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Kevin F Hallock. 2001. "The gender gap in top corporate jobs." ILR Review 55 (1):3-21.
Blau, Francine D, and Lawrence M Kahn. 2016. "The gender wage gap: Extent, trends, and sources." Journal of
         Economic Literature.
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2013. "Female Labor Supply: Why is the US Falling Behind?"
         American Economic Review 103 (3):251-256.
Buckles, Karey S., and Daniel M. Hungerman. 2013. "Season of Birth and Later Outcomes: Old Questions, New
         Answers." Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (3):711-724.
Bullinger, Lindsey Rose. 2019. "The Effect of Paid Family Leave on Infant and Parental Health in the United
         States." Journal of Health Economics 66:101-16.
Byker, Tanya. 2016. "The Opt-Out Continuation: Education, Work, and Motherhood from 1984-2008." Russell
         Sage Foundation Journal 2 (4):34-70.
Campbell, Zak , Eric Chyn, and Justine Hastings. 2018. "The Impact of Paid Maternity Leave: Evidence from a
         Temporary Disability Insurance Program." Working paper.
Cherlin, Andrew J. 2014. Labor's love lost: the rise and fall of the working-class family in America. New York:
         Russell Sage Foundation.
Council of Economic Advisors. 2014. "The Economics of Paid and Unpaid Leave."
         https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/docs/leave_report_final.pdf.
Dahl, Gordon B., Katrine V. Løken, Magne Mogstad, and Kari Vea Salvanes. 2016. "What Is the Case for Paid
         Maternity Leave?" The Review of Economics and Statistics 98 (4):655-670. doi: 10.1162/REST_a_00602.
Das, Tirthatanmoy, and Solomon W. Polachek. 2015. "Unanticipated Effects of California's Paid Family Leave
         Program." Contemporary Economic Policy 33 (4):619-635. doi: 10.1111/coep.12102.
Duflo, Esther, Rachel Glennerster, and Michael Kremer. 2007. "Chapter 61 Using Randomization in Development
         Economics Research: A Toolkit." In Handbook of Development Economics, edited by T. Paul Schultz and
         John A. Strauss, 3895-3962. Elsevier.
Fass, Sarah. 2009. Paid Leave in the States: A Critical Support for Low-wage Workers and Their Families. New
         York: National Center for Children in Poverty.
Goldin, Claudia, and Joshua Mitchell. 2017. "The New Life Cycle of Women's Employment: Disappearing Humps,
         Sagging Middles, Expanding Tops." Journal of Economic Perspectives 31 (1):161-82. doi:
         10.1257/jep.31.1.161.
Guvenen, Fatih, Greg Kaplan, and Jae Song. 2014. "The Glass Ceiling and The Paper Floor: Gender Differences
         among Top Earners, 1981-2012." NBER Working Paper 20560.
Han, WenJui, Christopher Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel. 2009. "Parental leave policies and parents' employment and
         leavetaking." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 28 (1):29-54.
Holm, Sture. 1979. "A Simple Sequentially Rejective Multiple Test Procedure." Scandinavian Journal of Statistics
         6 (2):65-70.




                                                       27
Huber, P. J. . 1967. "The behavior of maximum likelihood estimates under nonstandard conditions." Proceedings of
          the Fifth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability. 1:221­233.
Imbens, Guido W., and Joshua D. Angrist. 1994. "Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment
          Effects." Econometrica 62 (2):467-475. doi: 10.2307/2951620.
Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan. 1993. "Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers."
          American Economic Review 83 (4):685-703.
Klerman, Jacob Alex, Kelly Daley, and Alyssa Pozniak. 2012. Family and Medical Leave in 2012: Technical
          Report. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates.
Kleven, Henrik, Camille Landais, and Jakob Egholt Søgaard. 2018. "Children and Gender Inequality: Evidence from
          Denmark." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series No. 24219. doi:
          10.3386/w24219.
Liu, Q., and O.N. Skans. 2010. "The Duration of Paid Parental Leave and Children's Scholastic Performance." The
          BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 10 (1):1-35.
Matsa, David A., and Amalia R. Miller. 2011. "Chipping away at the Glass Ceiling: Gender Spillovers in Corporate
          Leadership." American Economic Review 101 (3):635-639.
McCrary, Justin. 2007. "The Effect of Court-Ordered Hiring Quotas on the Composition and Quality of Police."
          American Economic Review 97 (1):318-353.
O'Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 2001. "Choice and Procrastination." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
          116 (1):121-160.
Olivetti, Claudia, and Barbara Petrongolo. 2017. "The economic consequences of family policies: lessons from a
          century of legislation in high-income countries." Journal of Economic Perspectives 31 (1):205-30.
Oster, Emily. 2017. "Unobservable Selection and Coefficient Stability: Theory and Evidence." Journal of Business
          & Economic Statistics:1-18. doi: 10.1080/07350015.2016.1227711.
Pac, Jessica E., Ann P. Bartel, Christopher J. Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel. 2019. "Paid Family Leave and
          Breastfeeding: Evidence from California." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
          25784.
Rossin-Slater, Maya. 2017. "Maternity and Family Leave Policy." In Oxford Handbook on the Economics of
          Women, edited by Susan L. Averett, Laura M. Argys and Saul D. Hoffman. New York: Oxford University
          Press.
Rossin-Slater, Maya. 2018. "Maternity and Family Leave Policy." In Oxford Handbook on the Economics of
          Women, edited by Susan L. Averett, Laura M. Argys and Saul D. Hoffman. New York: Oxford
          University Press.
Rossin-Slater, Maya, Christopher Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel. 2013. "The Effects of California's Paid Family Leave
          Program on Mothers' Leave-Taking and Subsequent Labor Market Outcomes." Journal of Policy Analysis
          and Management 32 (2):224-45.
Stearns, Jenna. 2018. "Long-run Effects of Maternity Leave: Evidence from Britain." Univeristy of California-
          Davis Working Paper.
Thomas, Mallika. 2016. "The Impact of Mandated Maternity Benefits on the Gender Differential in Promotions:
          Examining the Role of Adverse Selection."
Timpe, Brenden. 2019. "The Long-Run Effects of American's First Paid Maternity Leave Policy." University of
          Michigan working paper.
Toossi, Mitra. 2002. "A century of change: The US labor force, 1950-2050." Monthly Lab. Rev. 125:15.
Trajkovski, Samantha. 2019. "California Paid Family Leave and Parental Time Use." Univeristy of Connecticut
          working paper.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2014. "Women in the Labor Force: A databook." BLS Reports, December 2014:
          Report 1052.
United States Department of Labor, USDOL. 2016. "Fact Sheet - Wage and Hour Division (WHD) - U.S.
          Department of Labor." https://www.dol.gov/whd/regs/compliance/whdfs28.htm.
Waldfogel, Jane. 1999. "The impact of the family and medical leave act." Journal of Policy Analysis and
          Management:281-302.
Washbrook, E. , CJ. Ruhm, J. Waldfogel, and W-J. Han. 2011. "Public policies, women's employment after
          childbearing, and child well-being." The BE journal of economic analysis & policy 11 (1).
White, H. . 1980. "A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance matrix estimator and a direct test for
          heteroskedasticity." Econometrica 48:817­830.




                                                      28
                                                               Figure 1. Changes in Earnings Relative to Year of First Birth

                                                   0.2



                                                     0
     Earnings relative to year before birth (-1)




                                                   -0.2



                                                   -0.4



                                                   -0.6
                                                                                                         Men, California           Women, California

                                                                                                         Men, US                   Women, US
                                                   -0.8



                                                    -1
                                                          -5       -4      -3      -2      -1         0          1         2   3        4        5
                                                                                         Years relative to first birth


Notes: The figure shows percentage changes in wage earnings (including zeros) for men and women relative to the
year of first birth. Percentage changes are estimated from an event-study regression that controls for parent age,
parent and year fixed effects following the scaling procedure in Kleven et al. (2018). Sample: 2004 to 2006 first
births. Source: IRS Tax data.




                                                                                             29
             Figure 2. Take-up of California's Paid Family Leave by Month and Year of Birth
                    A. Unadjusted Share of Mothers Taking Up Paid Leave, by Year of Birth


    0.30

    0.25
                                                                                                    Year of Birth
    0.20                                                                                                    2003
                                                                                                            2004
    0.15                                                                                                    2005
                                                                                                            2006
    0.10

    0.05

    0.00
           1        2       3         4       5        6        7          8       9       10        11       12
                                                      Month of Birth

       B. Regression-Adjusted Share of 2004 Mothers Taking Up Paid Leave, by Year Relative to Birth
      0.20
                                   0.18
                                                                No controls

      0.15                                                      Other states

                                                                Mother f.e. (95-percent, point-wise
                                                                confidence interval in dashed lines)
      0.10



      0.05



      0.00
               -3   -2    -1      0       1       2      3      4      5       6       7        8      9     10


     -0.05

Notes: Take-up of paid leave is computed using 1099-G Box 1 compensation, which comingles income paid out by
the California's TDI program (including paid leave) and unemployment income. Panel A plots the share of women
with positive unemployment compensation by the month they gave birth. Months 1 ­ 9 are drawn from 1099-G returns
with a tax-year corresponding to the year of birth. Months 10-12 are drawn from 1099-G returns corresponding to the
tax year after of birth, which aligns the receipt of PFL income with the birth year. Panel B plots regression estimates
from equation (1) with no controls, mother fixed effects, and using other states as controls. Dashed lines present the
95-percent, point-wise confidence interval for estimates from mother fixed effects specification. Source: IRS Tax data.




                                                          30
          Figure 3. Estimated Effect of Paid Family Leave on Mothers' Employment and Wages
                    A. Dependent Variable: 1=Worked during Tax Year (Earned at least $1000)
  0.020
                                              All Births
  0.015
                                              First Births (95-percent, point-wise confidence interval in dashed lines)

  0.010

  0.005

  0.000
          -3       -2     -1      0       1            2       3       4       5       6        7       8       9     10
 -0.005

 -0.010

 -0.015

 -0.020

 -0.025

               B. Dependent Variable: Wage Earnings in Tax year (2016 Dollars, Including Zeros)
  1000

                                              All Births

   500                                        First Births (95-percent, point-wise confidence interval in dashed lines)



      0
          -3      -2     -1      0       1         2       3       4       5       6        7       8       9       10


  -500



 -1000



 -1500
Notes: Series plot estimates from equation (1'') for women giving birth in California in 2004 compared to women
giving birth in 2003, 2005, and 2006. Specification includes mother fixed effects. All income variables are represented
in 2016 dollars using on the CPI-U. Source: IRS Tax data.




                                                            31
Figure 4. Local Average Treatment Effects of Paid Leave by Mothers' Characteristics


                     A. Dependent Variable: 1=Took Up Paid Leave




        B. Dependent Variable: 1=Worked during Tax Year (Earned at least $1000)




                                        32
                             C. Dependent Variable: Ln Wage Earnings in Tax year




                    D. Dependent Variable: 1=With Same Employer as in Year before Birth




Notes: In Panel A, take up of paid leave is computed using any 1099-G Box 1 income as the dependent variable (see
Figure 1B). In Panels B-D, we estimate the LATE for the short and long-terms using the 2SLS model described in
equations 4 and 4'. Each estimate is scaled by the relevant pre-birth mean except for panel C where the outcome is in
logs. See Appendix Tables 2-5 for parameter estimates, standard errors, observation, and regression statistics.


                                                         33
                Table 1. Effects of Paid Family Leave in the United States on Outcomes
Study                  Data                       Sample Size              Results
Trajkovski (2019)      1999-2000 National         65 CA births from        Differences-in-differences (DD)
                       Survey of Parents and      1999-2000 and 198        design; paid leave increases time
                       2003-2012 American         CA births from 2003-     mothers spend in childcare activities by
                       Time Use Survey            2012 (22 to 32 CA        34% (6 hours) per week
                                                  births per year)
Pac, Bartel, Ruhm      Restricted-use data        10,713 CA births from    DD design; paid leave increases
and Waldfogel          from the 2003-14           2000 to 2012 (890 CA     breastfeeding by 18 days with larger
(2019)                 National Immunization      births per year)         benefits for disadvantaged mothers
                       Survey
Bana, Bedard and       California                 42,727 to 202,159 CA     Regression kink design; for high-
Rossin-Slater          administrative data on     claims for paid leave    earning mothers, increase in wage
(2019)                 all paid family leave      (depending on            replacement rate at the cap ($80,000 to
                       claims for 2005-14;        bandwidth) over 10       $100,000) does not increase leave
                       California quarterly       years or approximately   duration or employment; conditional on
                       earnings for 2000-14       4,000-20,000 claims      returning to work, paid leave increases
                                                  per year                 likelihood of returning to pre-birth firm
Campbell, Chyn         Rhode Island               Regression               Regression discontinuity design; for
and Hastings           administrative data on     discontinuity            low-earning mothers, paid leave at the
(2018)                 all birth records linked   identified based on      eligibility discontinuity does not
                       to TDI claims and UI       3,365 to 15,209 births   increase labor supply or economic self-
                       records for 1994-2017      depending on outcome     sufficiency; also find no significant
                       (2004Q3 to 2005Q3          (or ~145 to 660 births   impacts of job protection eligibility
                       missing from data)         per year)

Baum and Ruhm          1997 National              346 CA births            DD design; paid leave increases leave-
(2016)                 Longitudinal Survey of     over 10 years or         taking (5 weeks for covered moms),
                       Youth                      approximately 35         13% increase in remaining with pre-
                                                  births per year          birth firm one year after birth; higher
                                                                           work and employment rates one year
                                                                           after birth; increased hours and weeks 2
                                                                           years after birth; no impact on wages
Byker (2016)           1996, 2001,2004 &          1,291 CA births          DD design; for less-educated mothers,
                       2008 Survey of Income      319 NJ births            paid leave reduces short-term labor-
                       and Program                (over 12 years or        market separations in 6 months around
                       Participation              approximately 100 per    birth
                                                  year)
Das and Polachek       1996-2009 March            1,418 CA births over     DD design; for young women, paid
(2015)                 Current Population         14 years, or             leave increases labor-force
                       Survey                     approximately 101        participation by 1.5 percentage points
                                                  births for 2004          (pp), unemployment by 0.3-1.5 pp, and
                                                  aggregated into 34,270   lengthened unemployment duration
                                                  state, gender, age
                                                  group, year for the US
Rossin-Slater et al.   1996-2009 March            1,418 CA births over     Find doubling of leave taking for
(2013)                 Current Population         14 years, or             women with children under age 1; 10-
                       Survey                     approximately 101        17% (but statistically insignificant)
                                                  births for 2004          impact on hours worked and large but
                                                                           insignificant increase in wages two to
                                                                           three years after birth. Results
                                                                           concentrated among less-advantaged
                                                                           women.




                                                         34
                      Table 2. Summary Statistics for Women Giving Birth in 2004
                                            (1)             (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)
                                                                                       Regression- Regression-
                                                                              Raw       adjusted     adjusted
                                                           Gave     Gave difference, difference difference
                                           Full           birth in birth in col. 3-2 2003/05/06 2005/06
                                          sample          Q1-2004 Q3-2004 (std. error) (std. error) (std. error)
Panel A. All births
    Filed taxes                            0.972           0.972     0.973    0.000324     0.000     -0.000840
                                          (0.164)         (0.164)   (0.163) (0.000836) (0.000972) (0.00104)
    Age                                     31.1            31.3     30.9      -0.385      0.029       0.0592
                                           (5.58)          (5.62)    (5.53)   (0.0285)    (0.033)     (0.0354)
    Age at first birth                      28.2            28.3     28.1      -0.194      0.0111      0.0249
                                           (5.27)          (5.31)    (5.23)   (0.0269)    (0.0313)    (0.0334)
    Married                                0.787           0.792     0.783    -0.00961    0.00128     0.00144
                                          (0.409)         (0.406)   (0.412)   (0.00209) (0.00243)    (0.00261)
    Birth parity                            1.75            1.75     1.74     -0.00321    -0.00208    0.00780
                                          (0.893)         (0.902)   (0.885)   (0.00456) (0.00521)    (0.00544)
    Share working*                         0.682           0.668     0.694     0.0262     0.000645    -0.00149
                                          (0.466)         (0.471)   (0.461)   (0.00238) (0.00275)    (0.00293)
    Wage earnings (including zeros)*      27,202          26,865    27,518      653         150         185
                                          (33,862)        (33,983) (33,746)     (173)      (201)       (216)
    Spouse's wage earnings (if present)   58,368          58,814    57,943      -871        -201        103
                                          (66,522)        (67,266) (65,806)     (383)      (444)       (476)
    With same employer as previous         0.685           0.669     0.700     0.0303     0.00202     0.00201
                                          (0.464)         (0.470)   (0.458)   (0.00288) (0.00333)    (0.00355)
    Firm size under 50 employees*          0.195           0.195     0.194    -0.000338   -0.00522    -0.00479
                                          (0.396)         (0.396)   (0.396)   (0.00245) (0.00283)    (0.00302)
    Observations                          153,531         74,317    79,214    153,531     597,384     442,273
Table continued on next page.




                                                     35
                  Table 2. Summary Statistics for Women Giving Birth in 2004 (continued)
                                                   (1)          (2)       (3)          (4)    (5)         (6)
                                                                                          Regression Regression
                                                                                 Raw       -adjusted -adjusted
                                                             Gave     Gave    difference, difference difference
                                                  Full      birth in birth in  col. 3-2 2003/05/06 2005/06
                                                 sample     Q1-2004 Q3-2004 (std. error) (std. error) (std. error)
Panel B. First births
    Filed Taxes                                  0.963       0.962       0.964      0.00133        0.00022     -0.00072
                                                (0.188)     (0.190)     (0.187)    (0.00138)      (0.00160) (0.00170)
    Age                                           29.3          29.5     29.2        -0.340        -0.0171      0.0299
                                                 (5.62)      (5.68)     (5.56)      (0.0412)      (0.0477)     (0.0506)
    Married                                      0.739       0.747       0.732       -0.0152      -0.00195     -0.00103
                                                (0.439)     (0.435)     (0.443)     (0.0032)      (0.00373) (0.00397)
    Share working*                               0.760       0.748       0.772       0.0237       0.000850 0.000500
                                                (0.427)     (0.434)     (0.420)    (0.00313)      (0.00361) (0.00383)
    Wage earnings (including zeros)*             31,784      31,455     32,097         642          -242        -0.610
                                                (35,446) (35,511) (35,381)            (260)         (300)        (319)
    Spouse's wage earnings (if present)          56,037      56,354     55,730        -623          -342         -26.2
                                                (62,095) (62,624) (61,578)            (530)         (612)        (652)
    With same employer as previous year          0.675       0.660       0.688       0.0275       -0.00535     -0.00516
                                                (0.469)     (0.474)     (0.463)     (0.0039)      (0.00456) (0.00484)
    Firm size under 50 employees*                0.196       0.194       0.198      0.00404      -0.000699 -0.000133
                                                (0.397)     (0.395)     (0.399)    (0.00334)      (0.00385) (0.00409)
    Observations                                 74,418      36,252     38,166       74,418        295,982      221,742
  Notes: Columns (1) ­ (3) describe means for characteristics for mothers who gave birth in 2004 in California, measured
  either in the year of birth or the year before birth (the latter denoted *) for the full sample, the sample of mothers
  giving birth in Q1-2004, or the sample of mothers giving birth in Q3-2004. All income variables are winsorized at the
  99th percentile and are reported in 2016 dollars based on the CPI-U. Column (4) presents the raw difference in means
  between columns (2) and (3) and indicates the standard error of this difference in parenthesis below. Column (5)
  additionally adjusts these estimates for birth seasonality (by including of mothers giving birth in 2003, 2005, and
  2006) as shown in equation (2). Sample: We restrict our sample to be women who (1) were at least 21 when they had
  their first birth, (2) filed taxes (omitting women who do not file, potentially due to low income or undocumented
  status), and (3) report their state of residence as California and work in California or one of the bordering states
  (omitting women who report working in states where they may not qualify for paid leave in California). The third
  restriction eliminates roughly 20 percent of births linked to a tax return with a California residence.




                                                           36
                Table 3. Estimates of the Effect of Paid Leave on Mothers' Employment
                                                  All births                  First births
                                               (1)            (2)         (3)             (4)
     Panel A. DV: 1=Took up paid leave
      Take-up in year of birth               0.176           0.176      0.215           0.215
                                           (0.00225)      (0.00257)   (0.00373)       (0.00411)
      F-statistic                            4,102           4,641      2,841           3,196

     Panel B. Dependent variable (DV): 1=Employed
                                                (all birth mean =0.68, first birth mean =0.76)
     1. Intention-to-treat (ITT) effects
        Short terma                       -0.000370        -0.00150        -0.00458      -0.00606
                                           (0.00267)      (0.00284)       (0.00383)      (0.00407)
        Long termb                         -0.00234        -0.00334        -0.00877       -0.0113
                                           (0.00285)      (0.00303)       (0.00403)      (0.00428)
     2. Local-average-treatment effects (LATE)
        Short terma                        -0.00203        -0.00828         -0.0213       -0.0282
                                            (0.0147)       (0.0157)        (0.0178)       (0.0189)
        Long termb                          -0.0129         -0.0185         -0.0409       -0.0526
                                            (0.0157)       (0.0168)        (0.0187)       (0.0199)

        Unique mother observations      597,384         442,273         295,982         221,742
     Panel C. DV: 1=Employed with pre-birth employer
                                             (all birth mean c=0.66, first birth mean c=0.65)
     1. ITT effects
        Short terma                     0.00405         0.00158         -0.00242       -0.00592
                                       (0.00398)       (0.00425)       (0.00541)       (0.00576)
        Long term b
                                        0.00349         0.00124         -0.00368       -0.00666
                                       (0.00389)       (0.00416)       (0.00526)       (0.00560)
     2. LATE
        Short terma                      0.0154         0.00593         -0.00868        -0.0209
                                        (0.0151)        (0.0159)        (0.0194)        (0.0203)
        Long term b
                                         0.0133         0.00465          -0.0132        -0.0235
                                        (0.0148)        (0.0156)        (0.0189)        (0.0198)

        Unique mother observations          411,898       305,222         226,663                       169,399
        Mothers with births in the following years included in regression
          2003                                                              
          2005, 2006                                                                                       
Notes: Columns (1) and (3) report estimates from our baseline specification for the short term (a 1 to 5 years after a
birth) and long term (b 6 to 11 years after birth) for the full sample of California mothers and new mothers (first births),
respectively. Mothers are identified as employed if they earn at least $1,000 in wage income. Columns (2) and (4)
limit the comparison group to mothers that gave birth in 2005 and 2006. c This mean represents the proportion of
women who remained with their same employer from 2 years before giving birth to the year before they gave birth.
The number of observations in Panel C is lower than in Panel B as we restrict to women who were working in the year
before birth.


                                                            37
         Table 4. Estimates of the Effect of Paid Leave on Mothers' and Spouses' Earnings

                                             All Births                           First Births
                                       (1)                (2)               (3)                  (4)
Panel A. DV: Wage earnings incl. zeros (all birth mean = $27,201, first birth mean = $31,783)
1. ITT effects
Short terma                          0.725            -74.6                   -346             -549
                                     (157)            (167)                  (243)            (257)
Long termb                            15.8            -95.5                   -541             -791
                                     (193)            (205)                  (298)            (315)
2. LATE
Short terma                           3.99             -413                 -1,613           -2,559
                                     (861)            (922)                (1,129)          (1,193)
Long termb                            86.9             -528                 -2,522           -3,685
                                    (1,059)          (1,134)               (1,387)          (1,467)
Unique mother observations          597,384          442,273               295,982          221,742
Panel B. DV: Ln wage earnings (all birth mean = $39,893, first birth mean = $41,787 excl. zeros)
1. ITT effects
Short terma                         -0.00316       -0.00418               -0.0171            -0.0182
                                   (0.00911)      (0.00970)              (0.0126)           (0.0134)
Long termb                          7.64e-05       -0.00538               -0.0147            -0.0226
                                   (0.00951)       (0.0101)              (0.0132)           (0.0140)
2. LATE
Short terma                          -0.0119        -0.0159               -0.0614            -0.0650
                                    (0.0359)       (0.0381)              (0.0458)           (0.0484)
Long termb                         0.000999         -0.0211               -0.0527            -0.0817
                                    (0.0380)       (0.0402)              (0.0485)           (0.0511)
Unique mother observations           536,189        397,282               271,016           202,864
Panel C. DV: Spouse's earnings including zeros (all birth mean = $56,061, first birth mean = $57,584)
1. ITT effects
Short terma                            -23.0            -3.31                -676                -572
                                       (381)            (406)               (612)               (648)
Long termb                               152             76.0                -441                -297
                                       (482)            (514)               (757)               (805)
2. LATE
Short terma                             -124            -13.8              -2,873              -2,458
                                      (2,094)         (2,234)             (2,572)             (2,753)
Long termb                               808             403               -1,851              -1,261
                                      (2,622)         (2,807)             (3,176)             (3,406)
Unique mother observations           524,422          386,854             252,993            188,715
Mothers with births in the following years included in regression
2003                                                                          
2005, 2006                                                                                        
    Table continued on next page.




                                                     38
   Table 4. Estimates of the Effect of Paid Leave on Mothers' and Spouses' Earnings (continued)

                                                     All Births                              First Births
                                               (1)                (2)                  (3)                  (4)
  Panel D. DV: Self-employment income incl. zeros
                                  (all birth mean = $2,943, first birth mean = $2,087)

  1. ITT effects
     Short-terma                          -18.6               -24.1                 -10.3                3.58
                                         (75.6)               (80.2)                (95.6)              (101)
     Long-termb                           65.3                 73.1                  210                 225
                                         (83.1)               (89.1)                (106)               (113)
  2. LATE
     Short-terma                        -102               -133                     -48.1               16.7
                                       (416)              (444)                     (445)              (472)
               b
    Long-term                           359                 404                      978               1,049
                                       (457)              (493)                     (495)              (530)
  Unique mother observations          597,384            442,273                   295,982            221,742
 Mothers with births in the following years included in regression
 2003                                                                                  
 2005, 2006                                                                                                 


Notes: See panel A of Table 3 for first stage results. Table 3 notes provide a description of the specifications and
variables. a The short term denotes 1 to 5 years after a birth. b The long term denotes 6 to 11 years after birth. The
number of observations in Panel B is lower than in Panel A as we restrict to women who have non-zero wages, and
lower in Panel C as we restrict to women who were married in the year of birth.




                                                         39
      Table 5. The Effect of Paid Leave on Children Ever Born and Time Spent with Children

                                                         All Births                       First Births
                                                   (1)                (2)               (3)          (4)
            Panel A: DV= Number of Children Born by 2013 (Tax Data)
                                               (all birth mean = 2.31, first birth mean = 1.81)
            1. ITT Effect of CPL               -0.0175           -0.0105          -0.0166        -0.0221
                                               (0.00583)         (0.00614)        (0.00682)      (0.00724)

            2. LATE of CPL                 -0.0965     -0.0583          -0.0772                  -0.103
                                           (0.0320)    (0.0340)         (0.0318)                 (0.0338)
              Mothers with births in the following years included in regression
                                   2003                                      
                            2005, 2006                                                               
            Unique mother observations 597,384         442,273          295,982                  221,742
                                                      Reading                 Outings          Breakfast
            DVs (SIPP)                               (per week)             (per month)       (per week)
                                                         (6)                     (7)              (8)
            Panel B: All Births
             Dependent variable mean                      6.09                 12.84             5.06
            1. ITT Effect of CPL                          2.07                 1.77              0.667
                                                         (0.455)              (0.852)           (0.229)

            2. LATE of CPL                                11.4                 9.83              3.67
                                                         (9.07)               (15.2)            (3.81)
            Observations                                 4,376                4,376             4,376
            Panel C: First Births
             Dependent variable mean                      6.96                 13.8              4.95
            1. ITT Effect of CPL                          1.89                 2.93              0.636
                                                         (1.45)               (1.78)            (0.484)
            2. LATE of CPL                                8.80                 13.6              2.96
                                                         (11.0)               (20.7)            (5.38)
            Observations                                  1,592               1,592              1,592
Notes. Panel A uses IRS tax data and reports coefficients from equation (3), where the dependent variable is the
number of children born within nine years after birth (cols. 1-2) and first birth (cols. 3-4). Panels B and C use 2004
and 2008 SIPP data and report coefficients for mothers giving birth in 2004 (vs 2005 or 2006) in California relative
to other states. LATEs are estimated using a two-sample 2SLS and bootstrapped standard errors. The p-value from a
test that the coefficients for the three time-use outcomes are jointly zero in seemingly unrelated regressions are 0.00
for ITT All Births, 0.042 for ITT First Births, 0.17 for LATE All Births, and 0.16 for LATE First Births. See Online
Appendix for more details on the specification and additional estimates. Full variable definitions in Data Appendix.
                                  [Click here for Online Appendix]


                                                           40
