                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




SETTING A GOOD EXAMPLE? EXAMINING SIBLING SPILLOVERS IN EDUCATIONAL
        ACHIEVEMENT USING A REGRESSION DISCONTINUITY DESIGN

                                      Krzysztof Karbownik
                                          Umut Özek

                                      Working Paper 26411
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26411


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2019




We appreciate feedback from David Figlio, Krzysztof Kalisiak and Paco Martorell as well as
conference and seminar participants at APPAM, Aarhus University, Michigan State University,
National Bureau of Economic Research Education Meeting, Northwestern University, University
of Copenhagen and University of Hong Kong. We are grateful to the anonymous county in
Florida for providing the data used in the analysis. Views expressed here are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect those of the anonymous district or the institutions to which the
authors are affiliated. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Krzysztof Karbownik and Umut Özek. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Setting a Good Example? Examining Sibling Spillovers in Educational Achievement Using
a Regression Discontinuity Design
Krzysztof Karbownik and Umut Özek
NBER Working Paper No. 26411
October 2019
JEL No. D13,I20,J13

                                         ABSTRACT

Using a regression discontinuity design generated by school-entry cutoffs and school records
from an anonymous district in Florida, we identify externalities in human capital production
function arising from sibling spillovers. We find positive spillover effects from an older to a
younger child in less affluent families and negative spillover effects from a younger to an older
child in more affluent families. These results are consistent with direct spillovers dominating in
economically disadvantaged families and with parental reinforcement in more affluent families.


Krzysztof Karbownik
Department of Economics
Emory University
Rich Memorial Building
1602 Fishburne Drive
Atlanta, GA 30322
and NBER
krzysztof.karbownik@emory.edu

Umut Özek
American Institutes for Research/CALDER
1000 Thomas Jefferson St. NW
Washington, DC 20007
uozek@air.org
1        Introduction
Social scientists and policymakers have long been interested in understanding the human capital
production function and the role it plays in equality of opportunity. One question that gained a lot of
interest in recent decades relates to potential externalities that changes in human capital generate.
The two streams of research in this area examine spillovers due to societal interactions (Manski
2000) and within-family spillovers (Black and Devereux 2011). Understanding these externalities is
important because if the hypothesized associations reflect causality, then positive (negative) shocks
to an individual can propagate beyond the direct effects that are typically considered in program
evaluations, and can lead to greater declines (increases) in inequality. In this paper, we study a
particular type of within-family externality that has received relatively little attention in the extant
literature due to data limitations and identification challenges ­ sibling spillovers.
        Theoretically, we consider two main mechanisms through which the educational achievement
of one sibling could influence the other regardless of birth order. First, sibling spillover effects
could arise due to direct interactions between siblings. This channel could be more prevalent in
less affluent, single-parent households in which the older child serves as the provider/role model for
the younger sibling. Second, the poor academic performance of one sibling could lead to parents
diverting resources, including time or money, away from other children (compensatory behavior,
e.g., Pitt et al. (1990) or Conley (2008)) or from the struggling child (reinforcing behavior, e.g.,
Becker and Tomes (1976) or Grätz and Torche (2016)); or this poor academic performance could
lead parents to engage in even more complex reallocation mechanisms (Yi et al. 2015; Leight and
Liu 2019). Thus, theoretically, both spillovers from an older to a younger child and spillovers from
a younger to an older child are possible; and we are able to causally estimate both using quasi
experimental variation and a regression discontinuity (RD) design.
        Empirically, establishing causality in social interactions in general is difficult due to well-known
problems with simultaneity, correlated unobservables, and reflection (Manski 1993; Manski 2000);
and even experimental studies often yield highly context-specific results (Sacerdote 2014). All these
problems are likely present when studying the effect of one sibling on another since these children
typically grow up in the same household, share common traits (e.g., cultural values) as well as
experiences, and are genetically related.1
        We estimate sibling spillovers in the context of a universally used education policy ­ school
starting age. Previous work has documented large effects of the policy on children's development,
    1
    It is worth noting that thus far only three papers (Black et al. 2011; Dhuey et al. 2019; Landersø et al. 2019) have
been able to link siblings in the context of school-entry policies, which illustrates how hard it is to combine credible
variation stemming from natural experiments with samples including information on individuals beyond treatment
and control groups. Likewise, in developed countries context, only two papers to date have employed regression
discontinuity design to estimate sibling spillovers (Breining et al. 2016; Landersø et al. 2019), and both of these are
based on Danish registry data. In developing countries, there are two papers (Adhvaryu and Nyshadham 2016; Ozier
2017) examining sibling spillovers using experimental variation in the context of health interventions, however, it is
possible that these results do not carry over to a developed country context. Finally, Berry et al. (2019) conduct a
lab-in-the-field experiment in Malawi to elicit parental preferences for investment in children education. They find
that although parents minimize inequality in inputs and maximize total household earnings they are simultaneously
not averse to inequality in outcomes.



                                                           1
with children who are relatively older than their classmates having improved cognitive outcomes
(Bedard and Dhuey 2006; McEwan and Shapiro 2008; Elder and Lubotsky 2009; Dhuey et al. 2019),
better leadership skills (Dhuey and Lipscomb 2008), lower likelihood of disability identification
(Dhuey and Lipscomb 2010; Elder 2010; Evans et al. 2010), improved college outcomes (Hurwitz et
al. 2015), reduced criminal activity (Depew and Eren 2016; Cook and Kang 2016; Landersø et al.
2017), and higher wages (Kawaguchi 2011; Fredriksson and Öckert 2014). As noted above, these
developmental effects on the focal child could spill over to other children in the family through
direct interactions between siblings or indirectly through parental decisions triggered by the effects
on focal child. In this study, we consider both of these channels as sibling spillovers as long as they
are driven by the effect of the policy on the outcomes of the focal child.2
       To examine sibling spillover effects, we make use of detailed school records from a large, anony-
mous district in the state of Florida, which enable us to link all children to their place of residence,
providing information on household characteristics and sibship composition. Using these data, we
first confirm the developmental effects of school starting age policies on focal children. In particu-
lar, we find that students born right after the school starting cutoff (and hence more likely to be
the oldest in their cohort) significantly outperform students born on the other side of the cutoff
(by 16 percent to 23 percent of the standard deviation) on standardized tests in elementary and
middle school.3 We then examine sibling spillover effects by comparing the educational outcomes
of students whose siblings were born in the days before and after the school starting cutoff in an
RD design.
       We find evidence for within-family spillovers running from an older to a younger child that are
concentrated in less affluent households. In particular, our reduced-form RD estimates indicate that
students in impoverished families whose older siblings were born right after the school-entry cutoff
   2
      In principle, school entry policies could also influence the outcomes of other children in the family through channels
other than their effects on broadly understood human capital of the focal child. For example, eligibility to start school
a year earlier could, through parental employment decisions, affect family income or time that siblings spend with
parents; and these in turn could affect the educational outcomes of other children in the family. Such alternative
channels have been examined in the literature in the context of maternal labor supply (Landersø et al. 2019; Gelbach
2002; Fitzpatrick 2010a) or family composition (Landersø et al. 2019), yielding mixed results. Gelbach (2002), using
U.S. Census data, finds positive effects of eligibility to start school a year earlier on the labor supply of mothers
and negative effects on public assistance take-up among less affluent households. On the other hand, Landersø et
al. (2019) document that mothers of old-for-grade children have increased labor supply and earnings and are more
likely to remain married in Denmark. As the authors explain, this finding is likely due to children already being
in out-of-home care before the start of formal schooling and old-for-grade students having smoother transition from
daycare to school, thereby reducing within-family constraints. There is also evidence in the U.S. context somewhat
contradicting the findings in Gelbach (2002). Fitzpatrick (2010b) and Fitzpatrick (2010a) document much weaker and
heterogeneous effects of, respectively, being young-for-grade and prekindergarten enrollment on maternal employment
and wages.
    3
      It is important to note that these findings reflect how well the focal child is performing in school compared to
other students in the same grade, which could be due to school entry age effects, testing age effects, or the effect
of being older in peer group (Cascio and Whitmore Schanzenbach 2016). As such, they suggest that the relative
test performance of students born right after the cutoff is higher (compared to their peers at the same grade level)
than the relative test performance of students born right before the cutoff. While this finding may not necessarily
imply that old-for-grade students have higher human capital (as proxied by test scores) compared to young-for-grade
students holding age constant, it could be the relevant signal for the parents and other children in the family about the
academic ability of the focal child, and this in turn could drive the role model effect and parental resource reallocation
decisions.


                                                             2
score about 15 percent of the standard deviation higher on standardized tests in elementary and
middle school compared to students whose older siblings were born right before the cutoff. We do not
find similar spillover effects for siblings in more affluent households, however; in higher SES families,
older siblings appear to be at a disadvantage if their younger brother or sister is born after the school-
entry cutoff compared to before. These negative effects are particularly pronounced when siblings
are spaced closer together or when the older child is struggling academically, and appear only after
the younger sibling is tested in school for the first time, providing suggestive evidence that school
entry policies affect other children in the family through their effect on the educational performance
of the focal child. No support for younger-to-older spillovers is found in poorer households. Our
findings are thus consistent with direct spillovers from older-to-younger children in less affluent
households and suggestive of reinforcing behavior in more affluent households, especially when the
older child performs poorly in school.4
    Our work contributes to a growing literature on sibling spillovers and within-family externalities
of education policies. It is closely related to work by Nicoletti and Rabe (2019), Qureshi (2017),
Joensen and Nielsen (2018) and Landersø et al. (2019), all of who examine sibling spillovers gen-
erated by educational shocks or policies in developed countries.5 Using data from England and
North Carolina, respectively, Nicoletti and Rabe (2019) and Qureshi (2017) employ fixed-effects
strategies to estimate spillover effects of having a higher performing sibling in the household. In the
former paper, the older sibling's human capital is affected through his/her classroom peers, while
the latter study examines the spillover effects of exposure to an experienced teacher. Both papers
find evidence for positive spillovers when the older child is affected and conclude that these operate
primarily through direct exposure and interaction with a higher ability sibling rather than through
parental resource reallocation.6 In both cases, causality is established through fixed-effects models
with individual level controls (school-by-cohort-by-subject and child fixed effects to identify peer
effects in Nicoletti and Rabe (2019) and school-by-year fixed effects paired with lagged achievement
controls to identify teacher experience effects in Qureshi (2017)) that necessarily require stronger
and potentially more problematic assumptions than natural experiments, such as the one explored
    4
      Had compensatory reallocation been at play, we would expect parents to divert resources to the older siblings from
the younger sibling who was advantaged by the school starting cutoff, ultimately leading to the higher achievement
of the older. However, no such pattern emerged in our data.
    5
      There is more extensive literature on spillovers generated by health shocks. Studies using U.S. data focus on
spillovers from having a disabled sibling (Fletcher et al. 2012; Black et al. 2017), while studies using Danish data
consider disability (Black et al. 2017), attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (Breining 2014), or additional care in the
neonatal intensive care unit (Breining et al. 2016). Others examine externalities driven by the iodine supplementation
campaign in Tanzania (Adhvaryu and Nyshadham 2016), the immunization campaign in Turkey (Alsan 2017), the
deworming program in Kenya (Ozier 2017), experiencing a disease before age 3 in China (Yi et al. 2015), or influenza
pandemics in the U.S. (Parman 2015). Beyond studying a different input into human capital production function,
in developed countries context only Breining et al. (2016) use an RD design, while the experimental papers are all
based on data from developing countries. In settings outside of education or health, Bingley et al. (2017) study
sibling spillovers from military conscription in Denmark, and Heissel (2018) studies sibling spillovers from teenage
pregnancies in Florida.
    6
      Another paper, Qureshi (2018), uses gender segregation in Pakistani schools to measure the effect of older-sibling
schooling on younger siblings, and finds that an increase in older sisters' schooling has a positive effect on their
younger brothers' literacy and schooling. It is not clear, however, if these results could carry over to a developed
country context in which universal schooling is available for all and gender segregation is minimal.


                                                             3
in this paper. Furthermore, both studies rely on relatively small effects on the focal child to study
spillovers while only Qureshi (2017) examines effects for both younger and older siblings but her
shock is contemporaneous. We complement these studies by (1) using a policy that has a large effect
on focal siblings' achievement that persists through their elementary and middle school careers; (2)
looking beyond contemporaneous effects when either the older or the younger child in the family is
affected; and (3) employing a regression discontinuity design.
   Another recent study by Joensen and Nielsen (2018) utilizes Danish data and instrumental
variable estimation, wherein the instrument generates quasi-random variation in the propensity
that an older sibling takes an advanced math or science course in high school. The study finds
older siblings' course participation increases the likelihood that their younger sibling also takes an
advanced math or science course. Due to the nature of the policy in question, however, they are
unable to explore spillovers from younger to older children. Furthermore, the intervention itself takes
place later in schooling, which could yield results different from ours if human capital production
function is dynamic in nature and childhood shocks are more consequential than events in early
adolescence (Cunha and Heckman 2007; Cunha et al. 2010).
   Landersø et al. (2019) is perhaps the closest in spirit to our work in that they also utilize school
entry policies as a quasi-experimental shock to study within-family spillovers using Danish data.
They show that a child's advantage in school driven by school entry policies affects both their parents
and older siblings. Our study diverges from Landersø et al. (2019) in several important dimensions.
First, we are able to examine the older-to-younger sibling spillovers in an RD setting which was
not feasible in the Danish context due to data limitations. Moreover, unlike in the Danish study,
socioeconomic status of the family is at the center of our investigation. Examining spillover effects in
both directions and comparing them in high-SES and low-SES families is important because it allows
us, under specific assumptions, to disentangle direct (e.g., operating through direct interactions
between siblings) and indirect (e.g. operating through parental decisions) channels. Second, we
study sibling spillovers in the U.S. context, which could lead to different conclusions given the
institutional and socioeconomic differences between the two countries; and our results are indeed
different from Landersø et al. (2019). For example, Landersø et al. (2019) find positive spillover
effects from the younger to the older sibling when the older sibling is close to their ninth grade
exit exam around the school start of the younger sibling. In contrast, we find negative spillover
effects from the younger to the older sibling concentrated among high SES families. Furthermore,
we document economically meaningful positive estimates when the older child in a family is affected
- a sample that they have not investigated. Finally, due to data limitations, Landersø et al. (2019)
can examine sibling spillover effects only on ninth grade test scores, while our longitudinal data
enable us to investigate spillover effects for educational outcomes measured as early as grade 3.
   To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to document sibling spillovers in the U.S. ed-
ucational context using regression discontinuity design and the first in a developed country context
using this identification strategy to study sibling spillovers in both directions. Taken together, our
results have important implications for understanding human capital production function, house-



                                                   4
hold dynamics, and program evaluation. First, our causal estimates depart significantly from the
observed correlations between sibling outcomes, strongly supporting initial endogeneity concerns
and necessitating credible quasi-experimental designs. Second, the causal estimates imply that hu-
man capital shocks to the older child in a family with low socioeconomic status (SES) can trickle
down to other children, while in more affluent families, parents may engage in reinforcing behavior
even in a developed country setting. These findings in turn suggest that human capital production
function should depend not only on the child's own investments and those of his/her parents but
also on interactions with other family members.


2        Theoretical considerations
To help interpret our empirical findings, in this section, we propose a simple model of human
capital production that incorporates sibling spillovers arising through two possible channels as well
as socioeconomic status of the family. In our model, we define human capital in a broad sense,
beyond simple measurements of cognitive skills such as test scores. For example, we view traits
like leadership or general non-cognitive skills as components of broadly understood human capital
that can affect the outcomes and experiences of the focal child. Following prior work (Becker 1993;
Currie and Almond 2011; Yi et al. 2015), and to highlight the salient features of our application,
we make the following assumptions: (1) there are only two school-aged children in each household
(labeled j and k , and j is older child in the family); (2) there are two types of households ­
constrained (corresponding to families whose children were ever eligible for free or reduced priced
lunches (FRPL)) and unconstrained (corresponding to never-FRPL-families); (3) parents treat their
children in a neutral way (i.e., they do not discriminate based on sex, birth order or other innate
characteristics); and (4) test scores provide a reliable proxy for children's broader human capital
accumulation. We come back to this last point and the plausible effects on other outcomes when
mapping predictions of the model onto our empirical application.
        Human capital production function is of the following form:

                                                  =  (i, µj , µk )                                                 (1)
        where i denotes parental investments; µj is a shock to older child j and µk is a shock to younger
child k .7 Parents value human capital of their children as well as their own current consumption.
Thus, their utility function can be written as:

                                                U = U (C, j , k )                                                  (2)
    7
    Here  is a value produced according to a function  . More traditionally this production function would also
include endowments, individual level characteristics, schooling inputs, and household level characteristics (Yi et al.
2015). We chose not to include them in the model for transparency since in our setting they are orthogonal to both
the school-entry shock and parental investment decisions. Human capital of a particular child in this model depends
on both his/her own shock and his/her sibling's shock, but we only consider one degree of contagion (i.e., a shocked
child can affect their brother or sister, through, for example, mentoring, but this direct effect does not feed back to
shocked child's human capital). An intuitive interpretation of our school-entry shock is to think about it as a change
in a child's perceived ability that is an input into his/her human capital production.



                                                          5
       where C is parental consumption while j and k are accumulated human capitals of the two
children in a family. In reality, parents might care about the adult incomes of their children (Becker
1993), but, for simplicity, we assume that human capital is the sole determinant of income. Parents
also face the following budget constraint:

                                                     ij + ik + C = Y                                                       (3)
       where ij and ik are parental investments in their children and Y is household wealth or resources.
Parents maximize their utility function in (2) subject to this budget constraint and production
technology of their children by choosing i = (ij , ik ) and C . Under the standard assumptions on the
utility function and the production function, the optimal human capital investment is:

                                                     i = i(µj , µk , Y )                                                   (4)
       Let's now consider how human capital of the sibling (older or younger) is affected by a shock
(µ) to the focal child in the family (older or younger):
                      dj       j      j ij              dk      k       k ik
                            =      +      ·       and        =      +       ·                      (5)
                      dµk     µk      i µk              dµj    µj       i µj
       The term on the left-hand side of each equation corresponds to the total effect of the shock to
child k (j ) on the human capital of sibling j (k ), which, in our case, is proxied by test scores. This
total effect can be decomposed into a direct effect (the first term on the right-hand side of each
equation) and an indirect effect (the second term on the right-hand side of each equation). For the
latter term, consistent with prior literature, we assume that marginal productivity of investment
( 
 i ) is positive for both children. The signs of the direct effect and the second term of the indirect
effect are generally ambiguous, and below we elaborate on some plausible scenarios. Under all these
                                   j                k
scenarios, we assume that         µj    > 0 and    µk    > 0 in the case of school entry shocks. That is, based
on the evidence presented in the prior literature (reviewed in Section 1) and our findings in Table
A1 and Figure A1, we assume that being born after the school-entry cutoff, and thus being oldest
at the start of school, has positive effects on test scores of all students, irrespective of family SES.8
       We expect the direct spillover to be positive if higher achieving students serve as better mentors
or role-models for their siblings and behave altruistically towards them (Buhrmester 1992). Because
older siblings have, on average, greater knowledge and experience than younger siblings, we expect
                                                                                                           k        j
this direct channel to be stronger if the affected child is the older one in the pair: (i)                µj   >   µk   = 0.9
   8
      We cannot empirically assess if in our sample the school-entry effects for a focal child persist into adulthood, and
the literature investigating long-run effects in this context has been mixed (e.g. Hurwitz et al. (2015) or Fredriksson
and Öckert (2014) vs. Dobkin and Ferreira (2010) or Black et al. (2011)); but what matters in our empirical application
is that the policy induces September born children to have higher human capital (here proxied by test scores) when
we measure outcomes of their siblings i.e., in grades 3 to 8. Figure A1 clearly shows that although some fade-out is
present, even the smallest estimated effect - in seventh grade - implies 17 percent of a standard deviation advantage
of September born children.
    9
      Alternatively, if a higher achieving focal child leads to feelings of envy or lower self-esteem, this could adversely af-
fect achievement of their sibling (Lavy et al. 2012). We view this negative channel as plausible in both older-to-younger
and younger-to-older settings, and we note that it will simply diminish any positive effects from mentoring/role-
modeling. In an extreme case where younger child is affected by the policy and there is no mentoring/role-modeling
at all we may observe negative direct spillovers.



                                                              6
It is also conceivable that these direct effects, mentoring in particular, could be more pronounced in
less affluent households (especially those that are headed by a single parent) where the older sibling
could be more likely to take over parental responsibilities.
       The sign of the indirect effect, however, potentially depends on households' socioeconomic status
to a larger degree. It is plausible to expect that families that are budget constrained are not able to
invest in children beyond covering their basic consumption (i.e., Y = C in equation 3), while those
that are not budget constrained can invest in children.10 The former case simplifies the problem
because parents do not have a budget slack to make differential investments in children. Further-
more, even if low-SES households could invest in their children, we expect differential investment
in these households to be at much lower levels and to be less effective because quality of the inputs
is lower (Chiswick 1988). Thus, focusing on the lower bound, we consider the following condition
                                                         j        ij        k       ik
for indirect effects in low-SES households: (ii)        i     ·   µk   =   i    ·   µj   = 0.
       In the absence of the policy shock (µ), if the siblings have similar perceived abilities in high-SES
households, we expect parents to invest the same amount in their children (i     
                                                                            j = ik ) because of the
neutrality assumption. On the other hand, if the observed relative test scores of one child is higher
than the other, then parents may engage in compensatory or reinforcing behavior. Compensatory
                                ij         ik
behavior implies that both      µk   and   µj   are positive while the latter implies that both of these terms
are negative. In other words, in response to a positive human capital shock to child k (j ) parents
will either increase (compensate) or decrease (reinforce) investments in child j (k ).
       Why would parents, in particular those in high-SES families, ever divert resources from an
under-performing to an over-performing child? Becker (1993) provides one explanation for this,
assuming that parents maximize adult incomes of their children and the investment strategy is
multidimensional. Namely, parents could divert resources toward the most productive child (in our
setting, the one with exogenously shifted test scores), and then compensate the other children in the
family with either investments in non-human capital goods or provide them with a compensatory
lump sum transfer later in life. Interestingly, descriptive evidence based on Health and Retirement
Survey suggests that parents who engage in differential spending on post-secondary schooling of
their children do not engage in later life offsetting of such differences using cash transfers (Haider
and McGarry 2018). More generally, parents will reinforce if marginal rates of return on human
capital investments exceed the difference in their marginal utilities (i.e., only if efficiency outweighs
equity). Otherwise, they will engage in compensating behavior and direct resources towards the
  10
     Here budget constraint combines both financial and time dimensions, and households which we consider budget-
constrained have maximum income of 185 percent of the federal income poverty levels. In the year 2000, this indicated
an annual income of 31,543 USD for a family with two children (i.e., household size of four). For the same year, Lino
(2000) reports that the total annual expenditure on children (below age 15) in families with before-tax income less
than 38,000 USD was in the range of 6,280 to 7,380 USD, and it was about half of the total expenditure among
households with before-tax income of more than 64,000 USD. Furthermore, among school-aged children considered in
our empirical application (ages 6 to 14), households making more than 64,000 USD spend 2.8 to 3.5 times more on
childcare and education than households making less than 38,000 USD. Since our families are almost 20% poorer than
those considered as low-SES by Lino (2000), we expect these expenditure differences to be even more striking, lending
further credibility for the assumption that in these households Y = C . Finally, both Guryan et al. (2008) and Kalil et
al. (2012) document that low-SES parents spend much less time on childcare than high-SES parents, especially along
quality-adjusted dimensions (Vinopal and Gershenson 2017).


                                                          7
struggling child.
   Overall, the theoretical predictions on how a higher-achieving children affect their siblings are
ambiguous. Under some of the scenarios discussed above, however, we can draw testable hypotheses
that correspond to our empirical setting. In particular, in low-SES households we expect positive
effects if the older child is affected by school-entry policy and null effects if the younger child is
affected by the school-entry policy (combine (i) and (ii) above). Conversely, in high-SES families,
the effect depends on whether parents compensate or reinforce the shock. When the older child is
affected by the school-entry policy, positive direct effect (per (i) above) will be either offset towards
zero by reinforcing behavior or magnified by compensatory behavior. If the younger child is old-
for-grade, however, and there is no direct effect, then we expect negative effects if parents reinforce
the shock and positive effects if they compensate for it.
   A subtle point that requires additional clarification relates to what we understand by children's
human capital, and in particular whether it includes, for example, non-cognitive skills and disability.
This is important given that prior literature documented effects of school-entry policies on behavioral
outcomes and disability (Elder 2010; Evans et al. 2010; Dee and Sievertsen 2018) as well as on
leadership skills (Dhuey and Lipscomb 2008). We view these traits as components of broadly
understood human capital and expect them to generally be affected in the same way as cognitive
skills (or at least we did not find evidence suggesting otherwise). Namely, being old for grade confers
cognitive (Dhuey et al. 2019) as well as non-cognitive (Dhuey and Lipscomb 2008) advantage and
it decreases disability likelihood (Elder 2010). Our data do not include high quality measures of
non-cognitive skills (e.g., from military testing) but the data support positive cognitive and negative
disability effects. Figure A1 presents evidence that indeed the policy has persistent effects on the
cognitive development of focal children while in Table A2 we show that it reduces the likelihood of
disability diagnoses - this is especially true for disabilities that are related to behavioral problems.
Given these estimates and findings in prior literature, we treat the IV estimates presented in Section
7 as only a descriptive quantification exercise assuming that all the effects are captured by test
scores. Likewise, this data limitation motivates our focus on reduced-form estimates which in this
particular context should still be interpreted as sibling spillovers where the effects on the focal child
operate through improvements in both developmental domains.
   Thus far we have discussed implications of the model assuming that the policy affects broadly
understood human capital of the focal (treated) child in the family, and then spills over to siblings
either through (1) direct interactions between children or (2) indirectly through parental investment
decisions triggered by the effect on the focal child. As noted in the introduction, however, such ex-
clusion restriction might not hold if school entry cutoff rule affects siblings through parental choices
independent of focal child's human capital; for example, through changes in parental labor supply
or family stability. Consequences of such adjustments can theoretically have both advantageous or
detrimental effects on other children in the family; for instance, if mother returns to labor market
earlier, then this could generate additional income for the household but simultaneously limit the




                                                   8
time children spend with their mother.11


3         Data and descriptive statistics
Our primary dataset comes from school records in an anonymous, large, and diverse school district
in the state of Florida. School districts in Florida are at the county level and are the primary
local administrative units responsible for public education. The dataset covers all individuals born
between 1970 and 2002 who attended public schools in the district in school years between 1989/90
and 2004/05. There are 311,248 unique children in this dataset. From these data, we know the
name, demographic information, and home address of each child, which enables us to form sibling
pairs. We define children as siblings if they consistently co-reside at the same address and have the
same last name. We also relax this definition and include children who consistently co-reside at the
same address but who have different last names, and our results remain unchanged. Our primary
outcome variable of interest in this analysis is student test scores in grades 3 through 8, which are
recorded as national percentiles and range from 1 to 99.12 As such, we restrict the sample in our
main analysis to adjacent sibling pairs born between 1976 and 1996, both of whom were tested
at least once in these grades during our sampling frame.13 We drop (1) sibling pairs whose age
spacing is greater than eight years because we cannot credibly assert their sibship relationship, and
(2) twins and higher order multiplets because they have the same birth date and, thus, no variation
in our treatment. Schooling records further provide us with additional information about student
health, ability, and educational progress. We use this information to create indicators for whether
a child has ever been diagnosed with either a cognitive/behavioral disability or a physical disability
by grade 8; whether he/she has ever been enrolled in the gifted program by grade 8; and whether
the child has ever repeated a grade between kindergarten and grade 8.
         Columns 1 and 2 of Table 1 present the descriptive statistics for all students born between 1976
    11
     We explore the plausibility of these alternative channels in Section 4.2 and conclude that in our particular
application - to the extent that we can measure it - they do not seem to be quantitatively meaningful threats to
the interpretation of reduced-form effects as stemming from sibling spillovers. Thus, empirical results from Florida
appear to be more in line with Fitzpatrick (2010b) rather than with Gelbach (2002) and Landersø et al. (2019).
  12
     During the time period investigated in this paper, the district used two types of tests: Comprehensive Test of
Basic Skills (CTBS) between school years 1989/90 and 1998/99 and Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT)
between school years 1999/00 and 2004/05. Across these two subsamples, we observe consistently reported scores in
mathematics and reading. Since in each case these are national percentiles, they can be compared across the two
assessments. One important difference between these two tests, however, is that the former is a low-stakes test, while
the latter is a high-stakes test with important implications for schools and students. We do not detect discontinuity
in the likelihood of ever taking the low-stakes test in either the older-to-younger or the younger-to-older spillover
analyses, and the estimates are 2.28 (SE of 1.61; mean of Y of 63.19) and -1.29 (SE of 1.41; mean of Y of 80.01)
for older-to-younger and younger-to-older samples, respectively. Our main older-to-younger spillover results among
students in families ever on FRPL are somewhat larger in the CTBS sample (coefficient of 4.68 with SE of 1.35)
than in the FCAT sample (coefficient of 3.31 with SE of 1.39), and in both cases they are statistically significant at
conventional levels. We do no have enough power to detect statistically significant subgroup estimates among families
never on FRPL but for both samples they are negative.
  13
     We focus on sibling pairs born between 1976 and 1996 because we require observations of at least two births per
family, which creates small cells in both the very early and very late birth cohorts. Furthermore, we observe test
scores only in grades 3 through 8, and children from very early or very late cohorts are observed only in grades not
covered by testing.



                                                          9
and 1996 and students in these birth cohorts who were tested at least once between the third and
eight grades. Nearly 75 percent of students in the district are White, and about 50 percent come
from families whose children have ever been classified eligible for free or reduced price lunch (FRPL)
­ our primary measure of affluence.14 Comparison of these numbers to state averages obtained using
the Common Core of Data from school years 1998/99 to 2004/05 reveals that the district is more
White (74 percent vs. 53 percent) and slightly less affluent (50 percent vs. 45 percent on FRPL)
than the rest of Florida. We observe 263,811 children born in these cohorts in our school records,
but only 193,094 children have at least one test score in grades 3 through 8. There are three main
reasons why we may not observe test scores for children. First, while children are consistently tested
in grades 3 through 8 during our sampling frame, some students are observed only in non-tested
grades. Second, if students leave the school district prior to the commencement of testing, we
cannot track them across borders. Third, before the 1999/00 school year, students were given a
low-stakes test, and during that time frame it was easier for students to avoid, through exceptions,
being tested.15 Children for whom we observe at least one test score are 4 percentage points more
likely to ever experience FRPL in their family compared to all children in the data; however, this
may be driven solely by the fact that we also observe them for a longer period of time. On the
other hand, the racial composition is highly similar across columns 1 and 2 of Table 1.
       Subsequent columns of Table 1 present characteristics of some of our estimation samples. First,
columns 3 and 4 document the composition of our preferred sample that maximizes the number of
children we can observe with test scores. Column 3 describes the younger sibling characteristics in
the older-to-younger sibling spillover sample, while column 4 describes older sibling characteristics
in the younger-to-older sibling spillovers sample. Comparing the characteristics of these spillover
samples with all tested children in column 2 reveals that our preferred estimation samples are
somewhat positively selected. These children are slightly more likely to be White, to have higher
achievement levels, and to have increased propensity of being enrolled in a gifted program, however,
the poverty rates are very similar in the two samples. We use these larger samples as our preferred
specification to maximize statistical power; however, as columns 5 and 6 reveal, our choice does not
appear to generate much of a selection issue when we compare our empirical sample to a plausibly
more preferable sample that restricts the analysis to the first two births in each family. This gives
us confidence that our results are not driven by focusing on families for whom we combine sibling
  14
     In particular, we classify a family as low SES if a child in the family was identified as FRPL eligible in school
records for at least one school year. During the time frame we examine in our study, students were eligible for
FRPL at school if their household income fell below the 130 (eligibility threshold for free lunches) or 185 (eligibility
threshold for reduced priced lunches) percent of the federal income poverty levels. When we look at the families who
are identified as ever FRPL eligible in our data, we see that their children, on average, are classified as FRPL eligible
for 63 percent of the school years during which we observe them in our data. At most, however, 7 percent of our
sample is consistently eligible for FRPL across all years; therefore, we do not have power to investigate spillovers
separately for families facing very deep poverty (Michelmore and Dynarski 2017).
  15
     We formally tested to see whether there exists a concerning discontinuity in the likelihood of having at least one
test score in our sample at the student's own school-entry cutoff. Using our preferred bandwidth of 60 days, we found
an RD coefficient of -0.303 (0.549), wherein the outcome variable is an indicator multiplied by 100. Given that we
observe test scores for roughly 73 percent of the students in our cohorts, this discontinuity is not only statistically
insignificant but also trivial in magnitude.



                                                           10
contrasts across multiple parities.


4         Empirical approach
4.1         Regression discontinuity
We are interested in estimating the causal effect of school-entry cutoff experienced by one of the
children in the family on his/her closest sibling, either younger or older. Thus, our RD design
compares the outcomes of siblings of children born right before and right after school-entry cutoff.16
More formally, we estimate the discontinuity in a child's outcome at the school-entry cutoff faced
by his/her older or younger sibling:

                                     RF = limS 0 E [Yi |Sj ] - limS 0 E [Yi |Sj ]                                  (6)
         where Yi denotes the outcome of child i. Sj denotes the difference between the birth date of
child i's older or younger sibling j and the school-entry cutoff date they faced (i.e. our running or
forcing variable), with non-positive values indicating dates before the cutoff, so that observations
with Sj  0 have siblings who were eligible to start school a year before those with Sj > 0. For
example, for cohorts facing the September 1 cutoff, Sj = -5 implies that child j was born on August
27, while Sj = 5 implies that child j was born on September 6. For simplicity, let us call a child who
receives the treatment (j ) the focal child and his/her older/younger sibling for whom we observe
spillovers the sibling (i). The parameter RF is thus the difference in average outcomes of siblings
with focal children born just before or just after the school-entry cutoff.
         Because our running variable is discrete, following Lee and Card (2008), we estimate RF para-
metrically. That is, in our main analysis, we estimate equations of the following form using ordinary
least squares (OLS):

                                   Yij =  + RF Aj + k (Sj ) + k (Sj ) · Aj + ij                                    (7)
         where Yij is the outcome for sibling i of treated focal child j , k (Sj ) is a linear function of focal
child birth date, and Aj  1(Sj > 0) is an indicator for having a focal child who was born after
the school-entry cutoff. In a subset of regressions, we add control variables to this equation that
include the focal child's school-entry cohort indicators and gender, as well as the sibling's year of
birth, month of birth, and gender and race indicators. We also include the age spacing between
the siblings in days, and when analyzing test scores, we further control for grade and test type
indicators. We cluster the standard errors at our running variable ­ the relative birth day (Lee
and Card 2008). In our main analysis, we limit the sample to within 60 days of the school starting
cutoff (i.e. -59        Sj    60). This bandwidth choice is consistent with other papers using RD design
    16
    Current policy in Florida stipulates that children must reach age 5 on or before September 1 of the school year
to be eligible to attend kindergarten. However, the school-entry cutoff has changed over time, and our oldest cohorts
were subject to different criteria. In particular, for those born in 1976, the cutoff was November 1; for those born in
1977, it was October 1; and for those born in 1978 and later, it was September 1. In our preferred sample, we use the
cutoff in place at the time the focal child would have turned 5 years old; however, we also show that our main results
are robust to using a sample wherein all children were subject to the September 1 cutoff.


                                                          11
in the context of school-entry cutoff (Cook and Kang 2016), and is at the upper end of a range
of bandwidths suggested for various outcomes by data driven, non-parametric bandwidth selection
procedures (Calonico et al. 2017). In Section 6, we discuss the robustness of our findings to different
bandwidths and functional forms. In particular, we show results using bandwidths ranging from 20
to 150 days, and estimates using a quadratic specification for k (·). We also generate estimates using
the non-parametric optimal bandwidth selection procedure developed by Calonico et al. (2017).

4.2      Validity of the research design
In the proposed empirical framework, ^RF provides the causal effect of the focal child's (older or
younger) eligibility to start school a year earlier as long as predetermined factors are smooth at
the cutoff. Table 2 shows estimated discontinuities in seven variables that should be continuous
around the focal sibling's school-entry cutoff date. Panel A presents the older-to-younger spillovers
balance (i.e., the discontinuity in younger sibling characteristics at the older sibling's school-entry
cutoff date) whereas panel B presents younger-to-older spillovers balance (i.e., the discontinuity
in older sibling characteristics at the younger sibling's school-entry cutoff date). Out of the 14
estimates presented in Table 2, none is statistically distinct from zero at conventional levels, and
none of the estimates exceeds 5 percent of the dependent variable mean. Importantly, there are no
discontinuities in our measure of socioeconomic status whether we treat it as a permanent feature
of the family (column 6) or allow it to vary across school years (column 7).17 Appendix Table
A3 replicates this analysis using the non-parametric method (Calonico et al. 2017), and reaches
a similar conclusion. Furthermore, Appendix Table A4 shows that balance holds within samples
stratified by time-invariant measure of SES, a finding important for our main heterogeneity analysis.
Finally, time varying measure of poverty is smooth among families ever classified as those on free
or reduced price lunch. This is important because families ever on free or reduced price lunch could
experience more transitions in- and out-of-status than families at the margin of becoming eligible
for the subsidy.
       Further evidence in support of smoothness can be found by examining the distribution of the
running variable in our samples (McCrary 2008). We present graphical evidence in Figure 1 for the
distribution of sibling observations around focal child school-entry cutoff, for the analysis of both
older-to-younger and younger-to-older spillovers. Because each daily bin in our sample contains
relatively few observations (from 94 to 182), and therefore the daily graph is very noisy, we chose
to bin the running variable every 5 days for expositional purposes. Nonetheless, we also provide a
formal test, run on daily data for smoothness of density (Cattaneo et al. 2018). We cannot reject
the hypothesis of no discontinuity in the density of the distribution at the cutoff, and the p-values
are 0.495 and 0.535 for panels A and B of Figure 1, respectively.18 Overall, we conclude that our
  17
     This distinction matters to the extent that SES could change due to parental responses to older or younger child's
school entry cutoff as documented by Gelbach (2002) and Landersø et al. (2019). In the empirical sample, the Pearson
correlation between the two variables is 0.67.
  18
     It can be argued that since our running variable is discrete rather than continuous, we should implement a test
that corrects for this data feature (Frandsen 2018). When doing so, assuming  = 0, we obtain p-values of 0.229 and



                                                          12
data do not exhibit particularly worrisome discontinuities at the policy cutoff that could invalidate
the inference and bias our results.
    In our empirical framework, similar to any analysis of sibling spillover effects, the analytic sample
only includes students with at least one younger or older sibling. This could be problematic when
interpreting our reduced-form effects if there is a discontinuity in the likelihood of having a younger
sibling at the school-entry cutoff of the focal sibling. For example, if the older child is born right
after the school-entry cutoff and perhaps exhibits higher maturity upon starting kindergarten, this
could motivate the mother to have a younger baby or have the baby faster, and part of the spillover
could envelope the effect of spacing between children. That said, such potential effects should be
minimized in our sample since the realization of the treatment for the older child is deferred and
occurs after the age of 5 (more likely at the time of first standardized testing in grade 3). Therefore,
any kind of fertility considerations would affect only families with larger spacing between births.
Nonetheless, to be on the safe side, we formally test the fertility channel in Appendix Table A5,
in which we show the likelihood of younger sibling birth as a function of school-entry discontinuity
in the older sibling's birth date. Since in our preferred sample we pool siblings across multiple
parities to maximize statistical power, we show fertility transitions across three margins: from one
to two, from two to three, and from three to four. In all cases, we find statistically insignificant
fertility estimates, and in the two larger samples, these insignificant effect sizes are small. At parity
three, the relative effect size is large but the sample size is small, and our results are robust to
dropping these higher order fertility transitions. Therefore, we do not find support for selection
into the sample in the older-to-younger analysis, which bolsters our confidence in these results. Of
course, this potential selection issue does not occur when studying younger-to-older spillover effects,
because the birth of the older sibling precedes that of the younger.
    It is worth noting that our reduced-form estimates measure the effect of the older (younger)
child being eligible to start school a year earlier on the outcomes of the younger (older) sibling in a
family. As such, these are intent-to-treat effects that, by themselves, are unable to answer how the
outcomes of children with siblings who start school a year earlier fare. Scaling the reduced-form
effects by the effects of the school-entry policy on the age at which the focal child starts school (i.e.,
estimating equation 7 with the age of child j at school-entry as the dependent variable) provides
an estimate of the effect of the school-entry policy on the likelihood of starting school a year later,
provided that the usual instrumental variable assumptions are met. Estimating this effect is useful
not only for calculating instrumental variable estimates of the effect of age at school-entry, but also
for understanding the extent to which the school-entry policies are followed. For example, in the
extreme case, if we observed non-zero reduced-form effects but no effect on age at school-entry, one
might be worried that our estimates are picking up spurious correlations.
    For a subset of cohorts, our school district data allow for direct measurements of the effect of
0.003 for older-to-younger and younger-to-older spillovers, respectively. The latter finding of significant discontinuity
is puzzling to us given predetermined fertility in this sample but could be driven by e.g., differential geographic
mobility. Therefore, to be on the safe side, in Section 6, we also present results wherein we exclude data points near
the cutoff. Our results remain unchanged.



                                                           13
birth date on age at school-entry for the focal child in the family. Ninety-three percent of older
focal children within our preferred bandwidth of +/- 60 days start kindergarten on time (90 percent
of students born before the cutoff and 97 percent of students born after the cutoff start school
on time), and among younger focal children, these numbers are almost identical. Overall, we find
that students who were born right before the school starting cutoff were 0.87 years younger when
they started kindergarten compared to their peers who were born right after the cutoff (panel A
of Appendix Figure A2).19 These statistics suggest that for the cohorts we study, the school-entry
policies were binding and had sizable effects on school-entry age.
       Aside from the standard regression discontinuity checks, as mentioned in Section 2, in order
to interpret our findings as sibling spillover effects, we also need to rule out any effects of school-
entry policies that affect siblings through parental decisions but without operating through focal
child's human capital. This could take place if being able to send the focal child to school one
year earlier affects household resources (e.g., through increased income) or time spent with children
(e.g., through mother or father not staying at home).20 While we are unable to observe parental
employment or household income directly in school records, we present indirect evidence using
FRPL eligibility as a proxy of household poverty.
       First, Table 2 shows that the time-varying measure of household poverty (as measured by FRPL
eligibility in school records) for the sibling is balanced at the school-entry cutoff of the focal child,
suggesting that students whose siblings were just-eligible to start school a year earlier were no more
likely to come from low-income families than students whose siblings were born on the other side
of the cutoff. Second, we investigate the FRPL eligibility of the older sibling in the years before,
during, and after his/her younger sibling turns 5 (and they become eligible to start schooling).21 If
  19
      It is important to note that if there was no redshirting/fast-tracking, this discontinuity would be almost exactly
1 year. Panel B of Appendix Figure A2 suggests that the gap in school starting age is slightly larger for students
from low-SES families (0.90 years versus 0.82 years), indicating that compliance with the policy is somewhat lower for
high-SES families. The graph also indicates that this difference in school starting age comes from children born after
rather than before school-entry cutoff, implying fast-tracking rather than redshirting as the primary explanation for
the observed gap. In fact, SES gap in redshirting is less than 1 percentage point compared to almost 10 percentage
points for fast-tracking, which suggests that in higher-SES families the resource burden of keeping a child another
year in a household could be somewhat reduced for some families whose children are born after the school-entry
cutoff. High levels of compliance with the policy, together with RD design and findings in prior literature (Dhuey et
al. 2019), ease our concerns regarding monotonicity violations due to differential redshirting/fast-tracking (Barua and
Lang 2016). Our results are also very similar in a sample of families whose children start school on-time, however,
due to potential selection this test should be treated as only suggestive evidence. Given high compliance rate, if
we found very different results in the sample that enters school on time it would have been worrisome but in this
empirical application we do not. Furthermore, we do not observe any statistically significant differences in our SES
proxy (free or reduced price lunch status) between families that comply with the cutoff rule and those that do not,
irrespective if the older or the younger child in a family is affected by the policy. This gives us some confidence that
the results are not confounded by the small share on families that do not comply with the policy. We return to
the issue of monotonicity assumption in Section 7, in which we discuss IV estimates. Nevertheless, to gauge what
the reduced-form effect might look like with full compliance, one could multiply our estimates by 1.1 in the analysis
presented later in this section.
   20
      When the policy affects the younger child in the pair, it could have direct consequences for older sibling who is
already at school and undergoes testing. On the other hand, when the policy affects the older child in the pair, then
consequences for a younger sibling could be developmental and not manifest until testing starts in a few years down
the road.
   21
      We are unable to execute the same analysis for older children affected by the policy because our time-varying



                                                          14
eligibility to start school a year earlier for the focal child indeed affects parental employment (and
hence family income), one would expect a discontinuity in FRPL eligibility of the sibling at the focal
child's school starting cutoff in the year the focal child turns 5. Table A6 presents the discontinuity
in the FRPL eligibility of the older child at the younger child's school-entry cutoff during the year
before the younger child turns 5 (Panel A) whereas Panel B repeats the same analysis during the
year the younger child turns 5. Figure A3 then focuses on a smaller sample and presents event
study in free or reduced price lunch status. Irrespective of the exact approach, we do not find any
statistically significant changes in family affluence at the time when younger child is eligible to enter
kindergarten.
    Third, in Table A7 we provide balancing check akin to analyses in Table 2 but based on al-
ternative proxies for family socioeconomic conditions which we measure at micro-neighborhood of
residence.22 Irrespective of birth order of the affected child we do not observe any discontinuities
in the affluence of neighborhood at the time when their siblings attend school. Furthermore, there
is likewise no significant discontinuities when we narrow the bandwidth of investigation around
younger child's school entry age (Table A6). Were the ability to send a child to school a year earlier
to affect family resources in a meaningful way, we would expect these families to move, for example,
to a better neighborhood. We observe no such pattern in our data and all estimates are not only
statistically insignificant but are also very small.
    Fourth, in Table A8 we analyze parental compliance with school-entry cutoff rules for the younger
child as a function of their older sibling's eligibility to start school. It is plausible that the older
sibling's eligibility to start school affects parents' decision to fast-track or redshirt the younger
child, which could in turn affect the educational outcomes of the younger child. Such effects would,
however, stem from parental decisions that are potentially independent of the effect of school entry
policy on the focal child, and thus should not be considered as sibling spillover in the context of our
model. Table A8 reveals no statistically significant effects on the school-entry timing of the younger
child irrespective of family affluence.23
    Based on the above set of results we conclude that there is not much support for quantitatively
meaningful effects of the policy on household affluence and resources which could impact siblings
beyond direct effects on broadly understood human capital of the focal child in our empirical
setting. Therefore, throughout the remainder of the paper, we interpret our reduced-form estimates
as documenting sibling spillovers (either direct or indirect).
measures of family affluence are tied to school records and younger siblings naturally have not yet started schooling
at the school start cutoff of their older brother or sister.
   22
      These neighborhood units reflect division at a very fine level, because the school district divides county into more
than 1,000 micro-neighborhoods for the purposes of school assignment and school bus routing and scheduling. While
the neighborhoods vary in size, between 50 and 200 students on average live in each unit at any given time. We merge
this information with census block data on income and demographics sourced from the American Community Survey.
   23
      Although some of these insignificant estimates are large in terms of effect sizes, this is driven by the fact that
non-compliance with the cutoff rule is so small. On the other hand, for on-time start the estimated effect sizes imply
trivial imbalance of at most 1.1 percent.




                                                           15
5    Results
Table 3 presents our main results for averaged mathematics and reading test scores measured as
national percentiles and pooled across grades 3 through 8. Panel A examines spillovers from older-
to-younger child (i.e., the dependent variable is younger child test scores, and the running variable
is the birth date of the older child relative to his/her school-entry cutoff), while panel B examines
spillovers from younger-to-older child (i.e., the dependent variable is older child test scores, and
the running variable is the birth date of the younger child relative to his/her school-entry cutoff).
In columns 1 through 3, we present the reduced-form effects using the entire sample estimated
without any controls in column 1; introducing own covariates in column 2 including race, gender,
grade, birth year, and birth month fixed effects; and adding focal sibling characteristics in column
3 including the sibling's gender, birth cohort fixed effects, and the age difference between the two
siblings. Columns 4 through 6 repeat the same analysis using sibling pairs in families whose children
were identified as FRPL eligible at least once in our sample, and columns 7 through 9 utilize sibling
pairs in never-FRPL eligible families. Several findings are worth highlighting in Table 3.
    First, we find significant positive sibling spillovers from the older child to the younger. In
particular, the findings in the first three columns of panel A suggest that students whose older
siblings were born after the school entry cutoff score 1.3 to 1.7 percentiles (or 5.1 percent to 6.4
percent of the standard deviation) better on standardized tests compared to students whose older
siblings fall on the other side of the cutoff, and these estimated effects are statistically different from
zero at the 5 percent level in columns 2 and 3. Estimated effects presented in columns 4 through
9 of panel A further indicate that these spillover effects are entirely driven by sibling pairs in less
affluent families. In ever-FRPL-eligible families, students with an older sibling born after the cutoff
score roughly 3.9 percentiles (or 14.8 percent of the standard deviation) better on standardized
tests in elementary and middle school compared to students with older siblings born right before
the cutoff. In contrast, the estimated older-to-younger effect in more affluent families is less than 1
percent of the standard deviation in magnitude in our preferred specification that controls for both
own and sibling characteristics. This difference in older-to-younger spillovers between poorer and
richer households of 4 percentiles is statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
    To assess the magnitude of this positive spillover effect in less affluent families, it is helpful to
compare it to other estimates in the family and education literature, and in particular to those
obtained using data from Florida. For instance, an effect size of almost 15 percent of a standard
deviation is about three times the effect size of a 10 percent increase in birth weight (Figlio et al.
2014), and over 50 percent larger than the size of birth order gap in reading scores (Breining et al.
2018). More related to the current variation and research question, this effect is about two-thirds the
size of own school-entry cutoff effects (Dhuey et al. 2019). In terms of the test score gaps between
different student groups in our data, the spillover effect of 3.9 percentile points is roughly 20 percent
of the gap between students in low- and high-SES families and 21 percent of the White-minority
gap. Furthermore, this effect is approximately equivalent to an increase of $3,000 in Earned Income
Tax Credit (EITC) income, or three times the difference in average EITC payout today versus that


                                                    16
in the early 1990s (Dahl and Lochner 2012); or three-quarters of the effect of assignment of a small
class for kindergarten through grade 3 on test scores; or 50 percent larger than the effect of the
same assignment on ACT/SAT performance (Krueger and Schanzenbach 2001). Thus, we view
these estimates as not only plausible but also comparable to magnitudes found in other studies of
the determinants of cognitive development.
    Second, the findings presented in columns 7 through 9 of panel B reveal modest negative spillover
effects from the younger child to the older in more affluent families that are statistically significant
at 10 percent level. In particular, we find that older children in more affluent households in which
the younger child is endowed with the school-entry advantage, perform worse than older children
in households in which the younger child is relatively more disadvantaged due to their school-entry
eligibility. These negative estimates are about 55 percent smaller (in absolute terms) than our
main positive findings from panel A, but still represent economically meaningful effects.24 These
findings suggest that families who do not face binding budget constraints can potentially engage in
reinforcing behavior in a developed country setting, and to the best of our knowledge, this is the
first evidence of such household behavior using quasi-experimental variation.25
    In this exercise, we can also examine the timing of the spillover effect from the younger child
to the older one. This is important because if the observed spillover effects are indeed driven by
the school-entry policy and its effects on the focal child, one would expect to find no significant
discontinuity in the older sibling test scores before the younger child is tested for the first time.
Conversely, if our estimates pick up adjustments due to the effects of policy on the household (e.g.,
maternal labor supply) that do not operate through younger child's human capital (as proxied by
test scores), then one would expect statistically significant negative (e.g., if loss of income from
postponed maternal employment dominates) or positive (e.g., if additional year with mother at
home dominates) estimates on older child's test scores prior to the commencement of testing of the
focal child. We present the results of this analysis in Table A10, in which panel A pools all families
together, while panels B and C present estimates separately for lower- and higher-SES families.
   24
      For example, the effect size of 0.08 is about 9 percent of the socioeconomic status gap or four-fifths of the gender
gap in this sample. Compared to the largest positive finding in Landersø et al. (2019) ­ a 0.985 standard deviation in
mathematics grades among siblings spaced 7 to 9 years apart ­ our negative effect (in absolute terms) is 8.1 percent
of their estimate. Overall, we view our negative effects as not only plausible but also as economically meaningful.
   25
      We also examined the spillovers separately for mathematics and reading, and these results are presented in
Table A9. Positive estimates in older-to-younger sample with families ever on FRPL are comparable across the two
subjects, whereas in our younger-to-older analysis among never-FRPL families statistically significant effects are driven
by reading only. This makes sense if home production, and thus resource reallocation, contributes more to reading
than mathematics performance. We have also examined the stability of our results across grades and the preferred
estimates are relatively stable in grades 3 to 8 for younger-to-older spillovers among never-FRPL families while they
modestly increase over grades for older-to-younger spillovers among ever-FRPL families. Importantly, akin to the
pooled regressions, we do not estimate any statistically significant effects in the two remaining samples and these
estimates are very similar across grades. We present these results in Figure A4 noting that standard errors are larger
in this specification and not all grade-by-grade estimates in the two samples of interest remain statistically significant.
This is expected since pooling across grades decreases the potential consequences of measurement error, and thus
improves precision. In a separate analysis, we also add grade-difference fixed effects (between the two siblings) to the
controls ­ in analyses in which we do not include focal child covariates ­ to gauge the extent to which our estimated
effects are driven by the difference in "time spent with the sibling at the same school" between students whose siblings
were born on either side of the cutoff. Estimates remain very similar, and thus we discard this channel as a potential
confounder.


                                                            17
The negative effects documented in Table 3 are entirely driven by test scores of older children
measured after the younger child starts being tested, and thus allowing parents to observe proxies
of relative ability for both children in the family. These negative effects are also concentrated in
more affluent rather than less affluent families, and even though the sample sizes are smaller, we
have enough power to reject statistical significance of coefficients across the two periods.26 This set
of results paired with no changes in affluence levels at either individual household or neighborhood
level documented in Figure A3 as well as Tables A6 and A7 suggests that the estimates are unlikely
to be confounded by effects of the policy on siblings that do not operate through the focal child.
    These findings further suggest that the negative coefficient in Table 3 is likely an underestimate
of the reinforcement effect because it pools together test scores of an older sibling before and after
the younger child's school entry age advantage is revealed to parents through testing. This intuition
is confirmed in Table A10 where we find a much larger and more precisely estimated coefficient of
negative 14.6 percent of the standard deviation in the latter sample when we restrict the older
sibling test scores to years after the younger child's third grade test. Note that this effect size is
very similar to what we have estimated for older-to-younger spillovers among less affluent families
where a younger child is more likely to be treated in all grades. We chose to focus on the smaller
negative estimate (representing a total effect) in the main results because it is likely more relevant
from the perspective of understanding how school-entry cutoff policies propagate across siblings.
Finally, we do not find any statistically significant spillover effects from the younger to the older
child in less affluent families (Table 3). It is also worth noting that our estimated coefficients
remain stable with the addition of own and sibling characteristics, lending further credibility to the
identifying assumptions discussed in Section 4.2
    To fully understand the variation in our data, Figure A5 presents the daily means and linear fits
for the bandwidth of 60 days around the focal sibling school-entry cutoff for the full sample, ever-
FRPL-eligible families, and never-FRPL-eligible families; and points toward the same conclusion.
These findings confirm a relatively larger discontinuity in the test scores of the younger sibling
as a function of the older child's school-entry cutoff among lower SES families and conversely a
smaller discontinuity in the opposite direction in the test scores of the older sibling as a function of
the younger child's school-entry cutoff among higher SES families. Thus, our conclusions of direct
spillovers among less affluent and modest reinforcing behavior among more affluent families remain
unchanged.
    Our empirical findings could be explained by mechanisms described in Section 2. First, our
results suggest that the direct effects of having a higher-performing sibling are driven mainly by the
role model/mentoring effect that is positive and more prominent in the older-to-younger setting.
Second, we find evidence of reinforcing behavior among high-SES households, which offsets the
positive direct effect in the older-to-younger setting, and leads to negative sibling spillover effects in
  26
     Coefficient in column 2 in panel C is also negative but more than three times smaller than that in column 3. This
could happen if we expect some smaller behavioral adjustment already after the younger child starts schooling but
before the start of testing. We do not have enough statistical power to divide this pre-period into years before the
start of schooling and those after the start of schooling and before the start of testing.



                                                         18
the younger-to-older setting. Finally, the results are also consistent with negligible indirect effects
among low-SES households, which, combined with the direct mentoring effect, lead to significant
positive spillover effects from an older child to the younger, and no spillover effects in the younger-
to-older case.27
       Several factors are expected to moderate these spillover effects. For example, it is plausible
that parents with children who are closely spaced in age are more likely to engage in reinforcing
behavior given that it is easier to compare the revealed abilities of their children.28 Figure A9
presents estimates for our four samples wherein we divide spacing between the two adjacent siblings
by the median. Consistent with our hypothesis above, in relatively more affluent families in which
the younger focal child starts school later, we observe more negative effects when siblings are spaced
more closely together. The results also indicate that the positive older-to-younger spillover effect in
less affluent families is stronger among siblings spaced above the median, which makes sense if the
older siblings serve as better mentor/role models for the younger ones when the age spacing is larger.
Similar to our main results in Table 3, we do not find any sizable estimates in either older-to-younger
analysis among high-SES families or younger-to-older analysis among low-SES families.
       The achievement level of the sibling is another potential moderator of the indirect sibling spillover
effects. For example, the negative spillover effect from the younger to the older child in more affluent
families could be more pronounced when the older sibling is academically struggling, which implies
that the marginal rate of return on investment in the younger child is relatively higher. Figure A10
presents unconditional quantile regression estimates for the 25th (navy bars), 50th (orange bars)
and 75th (maroon bars) percentiles of the test score distribution, again for our four samples defined
  27
      It is important to note that school-entry eligibility of the focal child in the family could also affect the sibling by
altering the time the focal child spends at home. For example, the focal child starting school a year earlier could free up
parental resources (e.g., in the form of preschool tuition), which could in turn benefit the sibling. This channel could
be particularly relevant for more resource-constrained households, however, pattern of our results is not consistent
with this hypothesis. First, we find that students whose older siblings were born after the cutoff (and hence were more
likely to start school a year later) perform better in low-SES households. Second, while our results seem to support
this hypothesis in the high-SES, younger-to-older spillover case, we find no such evidence in the low-SES setting, in
which one would expect this channel to be stronger. Furthermore, in Table A10 we show that older siblings' test
scores are affected only once the younger child starts being tested and their relative ability is revealed. Nonetheless,
a caveat remains: we do not have information on actual investments in children, and, therefore, with the help of
theoretical predictions, we equate observed differential outcomes with particular pattern of parental behavior. We
are not aware of any data set in a developed country context that would allow linking parental investment (based on
experimental or survey data) with policy shocks and large enough sample sizes to allow studying sibling spillovers
using RD or other quasi-experimental designs.
   28
      Another possible moderator of sibling spillovers is gender composition ­ i.e., same-sex vs. opposite-sex pairs. This
comparison is more problematic in our view because of scope for gender-specific investments (Barcellos et al. 2014,
Karbownik and Myck 2017) and differential sensitivity of boys and girls to inputs (Bertrand and Pan 2013, Autor
et al. 2018). Nonetheless, for completeness, in Figures A6, A7 and A8 we also examine differential effects by sex
composition of the sibling pair (Figure A6) as well as by either gender of focal child (Figure A7) or of their sibling for
whom we observe outcomes (Figure A8). We find larger positive spillover effects from the older to the younger child
in low-SES families when children are of the same-sex, which makes sense if these children are more likely to interact
with each other. Likewise, estimates in this sample are larger for focal male children and male siblings. This makes
sense if boys benefit more from being older at the start of school and are also more sensitive to inputs. On the other
hand, we find negative effects from the younger to the older child in high-SES families with opposite-sex children and
when the focal child is a girl. There are no striking gender differences for siblings for whom we measure outcomes in
this sample. Our estimates in the remaining two samples are not consistently signed, never statistically significant,
and generally smaller which is in line with the other analyses throughout the paper.


                                                             19
earlier (Firpo et al. 2009). Similar to the mean results, we find the largest positive spillovers from
older-to-younger child in lower SES families, and these effects are comparable across the distribution
of the younger sibling's ability. Corresponding estimates for higher SES families are much smaller
and positive only in the upper half of the test score distribution. Moving to younger-to-older
spillovers, akin to mean estimates, we do not find any sizable effects in low-SES families, but in
line with the hypothesis proposed above, results for more affluent households suggest much stronger
reinforcing behavior when the older sibling is struggling academically. All estimates in this sample
are negative, but the spillover effect for the 25th percentile of the distribution is almost eight times
larger than the effect for the 75th percentile. This result is consistent with Grätz and Torche (2016),
who find that advantaged parents provide more cognitive stimuli to higher-ability children, which,
in our case, could imply that high-SES parents observe the relatively higher-performing younger
sibling whose advantage is driven by the school-entry policy, and allocate more resources toward
this child because a higher return on the investment is more likely (Becker and Tomes 1976).
    Finally, in Table A11, we examine spillover effects on other academic and health-related out-
comes. Although the results are not equally striking, the general pattern of the findings in these
tables mimics results presented in Table 3. Namely, in the older-to-younger analysis, we find larger
and ­ for some outcomes ­ statistically significant spillovers in the less affluent sample, while we
find no consistent spillover effects for sibling pairs in more affluent families. Reductions in cog-
nitive/behavioral disabilities and grade repetition are the strongest results in this analysis. At
the same time, we find inconsistently signed and never statistically significant coefficients in the
younger-to-older analysis. We view these additional results as less informative compared to our
primary test score analyses because it is not clear whether reduced disability labeling is a positive
or a negative outcome. On one hand, this could reflect better health; but it could also be a sign of
lower parental involvement if parents are less likely to seek the additional resources their children
may need.


6     Robustness
This section presents a series of analyses to gauge the robustness of our two main test score findings
presented in column (6) in panel A and column (9) in panel B of Table 3.29 We begin by re-
estimating our parametric models using alternative bandwidths and both linear and quadratic
specifications for k (·). Panel A of Figures 2 and 3 present the results of this robustness check,
wherein the blue squares depict the point estimates along with 95 percent confidence intervals for
the linear polynomial specification (bandwidth indicated on the x-axis), and orange circles show
the corresponding effects for the quadratic specification. These are in line with the main result
presented in Table 3. As expected, the quadratic estimates are less precise, and both polynomial
specifications are less precise at smaller bandwidths. Nevertheless, almost all coefficients in Figure
  29
     For brevity, we focus this discussion primarily on test scores in older-to-younger spillovers among those ever on
FRPL and younger-to-older spillovers among those never on FRPL. We present the analyses for the remaining four
samples in Figures A11 to A14.



                                                         20
2 are statistically significant at the 5 percent level, and the coefficients in Figure 3 are consistently
negative except for very small bandwidths in the quadratic specification.30
       Second, in panel B of Figures 2 and 3, we re-estimate the main results using donut-RD models
where we remove observations very close to the focal child school-entry cutoff. The test score results
are remarkably stable irrespective of the number of observations that are dropped and, if anything,
they modestly grow at the larger donuts. This is consistent with no manipulation at the cutoff and
balance in auxiliary covariates.
       Third, in panel C of Figures 2 and 3, we present a falsification exercise estimating spillover effects
using placebo cutoffs away from the true school-entry cutoff, in which we consider alternative dates
up to 100 days on either side of the threshold.31 This is akin to the randomization inference idea,
and we label it as such. Note that, even if the true effect at the real cutoff were non-zero, we
would still expect to find some "effect" when we move the threshold by a small number of days.
Similarly, we would expect some non-zero effects with the alternative cutoffs due to random chance.
Nonetheless, if we are finding true effects, we would expect the estimates based on placebo cutoffs
to follow roughly a bell-curve shape distribution with the mass centered at zero and away from
the preferred RD estimate. This is certainly the case in panel C of Figure 2; however, in Panel
C of Figure 3, this pattern is not as distinct. That said, the point estimate from column 9 in
panel B of Table 3 corresponds to the 12th percentile of the distribution in the latter graph, which
is similar to the p-value of 0.070 reported in the main regression table. Overall, we view these
results as supporting the argument that our main spillover effects reflect causality rather than other
confounders.
       Fourth, in panel D of Figures 2 and 3, we present the main effects estimated using a variety of
alternative samples to ensure that the findings presented in Table 3 are not driven by the particular
set of observations we use in our analysis to maximize statistical power. Here, we test seven
alternative samples, including cases in which the school-entry cutoff is consistently September 1
(second bar); cases wherein we observe full birth order (third bar); cases focusing on the first two
births only (fourth bar); cases focusing on births at parity one and two only (fifth bar), cases where
we can observe panel of test scores (sixth bar); or cases in which we observe information on early
inputs of the focal child (seventh and eighth bars). Irrespective of the sample, in Figure 2 the
estimates are in the same ballpark as our initial choice, and they are statistically significant at the 5
percent level in six out of seven cases and at the 10 percent level in all cases. Likewise, in Figure 3,
five out of seven specifications are statistically significant at the 10 percent level, and all estimates
are consistently negative. Our results are, therefore, robust to reasonable alternative assumptions
  30
      To be precise, in Figure 2 all coefficients in linear specification are statistically significant at least at 10% level
while in the quadratic specification, this is true in 23 out of 27 coefficients. In Figure 3, 14 out of 27 coefficients in the
linear specification are statistically significant at least at the 10% level while in the quadratic specification none of the
coefficients reach conventional levels of significance. This could potentially be explained by overfitting of quadratic
specification in relatively smaller samples with modest estimated effect sizes.
   31
      For example, if the threshold is September 1, 1985, then in the two most extreme cases, we are comparing siblings
of focal children born +/- 60 days around July 4, 1985, or focal children born +/- 60 days around October 31,
1985. Note that we do not perform any bootstrapping here but, rather, simply plot a density distribution over 201
coefficients.


                                                             21
on which sample of students is included in the analysis.32
       Fifth, we re-estimate all our main results using the non-parametric optimal bandwidth selection
approach proposed by Calonico et al. (2017). These estimates are provided in appendix Table
A12, and are in line with our parametric estimates. This procedure, however, produces larger
standard errors than our polynomial approach; therefore, our reinforcing behavior result is no
longer statistically significant at conventional levels. Larger standard errors might be due to the
discrete nature of our running variable, while the data-driven method requires a continuous running
variable. Importantly for our interpretation, the point estimates for test scores among higher SES
families in younger-to-older spillovers are very similar across the two estimation methods.33
       Sixth, we check the robustness of our findings to alternative measures of family SES. In Table
A13, we repeat our main analysis using neighborhood income to define family affluence. This
measure, by construction, is noisier compared to individual FRPL eligibility, and the correlation
between the two variables is only 0.44. Columns (1) and (2) of Table A13 divide the sample by
median neighborhood income; while columns (3) to (5) into terciles of this variable. In panel
A, akin to results from Table 3, we find positive spillovers among families living in relatively more
impoverished neighborhoods and no effects for households living in relatively more affluent locations.
Conversely, in panel B we find zero to small positive estimates in lower-SES and negative coefficients
in higher-SES neighborhoods. The latter set of results is not statistically significant at conventional
levels (p-values of 0.14 and 0.18 in columns (2) and (5), respectively) but largely confirms our
findings from Table 3, and the point estimates are comparable. Similarly to prior results, when we
focus on older sibling test scores after the younger focal child starts being tested, our estimates for
families residing in neighborhoods with above median income is -2.210 (standard error of 1.440).
The corresponding estimate for the top tercile is -3.177 (standard error of 1.740). Overall, these
findings suggest that our main conclusions are robust to different measures of SES, even if derived
at the neighborhood rather than the individual level.
       The positive sibling spillovers from the older child to the younger in relatively less affluent
families are precisely estimated irrespective of the exact specification or sample. The negative
effects from the younger child to the older sibling in families never on free or reduced price lunch,
however, are smaller quantitatively and weaker in statistical sense. In the latter case, in the majority
of specifications p-values are in the range between 0.05 and 0.10, however, they rarely reach 5%
  32
     Supplementary to Figure 3 we have also analyzed robustness of the results based on column (3) and panel C of
Table A10 where we drop observations for older sibling prior to commencement of testing of younger focal child. As
explained in Section 5 this is a sample where we expect the largest negative effects due to potential reinforcement
according to predictions from our model outlined in Section 2. These results are presented in Figure A15 and despite
smaller sample size they imply very robust results. In particular, in panel A, 23 and 16 out of 27 coefficients are
statistically significant at 10% level in linear and quadratic specifications, respectively. The insignificant estimates are
concentrated at lower bandwidths which could be driven by the overfitting of the quadratic specification. Subsequent
panels (B to D) likewise provide evidence for robustness of the negative estimate.
  33
     For 8 outcomes and 32 specifications/samples under investigation across the balancing check and the main results,
the optimal bandwidths range from 31 to 67 days, which motivates our preferred bandwidth of +/- 60 days at the
upper bound of the range produced by the data-driven procedure from Calonico et al. (2017). Furthermore, the
younger-to-older estimate for families never eligible for free or reduced price lunch becomes -3.033 with standard error
of 1.277 (p-value of 0.018) when we focus on older sibling test scores after the younger focal child starts being tested
(column 3 and panel C in Table A10).


                                                            22
significance levels. As we explained in Section 5 this is partly due to pooling zero effects before
the younger child starts being tested and negative effects afterward. Furthermore, these efficiency
concerns occur in part because we chose to report as our preferred specification the most conservative
standard errors adjustment across all plausible estimation methods. In that, we cluster the standard
errors at the level of running variable even though it is discrete.
   Such an estimation approach has been questioned recently (Kolesár and Rothe 2018), and thus
in Table A14 for completeness we report seven sets of 95% confidence intervals across three esti-
mation strategies. In particular, we compute confidence intervals based on (1) Eicker-Huber-White
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors; (2) standard errors clustered at the running variable level;
(3) standard errors clustered at the family level (to account for correlation in errors between pairs of
siblings coming from the same household; approximately 6% of our empirical sample); (4) standard
errors clustered two-way at the running variable and family levels (to jointly account for specifica-
tions (2) and (3) above); (5) standard errors based on heteroskedasticity-robust nearest neighbor
variance estimator by Calonico et al. (2017); (6) standard errors based on running variable cluster-
robust variance estimator by Calonico et al. (2017); and (7) standard errors for honest confidence
intervals based on bounding the second derivative (Kolesár and Rothe 2018).
   Considering our main positive finding for older-to-younger spillovers in less affluent families,
none of confidence intervals cross zero. In case of the main negative finding for younger-to-older
spillovers in more affluent families, two out of seven confidence intervals cross zero, however, in both
of these cases the 90% confidence interval excludes zero. Thus, these estimates would be considered
statistically significant at 10% level - lowest conventionally considered level of statistical significance.
Furthermore, in the former sample, the most positive upper-bound implies an effect size of +21.7
percent of a standard deviation while the least positive lower-bound implies an effect size of +4.8
percent of a standard deviation. In the latter sample, the most negative lower-bound implies an
effect size of -21.8 percent of a standard deviation while the least negative upper bound implies
an effect size of +0.3 percent of a standard deviation. As a comparison, the preferred estimated
treatment effects in these two samples are positive 14.8 and negative 8.0 percent of a standard
deviation, respectively. Thus, these potentially positive effects for younger-to-older spillovers among
more affluent families are minuscule and are obtained using the non-parametric method developed
by Calonico et al. (2017) which is not well suited for discrete running variables. On the other
hand, honest confidence intervals proposed by Kolesár and Rothe (2018) generate 95% confidence
intervals that do not cover zero. Importantly, even the more lenient 90% confidence intervals always
cover zero in the two remaining samples where we did not find any statistically significant effects
in the main specification (older-to-younger spillovers among affluent families and younger-to-older
spillovers among impoverished families). We view this discussion on the efficiency of our estimates
as important but secondary to whether the coefficients are biased or not and whether the treatment
effects are meaningful in economic terms or not. Given our extensive testing of RD-assumptions
and benchmarking of estimates discussed in Sections 4.2 and 5, we conclude that our findings reveal
unbiased and economically meaningful positive spillovers when the older child in a relatively less



                                                    23
affluent family is positively affected by the school-entry policy and smaller negative spillovers when
the younger child in a relatively more affluent family is positively affected by the school-entry policy.


7    Interpreting the results through IV
The analysis thus far has focused solely on reduced-form effects. While this approach is useful to
investigate the existence and direction of sibling spillovers, another interesting and policy-relevant
question is the causal effect of a student's achievement on the educational outcomes of his/her
sibling. Such reframing of the relationship puts both inputs and outputs on the same scale and
enables simple quantification of the magnitude of estimated externality. A complicating factor in
assessing this effect in our context, in addition to monotonicity concerns outlined earlier, is that
school-entry policies have been shown to affect not only the test scores of the focal students but also
their non-cognitive traits, such as leadership skills (Dhuey and Lipscomb 2008) or the likelihood of
engaging in risky behavior (Depew and Eren 2016; Cook and Kang 2016; Landersø et al. 2017).
This, in turn, raises the possibility that the exclusion restriction in an IV framework in which we
instrument for the focal sibling's test scores using his/her birth date around the school-entry cutoff
is violated, thus possibly leading to biased estimates. The direction of this bias would depend on
how these alternative channels affect the sibling's educational outcomes independently of the test
score effects of the policy on the focal child. For example, conditional on test scores, if better
leadership skills of the focal student impose positive externalities on siblings, then the IV estimates
will overestimate the true causal effect of the focal student's test scores on their siblings' test scores.
We do not have leadership or pure non-cognitive assessment measures in our data, however, Table
A2 documents the effects of the policy on various types of disability diagnoses. September born
focal children experience reductions in disability and increases in gifted status which is consistent
with increases in test scores. Based on these results it appears plausible that siblings experience
positive externalities from lower disability rates and improved behavioral outcomes of their brothers
and sisters, and thus the IV estimates presented below should be treated as an upper bound on the
effects of test scores of focal child on test scores of their younger or older sibling. Therefore, this
analysis should be treated solely as a descriptive quantification exercise useful for comparison with
prior studies.
    With these caveats in mind, invoking exclusion restriction and monotonicity, Table A1 reports
the results of the IV analysis. In panel A, we present the OLS coefficients on the third through
eight grade average test score of the focal sibling in regressions where the dependent variable is the
pooled third through eight grade test scores of their younger sibling (columns 1 to 3), or his/her
older sibling (columns 4 to 6), for all sibling pairs and broken down by family affluence. These are
the correlations mentioned in the introduction and the causality of which we attempt to assess in
this paper. In panel B, we repeat the same analysis, restricting the sample to focal siblings born
60 days before or after their school-entry cutoff. In both cases, we find inter-sibling associations in
the range of 0.42 to 0.51 percentile points that are highly statistically significant. In panel C, we



                                                    24
provide the reduced-form estimates that are identical, by design, to those presented in columns 3,
6, and 9 of Table 3.
       We then instrument for the average test scores of the focal student using his/her school-entry
cutoff. In the first row of panel D, we present the first-stage results of this analysis, which reveal
significant differences in average test scores between students born right before and right after the
cutoff. For example, focal children in the older-to-younger analysis who were born right after the
cutoff score 4.3 to 5.1 percentiles (or roughly 16 percent to 20 percent of the standard deviation)
better than focal children who were born right before the cutoff. These own-effects are comparable
across older-to-younger and younger-to-older samples, and by family affluence. Equally importantly,
Appendix Figure A1 presents the discontinuities at each grade level and by socioeconomic status,
and shows that the own-effects of school starting age policies persist over grades. Furthermore,
F-statistics suggest that we have strong instruments. The subsequent row of panel D presents the
second-stage results. For all cases except the older-to-younger effects in less affluent families, the
IV estimates suggest that the observed inter-sibling associations obtained using OLS overestimate
the effect of one sibling's academic performance on that of another. Pooling all families together
(column 1), the estimate implies that a 1 percentile increase in older child achievement increases
his/her younger sibling achievement by 0.39 percentiles ­ an externality of 39 percent. These average
effects are larger than those documented for peer (Nicoletti and Rabe 2019) or teacher (Qureshi
2017) effects but are much smaller than what was found in Denmark for the younger-to-older
spillovers (Landersø et al. 2019). This makes sense if peer and teacher effects create more transitory
shocks than school-entry policies; on the other hand, the large positive estimate for Denmark stems
from a policy affecting the household at a crucial time for the older child's. Our estimates are larger
for poor families with an almost 80 percent spillover rate, and consistent with our main findings,
we do not find sizable or statistically significant spillovers from older-to-younger children among
more affluent families. Reinforcing spillover in high-SES families in column 6 implies an externality
of about 37 percent, but this estimate is marginally statistically insignificant at conventional levels
(p-value of 0.12).34
       Estimates in Table A1 use averaged test scores in grades 3 through 8 as the endogenous variable.
As such, they limit the scope for school-entry age fade-out effects (Elder and Lubotsky 2009) and
represent treatment more closely resembling differential human capital rather than just relative
age advantage. Another question of interest, however, is what the IV scaling implies when we use
third grade tests scores as an endogenous variable ­ the first time that the focal child advantage is
measured and directly communicated to the parents. As expected, our first-stage estimates in this
setting increase to about 7 to 8 percentile points. The older-to-younger positive spillover among low-
SES families decreases to 0.56 percentiles, while younger-to-older negative spillover among high-SES
families decreases to 0.30 percentiles and is now statistically significant at 10 percent level. Taken
together, we estimate that positive externalities generated by school-entry policies affecting the
older child could range in magnitude from 56 percent to 77 percent among low-SES households but
  34
   This estimate becomes -0.767 with standard error of 0.387 when we focus on older sibling test scores after the
younger focal child starts being tested (column 3 and panel C in Table A10).


                                                       25
unlike the effects presented in some previous research, they never exceed own effects (Breining et
al. 2016). Likewise, in contrast to earlier work, we detect negative reinforcement among high-SES
households of up to 37 percent.


8    Conclusions
Common perception and correlational evidence suggest that siblings exert important influences on
each other. However, does the academic performance of one sibling causally affect the performance
of another? Or do correlations in this case reflect just common unobservables? This is an important
policy question: If there indeed is a causal link between the educational achievement of siblings,
interventions that improve the outcomes of one sibling could have larger benefits than those typically
considered in policy evaluations and further reduce inequality.
    In this study, we examine sibling spillovers in the context of school-entry policies. A number of
studies in the last decade have shown that these policies have profound effects on the cognitive and
non-cognitive skills of students, with students born after the school-entry cutoff (and hence more
likely to be the oldest in their cohorts) significantly outperforming students born before the cutoff.
Here, we examine whether and how this policy-driven academic advantage spills over to the siblings
of these students.
    Using student-level administrative data that enable us to identify siblings, and RD design we
compare the educational outcomes of students whose older or younger siblings were born in the days
before and after the school-entry cutoff. We find statistically significant positive spillover effects
from older-to-younger siblings that are entirely driven by children in less affluent families. We do
not find any evidence of statistically significant sibling spillovers from younger-to-older children
on average or in the less affluent sample. Interestingly, however, we do find suggestive evidence
for negative spillover effects among more affluent families that are larger for low-performing older
children, families in which siblings are spaced closer together, and that manifest only after the
ability of younger sibling is revealed through testing. These findings, potentially contradictory at
first, are consistent with two theoretical mechanisms: mentoring/tutoring when older sibling is
positively affected by school-entry policies and parental reinforcement in more affluent households
when either the younger or the older sibling is positively affected by school-entry policies. The
latter set of findings has, to our best knowledge, not been documented to date in developed country
context using quasi-experimental variation.
    Although the policy in question here is not easily manipulable, it is reasonable to think that our
results could generalize to other educational interventions that are targeted toward individual chil-
dren. Thus, policymakers should be cautious when designing and implementing such interventions,
since their target population could differ from the full population of affected individuals. Finally,
our findings suggest that the same educational intervention could create both positive and negative
externalities depending on the characteristics of the affected households, putting the "one-size fits
all" policy approach into question.



                                                 26
References
Adhvaryu, Achyuta and Anant Nyshadham, "Endowments at Birth and Parents' Investment
  in Children," Economic Journal, 2016, 126 (593), 781­820.

Alsan, Marcella, "The Gendered Spillover Effect of Young Children's Health on Human Capital:
  Evidence from Turkey," 2017.

Armstrong, Timothy and Michal Kolesár, "Simple and honest confidence intervals in non-
  parametric regression," arXiv:1606.01200v5, 2019.

Autor, David, David Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, Jeffrey Roth, and Melanie Wasser-
  man, "Family Disadvantage and the Gender Gap in Behavioral and Educational Outcomes,"
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2018, forthcoming.

Barcellos, Silvia, Leonardo Carvalho, and Adriana Lleras-Muney, "Child gender and
  parental investments in India: Are boys and girls treated differently?," American Economic Jour-
  nal: Applied Economics, 2014, 6 (1), 157­189.

Barua, Rashmi and Kevin Lang, "School entry, educational attainment and quarter of birth:
  A cautionary tale of a local average treatment effect," Journal of Human Capital, 2016, 10 (3),
  347­376.

Becker, Gary, A treatise on the family, Harvard University Press, 1993.

      and Nigel Tomes, "Child endowments and the quantity and quality of children," Journal of
  Political Economy, 1976, 84 (4), S143­S162.

Bedard, Kelly and Elizabeth Dhuey, "The persistence of early childhood maturity: Interna-
  tional evidence of long-run age effects," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (4), 1437­1472.

Berry, James, Rebecca Dizon-Ross, and Maulik Jagnani, "Not playing favorites: An exper-
  iment on parental preferences for educational investment," Mimeo, 2019.

Bertrand, Marianne and Jessica Pan, "The trouble with boys: Social influences and the gender
  gap in disruptive behavior," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2013, 5 (1), 32­64.

Bingley, Paul, Petter Lundborg, and Stepanie Vincent Lyk-Jensen, "Brothers in Arms:
  spillovers from a draft lottery," 2017.

Black, Sandra and Paul Devereux, "Recent developments in intergenerational mobility," in
  Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4B, Elsevier, 2011,
  pp. 1487­1541.

  ,     , and Kjell Salvanes, "Too young to leave the nest? The effects of school starting age,"
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 2011, 93 (2), 455­467.

                                                  27
  , Sanni Breining, David Figlio, Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik, Helena Skyt
  Nielsen, Jeffrey Roth, and Marianne Simonsen, "Sibling spillovers," NBER Working Paper
  230062, 2017.

Breining, Sanni, "The presence of ADHD: Spillovers between siblings," Economics Letters, 2014,
  124 (3), 469­473.

  , Joseph Doyle, David Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey Roth, "Birth order
  and delinquency: Evidence from Denmark and Florida," Journal of Labor Economics, 2018,
  forthcoming.

  , Meltem Daysal, Marianne Simonsen, and Mircea Trandafir, "Spillover Effects of Early
  Life Medical Interventions," IZA Discussion Paper 9086, 2016.

Buhrmester, Duane, "The developmental course of sibling and peer relationships," in Frits
  Boer and Judith Dunn, eds., Children's sibling relationships: Developmental and clinical issues,
  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1992.

Calonico, Sebastian, Matias Cattaneo, Max Farrell, and Rocio Titiunik, "rdrobust: Soft-
  ware for regression-discontinuity designs," The Stata Journal, 2017, 17 (2), 372­404.

Cascio, Elizabeth and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, "First in the class? Age and educa-
  tion production function," Education Finance and Policy, 2016, 11 (3), 225­250.

Cattaneo, Matias, Michael Jansson, and Xinwei Ma, "Manipulation testing based on density
  discontinuity," Stata Journal, 2018, 18 (1), 234­261.

Chiswick, Barry, "Differences in education and earnings across racial and ethnic groups: Tastes,
  discrimination, and investments in child quality," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1988, 103 (3),
  517­597.

Conley, Dalton, "Bringing sibling differences in: Enlarging our understanding of the transmission
  of advantage in families," in Annette Lareau and Dalton Conley, eds., Social Class: How does it
  work?, Russell Sage Foundation, 2008.

Cook, Philip and Songman Kang, "Birthdays, schooling, and crime: Regression-discontinuity
  analysis of school performance, delinquency, dropout, and crime initiation," American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics, 2016, 8 (1), 33­57.

Cunha, Flavio and James Heckman, "The technology of skill formation," American Economic
  Review, 2007, 97 (2), 31­47.

  ,   , and Susanne Schennach, "Estimating the technology of cognitive and noncognitive skill
  formation," Econometrica, 2010, 78 (3), 883­931.



                                                28
Currie, Janet and Douglas Almond, "Human capital development before age five," in Or-
  ley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4B, Elsevier, 2011,
  pp. 1315­1486.

Dahl, Gordon and Lence Lochner, "The impact of family income on child achievement: Ev-
  idence from the Earned Income Tax Credit," American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (5), 1927­
  1956.

Dee, Thomas and Hans Sievertsen, "The gift of time? School starting age and mental health,"
  Health Economics, 2018, 27 (5), 781­802.

Depew, Briggs and Ozkan Eren, "Born on the wrong day? School entry age and juvenile
  crime," Journal of Urban Economics, 2016, 96, 73­90.

Dhuey, Elizabeth and Stephen Lipscomb, "What makes a leader? Relative age and high
  school leadership," Economics of Education Review, 2008, 27 (2), 173­183.

  and     , "Disabled or young? Relative age and special education diagnoses in schools," Economics
  of Education Review, 2010, 29 (5), 857­872.

  , David Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey Roth, "School starting age and cognitive
  development," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2019, forthcoming.

Dobkin, Carlos and Fernando Ferreira, "Does school entry laws affect educational attainment
  and labor market outcomes?," Economics of Education Review, 2010, 29 (1), 40­54.

Elder, Todd, "The importance of relative standards in ADHD diagnoses: Evidence based on child's
  date of birth," Journal of Health Economics, 2010, 29 (5), 641­656.

   and Darren Lubotsky, "Kindergarten entrance age and children's achievement: Impacts of
  state policies, family background, and peers," Journal of Human Resources, 2009, 44 (3), 641­683.

Evans, William, Melinda Morrill, and Stephen Parente, "Measuring inappropriate medical
  diagnosis and treatment in survey data: the case of ADHD among school-aged children," Journal
  of Health Economics, 2010, 29 (5), 657­673.

Figlio, David, Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey Roth, "The Effects of
  Poor Neonatal Health on Children's Cognitive Development," American Economic Review, 2014,
  104 (12), 3921­3955.

Firpo, Sergio, Nicole Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux, "Unconditional quantile regression,"
  Econometrica, 2009, 77 (3), 953­973.

Fitzpatrick, Maria, "Preschoolers enrolled and mothers at work?           The effects of universal
  prekindergarten," Journal of Labor Economics, 2010, 28 (1), 51­85.


                                                29
  , "Revising our thinking about the relationship between maternal labor supply and preschool,"
  Journal of Human Resources, 2010, 47 (3), 583­612.

Fletcher, Jason, Nicole Hair, and Barbara Wolfe, "Am I my Brother's Keeper? Sibling
  Spillover Effects: The Case of Developmental Disabilities and Externalizing Behavior," NBER
  Working Paper 18279, 2012.

Frandsen, Brigham, "Party bias in union representation elections: testing the manipulation in the
  regression discontinuity design when the running variable is discrete," Advances in Econometrics,
  2018, forthcoming.

Fredriksson, Peter and Björn Öckert, "Life-cycle effects of age at school start," Economic
  Journal, 2014, 124 (579), 977­1004.

Gelbach, Jonah, "Public schooling for young children and maternal labor supply," American
  Economic Review, 2002, 92 (1), 307­322.

Grätz, Michael and Florencia Torche, "Compensation or reinforcement? The stratification of
  parental responses to children's early ability," Demography, 2016, 53 (6), 1883­1904.

Guryan, Jonathan, Erik Hurst, and Melissa Kearney, "Parental Education and Parental
  Time with Children," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2008, 22 (3), 23­46.

Haider, Steven and Kathleen McGarry, "Parental investments in college and later cash trans-
  fers," Demography, 2018, 55 (5), 1705­1725.

Heissel, Jennifer, "Spillover effects within families: Evidence from teenage motherhood and sib-
  ling academic performance," 2018.

Hurwitz, Michael, Jonathan Smith, and Jessica Howell, "Student age and the collegiate
  pathway," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2015, 34 (1), 59­84.

Joensen, Juanna Schroeter and Helena Skyt Nielsen, "Spillovers in Education Choice,"
  Journal of Public Economics, 2018, 157, 158­183.

Kalil, Ariel, Rebecca Ryan, and Michael Corey, "Diverging Destinies: Maternal Education
  and the Developmental Gradient in Time with Children," Demography, 2012, 49 (4), 1361­1383.

Karbownik, Krzysztof and Michal Myck, "Who gets to look nice and who gets to play? Effects
  of child gender on household expenditure," Review of Economics of the Household, 2017, 15 (3),
  925­944.

Kawaguchi, Daiji, "Actual age at school entry, educational outcomes, and earnings," Journal of
  the Japanese and International Economies, 2011, 25 (2), 64­80.

Kolesár, Michal and Christoph Rothe, "Inference in regression discontinuity designs with a
  discrete running variable," American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (8), 2277­2304.

                                                30
Krueger, Alan and Diane Schanzenbach, "The effect of attending a small class in the early
  grades on college-test taking and middle school test results: Evidence from Project STAR,"
  Economic Journal, 2001, 111 (468), 1­28.

Landersø, Rasmus, Helena Nielsen Skyt, and Marianne Simonsen, "School starting age
  and the crime-age profile," Economic Journal, 2017, forthcoming.

  ,   , and   , "How going to school affcts the family," Journal of Human Resources, 2019, forth-
  coming.

Lavy, Victor, Olmo Silva, and Felix Weinhardt, "The good, the bad, and the average: Evi-
  dence on ability peer effects in schools," Journal of Labor Economics, 2012, 30 (2), 367­414.

Lee, David and David Card, "Regression discontinuity inference with specification error," Jour-
  nal of Econometrics, 2008, 142 (2), 655­674.

Leight, Jessica and Elaine Liu, "Maternal education, parental investment and non-cognitive
  characteristics in rural China," Economic Development and Cultural Change, 2019, forthcoming.

Lino, Mark, "Expenditures on children by families: 2000 annual report," Technical Report 1528-
  2000, Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion 2000.

Manski, Charles F., "Indentification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem,"
  Review of Economic Studies, 1993, 60 (3), 531­542.

  , "Economic Analysis of Social Interactions," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2000, 14 (3),
  115­136.

McCrary, Justin, "Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity design: A
  density test," Journal of Econometrics, 2008, 142 (2), 698­714.

McEwan, Patrick and Joseph Shapiro, "The benefits of delayed primary school enrollment.
  Discontinuity estimates using exact birth dates," Journal of Human Resources, 2008, 43 (1), 1­29.

Michelmore, Katherine and Susan Dynarski, "The gap within the gap: Using longitudinal
  data to understand income differences in educational outcomes," AERA Open, 2017, 3 (1), 1­18.

Nicoletti, Cheti and Birgitta Rabe, "Sibling spillover effects in school achievement," Journal
  of Applied Ecopnometrics, 2019, 34 (4), 482­501.

Ozier, Owen, "Exploiting Externalities to Estimate the Long-term Effects of Early Childhood
  Deworming," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2017, forthcoming.

Parman, John, "Childhood Health and Sibling Outcomes: Nurture Reinforcing Nature During
  the 1918 Influenza Pandemic," Explorations in Economic History, 2015, 58, 22­43.



                                                 31
Pitt, Mark, Mark Rosenzweig, and Nazmul Hassan, "Inequality in the intrahousehold dis-
  tribution of food in low-income countries," American Economic Review, 1990, 80 (5), 1139­1156.

Qureshi, Javaeria, "Siblings, Teachers and Spillovers on Academic Achievement," Journal of
  Human Resources, 2017, forthcoming.

  , "Additional Returns to Investing in Girls' Education: Impact on Younger Sibling Human Capi-
  tal," Economic Journal, 2018, forthcoming.

Sacerdote, Bruce, "Experimental and quasi-experimental analysis of peer effects: two steps for-
  ward?," Annual Reviews Economics, 2014, 6, 253­272.

Vinopal, Katie and Seth Gershenson, "Re-Conceptualizing Gaps by Socioeconomic Status in
  Parental Time with Children," Social Indicators Research, 2017, forthcoming.

Yi, Junjian, James Heckman, Junsen Zhang, and Gabriella Conti, "Early Health Shocks,
  Intra-Household Resource Allocation and Child Outcomes," Economic Journal, 2015, 125, F347­
  F371.




                                               32
Tables

                                             Table 1: Descriptive statistics

                                                  (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)       (5)            (6)
                                                                           All possible adjacent
                                                            All with                                    First two births
                                                                                sibling pairs
                                                 All      grades 3 to 8
                                                           outcomes      Older-to- Younger-to- Older-to- Younger-to-
                                                                          younger          older    younger          older
                                                                         Panel A. Demographics
  White                                          74.0         74.6          78.8            79.1      79.3           79.6
  Ever on free or reduced price lunch            50.2         54.2          53.5            53.6      53.4           53.4
  Female                                         48.3         49.2          49.7            48.5      49.7           48.3
  Birth year                                    1986.5       1986.3        1987.3         1984.4     1988.6         1985.6
                                                                     Panel B: Grades 3 to 8 outcomes
  Test score                                       -          58.5          60.0            62.1      60.7           62.9
  Gifted                                           -           9.9          10.8            12.8      11.2           13.2
  Disabled                                         -          13.1          13.0            10.6      13.2           10.4
  N                                            263,811       193,094        34,331        33,290        23,659        23,131
Note: Column 1 includes all children attending public schools in the county between 1990 and 2005 who were born between 1975
and 1996; column 2 additionally requires at least one test score observation in grades 3 to 8; column 3 is our primary sample
for the analyses where older sibling is the focal child and we investigate outcomes for younger child: older sibling birth cohorts
1973 to 1995 while younger sibling birth cohorts 1976 to 1996; column 4 is our primary sample for the analyses where younger
sibling is the focal child and we investigate outcomes for the older child: older sibling birth cohorts 1975 to 1996 while younger
sibling birth cohorts 1977 to 2000; columns 5 and 6 present subsamples of the previous two columns for the sample of the first
two births in family. Running variable in columns 3 through 6 is restricted to +/- 150 days.




                                                               33
                             Table 2: Discontinuities in background characteristics

                                (1)           (2)           (3)               (4)        (5)           (6)           (7)
                                                                                         Age      Free or reduced price lunch
                              White         Female      Birth month Birth year
                                                                                     difference       Ever         Annual
                                                               Panel A: Older-to-younger
    Focal child born after    -0.968         2.096         -0.062        -0.250         9.214         2.114         0.628
    school entry cutoff       (1.360)       (1.712)        (0.102)       (0.157)      (17.422)       (1.731)       (1.298)
    Mean of Y                  78.7          49.3            6.6             1987.3    1021.9         53.6        34.282
    Implied imbalance (%)      -1.2           4.2           -0.9               0.0       0.9           3.9          1.8
    Observations                                                    14,148                                        114,628
                                                               Panel B: Younger-to-older
    Focal child born after     1.364         0.279         0.045         -0.075       -13.203         0.954        -0.228
    school entry cutoff       (1.165)       (1.233)       (0.099)       (0.155)      (18.784)        (1.632)       (1.484)
    Mean of Y                  78.8          48.8           6.6              1984.3    1019.2         54.1         34.8
    Implied imbalance (%)       1.7           0.6           0.7                0.0      -1.3           1.8          -0.7
    Observations                                                    13,854                                        111,418
Note: Local linear regression with bandwidth of +/- 60 days for reduced-form estimates based on equation 7. Sample in panel
A is based on all children for whom we observe two adjacent siblings with at least one test score in grades 3 to 8 for the
younger child and where the older sibling is a focal child. Sample in panel B is based on all children for whom we observe
two adjacent siblings with at least one test score in grades 3 to 8 for the older child and where the younger sibling is a focal
child. Single observation per individual. Outcome variables are: indicator for White student, indicator for female student, birth
month, birth year, age difference between siblings, indicator for family ever being on free or reduced price lunch, and indicator
for contemporaneous free or reduced price lunch status. Indicators are multiplied by 100. Standard errors clustered at running
variable at daily level.




                                                               34
                              Table 3: Main results: sibling spillovers in test scores

                               (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)        (9)
                                                                      Ever on free or                 Never on free or
                                          All
                                                                    reduced price lunch             reduced price lunch
                                                              Panel A. Older-to-younger
    Focal child born after 1.347        1.696**    1.694**   3.875*** 4.006*** 3.943***         -0.387     -0.119     -0.076
    school entry cutoff    (0.830)      (0.778)    (0.785)    (0.929) (0.921) (0.929)           (1.172)    (1.160)    (1.155)
    Mean/SD of Y                       59.9/26.4                         50.6/26.3                        70.0/22.6
    Observations                        56,701                            29,582                           27,119
                                                               Panel B. Younger-to-older
    Focal child born after -0.561       -0.602     -0.588      0.960     0.692     0.809       -1.983*     -1.755*    -1.773*
    school entry cutoff    (0.882)      (0.802)    (0.796)    (1.318) (1.268) (1.269)          (1.014)     (0.986)    (0.969)
    Mean/SD of Y                       61.7/26.7                         52.3/26.8                        72.7/22.2
    Observations                        55,813                            29,981                           25,981
    Own controls                           X          X                      X         X                     X          X
    Sibling controls                                  X                                X                                X
Note: Local linear regression with bandwidth of +/- 60 days for reduced-form estimates based on equation 7. Sample in panel
A investigates spillovers from older (treated) to younger (outcome) children while sample in panel B investigates spillovers from
younger (treated) to older (outcome) children. Outcome variable is averaged mathematics and reading scores represented as
percentiles of nationally normed distribution. We present both means as well as standard deviations of this variable. Columns
1 through 3 pool all families, columns 4 through 6 are limited to families where any of the children was ever on free or reduced
price lunch, while columns 7 through 9 are limited to families where children were never on free or reduced price lunch. Due
to grade repetition there are up to eight and up to seven observations per individual in panels A and B, respectively. Mean
number of tests are 4.0, 3.9, and 4.1 for columns 1 to 3, 4 to 6 and 7 to 8 in panel A, respectively. Mean number of tests
are 4.0, 4.0, and 4.1 for columns 1 to 3, 4 to 6 and 7 to 8 in panel B, respectively. Free or reduced price lunch is measured
in school records between 1989/90 and 2004/05. Columns 1, 4 and 7 do not include any controls; columns 2, 5 and 8 control
for individual covariates of child for whom we measure the outcome; columns 3, 6 and 9 further include individual controls of
the focal child from the pair. Own controls are: indicator for White student, indicator for female student, indicators for grades
(3 to 8), indicators for birth year, indicators for birth month and indicator for FCAT test. Sibling controls are: indicators for
sibling school starting cohorts, indicator for sibling being a female, and age difference between siblings in days. Standard errors
clustered at running variable at daily level.




                                                               35
Figures

                     Figure 1: Distribution of sibling observations around focal child school-entry cutoff

                               A. Older-to-younger                                                               B. Younger-to-older
            .005




                                                                                             .005
                                                    p-value: 0.495                                                                   p-value: 0.535
            .004




                                                                                             .004
              .003




                                                                                               .003
        Density




                                                                                         Density
     .002




                                                                                      .002
            .001




                                                                                             .001
            0




                     -5   -4   -3   -2      -1     0       1     2   3   4   5               0        -5   -4   -3   -2      -1     0       1     2   3   4   5
                                         Months around threshold                                                          Months around threshold


Note: Figures present histogram of density of children born around their sibling's school-entry cutoff (+/- 150 days). Bin width
is set to 5 days. Sample in panel A is based on births of younger siblings around the older sibling cutoff while sample in panel
B is based on births of older sibling around the younger sibling cutoff. Both samples are based on those used in main analysis
in Table 3. Dotted lines indicate cutoff while p-values are based on density test, run at daily level, proposed in Cattaneo et al.
(2018).




                                                                                 36
Figure 2: Robustness of the main results: Older-to-younger spillovers in test scores among families
                              ever on free or reduced priced lunch

    A. Bandwidth selection and functional form                                                                                                                                                        B. Donut regressions
                                                     8




                                                                                                                                                                      8
       for ever free or reduced price lunch families
        Older-to-younger spillovers in test scores




                                                                                                                                       for ever free or reduced price lunch families
                                                                                                                                        Older-to-younger spillovers in test scores

                                                                                                                                                                                  7
                                             6




                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                     4




                                                                                                                                                                      5
                             2




                                                                                                                                                           3   4
                      0




                                                                                                                                                     2
             -2




                                                                                                                                              1
     -4




                                                                                                                                        0
                                                         20   30   40   50   60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150




                                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                                                              Bandwidth every 5 days (+/-)
                                                                                                                                                                                       1          2       3      4      5       6       7        8                  9      10
                                                                               Local linear    Quadratic                                                                                                  Dropping days around the threshold (+/-)


                                                                   C. Randomization test                                                                                                              D. Sample restrictions


                                                                                                                                       for ever free or reduced price lunch families
                      .25




                                                                                                                                        Older-to-younger spillovers in test scores

                                                                                                                                                                              8
                                                                                                             RD estimate: 3.943
                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                     6
            .15




                                                                                                                                                             4
     Density




                                                                                                                                                     2
                      .1




                                                                                                                                            0
                      .05




                                                                                                                                                                                       Baseline   September     Fully     First two    Parity one   Grades   3rd grade   KG
                                                                                                                                                                                                  cutoff only observed     births       and two     3 to 8    scores attendance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sample restrictions
                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                      General                         Birth order related
                                                    -3    -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -.5       0     .5   1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4
                                                         Point estimates based on moving threshold by one day for +/- 100 days                                                                        Panel analysis                  Focal child information related


Note: This figure presents robustness checks for older-to-younger spillovers in test scores for the sample of families that were ever
observed on FRPL. Panel A tests bandwidth and functional form assumptions; panel B presents "donut regressions"; panel C
presents randomization inference; and panel D presents estimates in alternative samples. Panel A: dots present point estimates
while spikes reflect 95% confidence intervals with standard errors clustered at running variable at daily level; navy squares are
based on local linear specification while orange circles are based on quadratic specification; our preferred bandwidth is +/- 60
days and we test bandwidth range from +/- 20 days to +/- 150 days every 5 days. Panel B: point estimates and 95% confidence
intervals from local linear regression with +/- 60 days bandwidth when we exclude data points around the threshold; excluded
days range from +/- 1 to +/- 10 days. Panel C: density of point estimates coming from 201 regressions where for each regression
we move the threshold by one day, either earlier or later; we also include our baseline regression result which is marked with
dotted vertical line; each regression uses local linear specification with +/- 60 days bandwidth; the x-axis presents the range
of estimates. Panel D: all estimates are based on our preferred specification from panel A, column (6) of Table 3; first bar
replicates this estimate; second bar restricts the sample to cohorts where school-entry cutoff is consistently September 1; third
bar restricts the sample to cohorts where we can observe full information on birth order from first birth onward; fourth bar
limits the sample to first and second borns only; fifth bar limits the sample to parity one and two transitions only; sixth bar
limits the main sample to pairs where we observe panel of test scores for the younger child between grades 3 and 8; seventh bar
limits the sample to pairs where we observe information on 3rd grade test scores for the focal child; and eight bar limits the
sample to pairs where we observe information on kindergarten attendance for the focal child.




                                                                                                                                  37
Figure 3: Robustness of the main results: Younger-to-older spillovers in test scores among higher
                                          SES families

    A. Bandwidth selection and functional form                                                                                                                                                               B. Donut regressions
     for families never on free or reduced price lunch
                                                    8




                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                        for families never on free or reduced price lunch
         Younger-to-older spillovers in test scores




                                                                                                                                            Younger-to-older spillovers in test scores
                                              6




                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                      4




                                                                                                                                                                            -1
                               2




                                                                                                                                                                    -2
                        0




                                                                                                                                                            -3
                 -2




                                                                                                                                                     -4
          -4




                                                                                                                                              -5
                                                         20    30       40     50   60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150




                                                                                                                                                                           -6
                                                                                     Bandwidth every 5 days (+/-)
                                                                                                                                                                                              1          2       3      4      5       6       7        8                  9      10
                                                                                     Local linear   Quadratic                                                                                                    Dropping days around the threshold (+/-)


                                                                       C. Randomization test                                                                                                                 D. Sample restrictions


                                                                                                                                        families never on free or reduced price lunch
                                                                                                                                        Younger-to-older spillovers in test scores for
                      .25




                                                                                                                                                                              0    1
                                                         RD estimate: -1.773
                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                 -2    -1
            .15
     Density




                                                                                                                                                    -4     -3
                      .1




                                                                                                                                               -5
                      .05




                                                                                                                                         -6




                                                                                                                                                                                              Baseline   September     Fully     First two    Parity one   Grades   3rd grade   KG
                                                                                                                                                                                                         cutoff only observed     births       and two     3 to 8    scores attendance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sample restrictions
                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                             General                         Birth order related
                                                    -3     -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1         -.5    0     .5     1   1.5     2     2.5   3
                                                         Point estimates based on moving threshold by one day for +/- 100 days                                                                               Panel analysis                  Focal child information related


Note: This figure replicates analysis from Figure 2 for the specification from column (9) in panel B of Table 3.




                                                                                                                                   38
For Online Publication

Appendix Tables
                               Table A1: Sibling spillovers: Instrumental variables

                                  (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)              (5)          (6)
                                                     Outcome: pooled third to eight grade test scores
                                           Older-to-younger                                 Younger-to-older
                                             Ever on free Never on free                        Ever on free Never on free
                                  All         or reduced     or reduced           All           or reduced   or reduced
                                              price lunch    price lunch                        price lunch  price lunch
                                                                Panel A. Full sample OLS
   Focal child third to        0.491***         0.434***        0.432***         0.497***          0.444***         0.417***
   eight grade test scores      (0.004)          (0.006)         (0.008)          (0.005)           (0.006)          (0.007)
   Mean/SD of Y               60.1/26.4        50.8/26.2        70.2/22.6        62.1/26.7        52.4/26.6        73.1/22.0
   Observations                165,513          86,202           79,311           163,189          86,504           76,685
                                                               B. Bandwidth restricted OLS
   Focal child third to        0.491***         0.439***        0.427***         0.508***          0.464***         0.420***
   eight grade test scores      (0.007)          (0.010)         (0.014)          (0.008)           (0.010)          (0.012)
                                                                     C. Reduced-form
   Focal child born after      1.694**          3.943***         -0.076          -0.588              0.809          -1.773*
   school entry cutoff         (0.785)           (0.929)         (1.155)         (0.796)            (1.269)         (0.969)
                                            D. 2 SLS (instrumenting focal child averaged third to eight grade
                                                        test scores with their school entry cutoff)
   Focal child own effect      4.347***        5.122***         4.327***          5.274***         6.032***         4.760***
   (first-stage)                (0.872)         (1.188)          (1.100)           (0.867)          (1.173)          (1.132)
   F-stat                        18.6             18.7             14.4             51.4             29.8             25.2
   Focal child third to        0.390**          0.770***         -0.018            -0.111            0.134           -0.372
   eight grade test scores     (0.155)           (0.195)         (0.268)           (0.158)          (0.200)          (0.241)
   Mean/SD of Y               59.9/26.4        50.6/26.3        70.0/22.6        61.7/26.7        52.3/26.8        72.7/22.2
   Observations                56,701           29,582           27,119           55,813           29,981           25,832
Note: Columns 1 through 3 investigate spillovers from older-to-younger child while columns 4 through 6 investigate spillovers
from younger-to-older child. Columns 1 and 4 pool all families, columns 2 and 5 are limited to families where any of the children
was ever on free or reduced price lunch, while columns 3 and 6 are limited to families where children were never on free or
reduced price lunch. Free or reduced price lunch is measured in school records between 1989/90 and 2004/05. Panel A presents
regressions of pooled 3rd- through 8th-grade test scores of younger (older) sibling on averaged 3rd- through 8th-grade test scores
of older (younger) child in the full sample of children. Panel B restricts OLS regression from panel A to focal children born
within +/- 60 days of their school-entry cutoff, our preferred bandwidth. Panel C recreates reduced-form effects from columns
3, 6 and 9 of Table 3. Panel D presents 2SLS estimates where we instrument focal child's averaged 3rd- through 8th-grade tests
scores with their school-entry cutoff in a local linear regression with bandwidth of +/- 60 days. First set of coefficients in this
panel presents first-stage relationship together with F-statistics. Second set of coefficients in this panel presents 2SLS estimates.
All regressions include full set of controls akin to columns 3, 6 and 9 of Table 3. Standard errors clustered at running variable
at daily level.




                                                                39
                                                      Table A2: School-entry effects on disability for focal children

                             (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)              (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)       (11)        (12)
                                         Older child from older-to-younger pair                                     Younger child from younger-to-older pair
                                                    Ever on free or        Never on free or                                     Ever on free or        Never on free or
                              All children                                                                All children
                                                 reduced price lunch     reduced price lunch                                 reduced price lunch     reduced price lunch
                            Mean       Estimate      Mean       Estimate      Mean       Estimate       Mean      Estimate       Mean       Estimate      Mean       Estimate
            Any             18.2       -5.045***     23.7       -6.801***     11.8       -3.424**       24.3      -6.371***      29.4       -9.796***     18.3        -2.632
            disability                   (1.492)                  (2.027)                 (1.701)                   (1.379)                   (1.834)                 (1.701)
            Behavioral       11.1      -4.060***      15.2      -5.434***       6.3       -2.798**      13.7      -3.449***       17.7      -5.274***       8.9       -1.624
            disability                   (1.061)                  (1.648)                  (1.130)                  (0.973)                   (1.424)                 (1.203)
            Cognitive        1.6         0.223         2.7        0.163         0.5         0.183        2.0        -0.355        3.3        -1.015         0.5        0.251
            disability                  (0.360)                  (0.608)                   (0.361)                  (0.444)                  (0.846)                  (0.355)
            Physical         7.9        -1.509         9.8      -2.379**        5.8        -0.598       12.0      -3.931***       13.6      -5.513***      10.2       -1.913




40
            disability                  (1.072)                  (1.201)                   (1.364)                  (1.078)                   (1.497)                 (1.557)
            Other            0.2       -0.462***       0.2       -0.157         0.2      -0.806***       0.4        -0.166        0.4        -0.174         0.3       -0.143
            disability                   (0.174)                 (0.290)                   (0.258)                  (0.158)                  (0.263)                  (0.259)
            Gifted           13.1        1.164         5.9        0.783        21.4         2.276       10.8         0.587        4.9        1.541*        17.8       -0.154
            child                       (1.098)                  (1.162)                   (1.724)                  (0.883)                  (0.917)                  (1.463)
            N                           14,148                    7,577                    6,571                    13,854                    7,498                    6,356
     Note: This table presents estimates of school-entry cutoff on focal children disability diagnoses and gifted status classification. Sample is based on focal children from sibling-
     pairs used in estimation in Table 3. Disability and gifted status are defined as ever being assigned an appropriate IEP (individual education plan) in grades KG to 8.
     Behavioral disabilities include emotionally handicapped, specific learning disabled, severely emotionally disturbed, and autistic; cognitive disabilities include educable mentally
     handicapped, trainable mentally handicapped, language impaired, intellectual disability, profoundly mentally handicapped, and developmentally delayed; physical disabilities
     include orthopedically impaired, speech impaired, deaf or hard of hearing, visually impaired, hospital/homebound, dual sensory impaired, deaf, and traumatic brain injury;
     while other disabilities include having established condition and having other health impairment. Columns 1 to 6 present estimates for older focal children (pairs from panel A
     of Table 3) while columns 7 to 12 present estimates for younger focal children (pairs from panel B of Table 3). Columns 1, 2, 7, and 8 present results for all families; columns
     3, 4, 9, and 10 present results for families where any of the children was ever on free or reduced price lunch; while columns 5, 6, 11, and 12 present results for families where
     children were never on free or reduced price lunch. Even-numbered columns present sample means while odd-numbered columns present point estimates and standard errors.
     Standard errors clustered at running variable at daily level.
         Table A3: Discontinuities in background characteristics. Non-parametric estimates

                               (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)
                                                                                             Free or reduced price lunch
                             White        Female    Birth month Birth year          Age          Ever        Annual
                                                    Panel A: Older-to-younger
   Focal child born after    0.040        -1.723        0.059       -0.310          3.596        3.531        0.686
   school entry cutoff      (2.012)       (2.304)      (0.133)      (0.224)       (24.398)      (2.449)      (1.965)
   Mean of Y                  79.1         49.7          6.5          1987.4      1025.4         53.5          35.5
   Implied imbalance (%)       0.1         -3.5          0.9            0.0         0.4           6.6           1.9
   Bandwidth                   49           35           51             48          59            49            67
   Observations                                                 41,201                                       165,513
                                                     Panel B: Younger-to-older
   Focal child born after   -1.248        -0.412        -0.103      -0.263        -23.348        0.902       -1.719
   school entry cutoff      (1.591)       (1.356)      (0.152)      (0.255)       (23.542)      (2.227)      (1.852)
   Mean of Y                  79.2         48.6           6.6         1984.4      1022.4         53.6         37.129
   Implied imbalance (%)      -1.6         -0.8          -1.6           0.0        -2.3           1.7          -4.6
   Bandwidth                   31           40            46            50          55            50            59
   Observations                                                 40,181                                       163,189
Note: This table is a non-parametric version of results presented in Table 2 estimated using method developed by Calonico et
al. (2017). Standard errors clustered at running variable at daily level.




                                                            41
  Table A4: Discontinuities in background characteristics by free and reduced price lunch status

                               (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)
                                                                                                          Free or reduced
                             White          Female        Birth month       Birth year     Age difference
                                                                                                            price lunch
                                          Panel A: Older-to-younger, ever on free or reduced price lunch
    Focal child born after   -0.791          4.034           -0.224           -0.066          -10.257          -1.651
    school entry cutoff      (2.149)        (2.534)          (0.146)          (0.183)         (24.574)        (1.401)
    Mean of Y                 69.2            50.0              6.7           1987.5           980.3           64.1
    Implied imbalance (%)     -1.1             8.1             -3.4             0.0             -1.0           -2.6
    Observations                                              7,577                                           61,302
                                          Panel B: Older-to-younger, never on free or reduced price lunch
    Focal child born after    0.145          -0.250           0.118          -0.484**          36.507
    school entry cutoff      (1.169)        (2.608)          (0.140)          (0.241)         (26.415)
    Mean of Y                 96.1            48.5             6.5            1987.0           1075.2          N/A
    Implied imbalance (%)      0.2            -0.5             1.8              0.0              3.4
    Observations                                              6,571
                                          Panel C: Younger-to-older, ever on free or reduced price lunch
    Focal child born after    2.422          1.463           0.214             0.151          -17.002         -1.559
    school entry cutoff      (2.086)        (1.888)         (0.154)           (0.208)         (23.210)        (1.484)
    Mean of Y                 69.8            48.8             6.6            1984.6           973.9           63.9
    Implied imbalance (%)      3.5             3.0             3.2              0.0             -1.7           -2.4
    Observations                                              7,498                                           60,637
                                          Panel D: Younger-to-older, never on free or reduced price lunch
    Focal child born after    0.709          -1.163          -0.169           -0.353           -6.517
    school entry cutoff      (1.261)         (2.438)         (0.147)          (0.266)         (27.908)
    Mean of Y                 96.0            47.7              6.5           1983.9           1073.3          N/A
    Implied imbalance (%)      0.7            -2.4             -2.6             0.0             -0.6
    Observations                                              6,356
Note: This table replicates balancing checks presented in Table 2 separately for families ever and never on FRPL. Standard
errors clustered at running variable at daily level.




                                                            42
          Table A5: Effects of older sibling school-entry discontinuity on subsequent fertility

                                             (1)        (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)
                                                       Probability of younger sibling birth
                                             Parity 1 to 2         Parity 2 to 3         Parity 3 to 4

         Older sibling born after 1.120                 1.155           0.119      0.390       -2.116       -2.219
         school entry cutoff      (0.696)              (0.702)         (1.033)    (1.025)      (2.465)      (2.554)
         Implied % effect                    4.8            4.9         0.7            2.3      -15.4           -16.1
         Mean of Y                                  23.4                       16.6                     13.7
         Observations                              65,632                     15,431                    2,604
         Demographic controls               No              Yes         No             Yes       No             Yes
Note: This table shows the effects of older sibling school-entry cutoff on the probability that there is a younger sibling in
the family. Sample is based on children born on or after September 1, 1979 and on or before December 31, 2000, where we
can fully observe birth order. All outcomes are indicator variables multiplied by 100. Columns 1 and 2 analyze parity one
transition, columns 3 and 4 analyze parity two transition while columns 5 and 6 analyze parity three transition. All regressions
include indicators for older sibling school-entry cohort. Demographic controls further include: indicator for gender of older
child, indicator for White family and indicator for whether family has ever been on free or reduced price lunch. Standard errors
clustered at running variable at daily level.



      Table A6: Proxies for socioeconomic status of an older child measured at younger child's
                  school-entry cutoff, before and after the younger child turns 5

                                     (1)            (2)               (3)             (4)                          (5)
                              Free or reduced                  % high school      % college                      % single
                                              Median income
                                price lunch                       dropouts        graduates                      mothers
                                                   Panel A. Year before younger turns 5
    Focal child born after        -2.264         981.240           -0.479           0.684                        -0.570
    school entry cutoff           (2.010)       (690.564)          (0.518)         (0.649)                       (0.652)
    Implied imbalance (%)           -5.6           2.5               -2.8             2.4                          -1.9
    Mean of Y                       40.6          39413              17.4            28.9                          29.3
    Observations                   6,003                                    4,814
                                                  Panel B. First year when younger turns 5
    Focal child born after        -3.091         445.750           -0.070           0.124                        -0.101
    school entry cutoff           (2.120)       (744.573)          (0.504)         (0.688)                       (0.689)
    Implied imbalance (%)           -7.4           1.1               -0.4             0.4                          -0.3
    Mean of Y                       41.8          39644              17.3            29.0                          29.0
    Observations                   6,003                                    4,814
Note: Local linear regression with bandwidth of +/- 60 days for reduced form estimates based on equation 7. Empirical sample
based on spillovers from younger (treated) to older (outcome) children where the dependent variables are: an indicator variable
for annually measured free or reduced price lunch status (column 1), median micro-neighborhood income (column 2), fraction
of high school dropouts in micro-neighborhood (column 3), fraction of college graduates in micro-neighborhood (column 4), and
fraction of households headed by single mothers in micro-neighborhood (column 5). Estimates in panel A are based on a school
year before the younger child turns five years of age (school-entry cutoff) while estimate in panel B are based on school year in
a year when younger child turns five years of age. Indicators and fractions are multiplied by 100. Standard errors clustered at
running variable at daily level.




                                                                  43
                         Table A7: Discontinuities in background characteristics: Neighborhood characteristics and annual FRPL

                                  (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)                                  (9)       (10)
                                  Median income      % high school dropouts % college graduates          % single mothers                                   Annual FRPL
                              Older-to- Younger- Older-to- Younger- Older-to- Younger- Older-to- Younger-                                                Older-to- Younger-
                               younger     to-older    younger     to-older     younger    to-older    younger     to-older                              younger    to-older
                                                                   Panel A. All families
       Focal child born after -548.734      18.305       0.202      -0.075       -0.361     -0.181       0.049      -0.039                                 0.544         -0.261
       school entry cutoff    (425.102) (415.958) (0.268)           (0.283)     (0.396)     (0.392)     (0.465)     (0.448)                               (1.292)        (1.473)
       Mean of Y                40648       40361         16.8       16.9          29.8       29.7        28.1        28.4                                  34.1          34.6
       Implied imbalance (%)     -1.3         0.0          1.2        -0.4         -1.2       -0.6         0.2        -0.1                                   1.6           -0.8
       Observations            106,558 102,132 106,558 102,132 106,558 102,132 106,554 102,132                                                           106,554        102,132
                                                   Panel B. Families ever on free or reduced price lunch
       Focal child born after   48.684    142.691       -0.301      -0.408        0.371      0.265      -0.219      -0.136                                -1.834         -1.638
       school entry cutoff    (423.253) (373.624) (0.339)           (0.318)     (0.391)     (0.357)     (0.622)     (0.545)                               (1.441)        (1.484)




44
       Mean of Y                35874       35613         20.1       20.2          25.4       25.2        33.4        33.6                                  63.7          63.7
       Implied imbalance (%)      0.1         0.4         -1.5        -2.0          1.5        1.0        -0.7        -0.4                                  -2.9           -2.6
       Observations             56,986      55,545     56,986       55,545      56,986      55,545      56,986      55,545                                56,986         55,545
                                                     C. Families never on free or reduced price lunch
       Focal child born after -720.099      54.413      0.419*       0.184       -0.725     -0.538      -0.232      -0.151
       school entry cutoff    (566.047) (573.124) (0.242)           (0.268)     (0.470)     (0.562)     (0.374)     (0.414)
       Mean of Y                46136       46021         13.0       12.9          35.0       35.1        22.0        22.2                                         N/A
       Implied imbalance (%)     -1.6         0.1          3.2         1.4         -2.1       -1.5        -1.1        -0.7
       Observations             49,572      46,587     49,572       46,587      49,572      46,587      49,572      46,587
     Note: Local linear regression with bandwidth of +/- 60 days for reduced-form estimates based on equation 7. Samples in panel A are based on all families; samples in panel
     B are limited to families where any of the children was ever on free or reduced price lunch; while samples in panel C are limited to families where children were never on free
     or reduced price lunch. Odd-numbered columns present spillover estimated from older (treated) to younger (outcome) children while even-numbered columns present spillover
     estimates from younger (treated) to older (outcome) children. Outcomes in columns 1 to 8 are based on time varying characteristics of micro-neighborhoods of residence that
     are merged into the data at school year level. Dependent variables are median neighborhood income (columns 1 and 2), percentage of high school dropouts in neighborhood
     (columns 3 and 4), percentage of college graduates in neighborhood (columns 5 and 6), percentage of single mothers in neighborhood (columns 7 and 8). Columns 9 and 10
     present results for individual level indicator (varying at annual level) for being on free or reduced price lunch. Columns 9 and 10 replicate analysis in column 7 of Table 2 for
     the sample where neighborhood information is available. Indicators and percentages are multiplied by 100. Standard errors clustered at running variable at daily level.
  Table A8: Younger sibling compliance with school-entry rules by older focal child school-entry
                                            cutoff

                                 (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)
                                             Younger child from older-to-younger pair
                                                    Ever on free or reduced      Never on free or
                                  All children
                                                           price lunch         reduced price lunch
                               Mean       Estimate     Mean        Estimate     Mean       Estimate
     Held back at               3.3         1.010        2.8         0.697       3.8        1.491
     school entry                          (0.669)                  (0.940)                (1.117)
     Fast-tracked at             0.6           -0.146             0.7           0.100             0.5            -0.424
     school entry                              (0.331)                         (0.526)                           (0.387)
     On-time school             96.1           -0.865            96.5          -0.796             95.6           -1.067
     entry                                     (0.769)                         (1.131)                           (1.174)
     N                                         7,858                            4,373                            3,485
Note: Local linear regression with bandwidth of +/- 60 days for reduced form estimates based on equation 7. Empirical sample
based on spillovers from older (treated) to younger (outcome) children where the dependent variables are: an indicator variable
for being held back at school entry (row 1), an indicator variable for being fast-tracked at school entry (row 2), and an indicator
variable for on-time school entry (row 3). Odd-numbered columns present means of dependent variables while even-numbered
columns present point estimates. Column 1 and 2 pool all families, columns 3 and 4 are limited to families where any of the
children was ever on free or reduced price lunch, while columns 5 and 6 are limited to families where children were never on free
or reduced price lunch. Indicators are multiplied by 100. Standard errors clustered at running variable at daily level.



               Table A9: Main results: Estimates separately for reading and mathematics

                                 (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)            (5)               (6)
                                          Older-to-younger                                   Younger-to-older
                                             Ever on free    Never on free                     Ever on free     Never on free
                                 All          or reduced      or reduced          All           or reduced       or reduced
                                             price lunch      price lunch                      price lunch       price lunch
                                                                  Panel A. Mathematics
   Focal child born after      1.787**         4.501***          -0.467         -0.222             1.013           -1.110
   school entry cutoff         (0.888)          (1.059)         (1.251)         (0.839)           (1.325)          (1.012)
   Mean/SD of Y               62.6/28.7       53.2/29.0        72.6/24.7        63.4/29.0        54.1/29.4        74.0/24.7
                                                                    Panel B: Reading
   Focal child born after      1.561*          3.413***          0.267           -1.116            0.507          -2.511**
   school entry cutoff         (0.826)          (1.100)         (1.193)          (0.845)          (1.329)          (1.061)
   Mean/SD of Y               57.5/28.3       48.4/28.0        67.4/25.2        60.6/28.6        51.1/28.6        71.4/24.4
   Observations                56,116          29,142           26,974           55,203           29,491           25,712
Note: Local linear regressions with bandwidth of +/- 60 days for reduced-form estimates based on equation 7. Each panel
presents point estimates, standard errors as well as means and SDs for mathematics test scores (panel A) and reading test scores
(panel B). Columns 1 through 3 present spillovers from older (treated) to younger (outcome) children while columns 4 through
6 present spillovers from younger (treated) to older (outcome) children. Columns 1 and 4 pool all families, columns 2 and 5
are limited to families where any of the children was ever on free or reduced price lunch, while columns 3 and 6 are limited to
families where children were never on free or reduced price lunch. Free or reduced price lunch is measured in school records
between 1989/90 and 2004/05. All regressions include both own and sibling controls from Table 3. Standard errors clustered at
running variable at daily level.




                                                               45
    Table A10: Effects of younger sibling school-entry discontinuity on older child achievement:
                                  Estimates by timing of testing

                                               (1)                  (2)                  (3)               (4)
                                                                Before first        After first    p-value difference
                                           Main effect
                                                                  testing              testing         (2) vs (3)
                                                                          Panel A. All
            Younger child born after         -0.588                0.015              -1.827*
                                                                                                          0.071
            school entry cutoff              (0.796)              (0.884)              (1.027)
            Mean/SD of Y                    61.7/26.7            62.4/26.3          60.8/27.3
            Observations                     55,813               33,454             22,359
                                                         Panel B. Ever on free or reduced price lunch
            Younger child born after          0.809                1.362             -0.036
                                                                                                          0.254
            school entry cutoff              (1.269)              (1.402)            (1.401)
            Mean/SD of Y                    52.3/26.8            53.0/26.5          51.4/27.0
            Observations                     29,981               17,452             12,529
                                                         Panel C. Never on free or reduced price lunch
            Younger child born after         -1.773*               -1.097            -3.300***
                                                                                                          0.099
            school entry cutoff              (0.969)               (1.129)            (1.231)
            Mean/SD of Y                    72.7/22.2            72.6/22.0          72.8/22.6
            Observations                     25,832               16,002              9,830
Note: Local linear regression with bandwidth of +/- 60 days for reduced-form estimates based on equation 7 and specifications
with controls from columns 3, 6 and 9 of panel B of Table 3. Control variables include: indicator for White student, indicator
for female student, indicators for grades (3 to 8), indicators for birth year, indicators for birth month and indicator for FCAT
test, indicators for sibling school starting cohorts, indicator for sibling being a female, and age difference between siblings in
days. Sample in panel A presents estimates for full population, in panel B for families with a child ever on free or reduced price
lunch, and in panel C for families with children never on free or reduced price lunch. Column 1 replicates the main effects from
Table 3 while columns 2 and 3 divide the sample by timing of the testing of the younger child: column 2 presents spillovers
into older child for scores before younger child is first tested (grade 3 or before) and column 3 presents spillovers into older
child for scores after younger child is first tested (grades 4 and after). Column 4 presents p-value from statistical test that the
estimates in columns 2 and 3 are equal. Outcome variable is averaged mathematics and reading scores represented as percentiles
of nationally normed distribution. We present both means as well as standard deviations of this variable. Standard errors
clustered at running variable at daily level.




                                                                 46
                   Table A11: Sibling spillovers: Estimates for non-test score outcomes.

                                 (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)          (6)
                                         Older-to-younger                                Younger-to-older
                                           Ever on free Never on free                      Ever on free Never on free
                                All         or reduced      or reduced          All          or reduced   or reduced
                                           price lunch      price lunch                      price lunch  price lunch
                                                     Panel A: Cognitive or behavioral disability
    Focal child born          -2.518*        -3.941**         -0.759           0.091            0.147       -0.719
    after school entry        (1.480)         (1.921)         (1.912)         (1.104)          (1.640)      (1.149)
    cutoff
    Mean of Y                  16.5            21.6             10.5            13.5             18.5            7.8
    Observations              12,863           6,906           5,957           13,059           7,023           6,036
                                                             Panel B: Physical disability
    Focal child born           0.381           0.771           0.034           -0.450          -0.324          -0.903
    after school entry        (1.214)         (1.744)         (1.682)          (0.893)         (1.418)         (1.055)
    cutoff
    Mean of Y                   13.7           15.7             11.7             9.1             11.5            6.4
    Observations              12,457           6,418           6,039           12,420           6,470           5,950
                                                                 Panel C: Ever gifted
    Focal child born           0.270          1.714*           -0.989          -1.712          -0.623          -2.846
    after school entry        (1.036)         (0.906)          (1.917)         (1.082)         (0.977)         (1.883)
    cutoff
    Mean of Y                   10.9            4.8              18.0            12.7            6.0             20.6
    Observations              14,148           7,577            6,571          13,854           7,498           6,356
                                                           Panel D: Ever repeating grade
    Focal child born         -1.829**         -3.578**        -0.107         -0.298            -0.953           0.082
    after school entry        (0.864)          (1.527)        (0.849)        (0.721)           (1.133)         (0.696)
    cutoff
    Mean of Y                   8.1             11.8            3.8             5.4              7.9             2.5
    Observations              14,148            7,577          6,571         13,854             7,498           6,356
Note: Local linear regressions with bandwidth of +/- 60 days for reduced-form estimates based on equation 7. Each panel
presents point estimates, standard errors, sample sizes and means for indicator for ever being diagnosed with cognitive or
behavioral disability (panel A), indicator for ever being diagnosed with physical disability (panel B), indicator for ever being
in a gifted program (panel C), and indicator for ever repeating a grade (panel D). Indicator variables are multiplied by 100.
Columns 1 through 3 present spillovers from older (treated) to younger (outcome) children while columns 4 through 6 present
spillovers from younger (treated) to older (outcome) children. Columns 1 and 4 pool all families, columns 2 and 5 are limited to
families where any of the children was ever on free or reduced price lunch, while columns 3 and 6 are limited to families where
children were never on free or reduced price lunch. Free or reduced price lunch is measured in school records between 1989/90
and 2004/05. All regressions include both own and sibling controls from Table 3 with the exception of grade indicators and test
type (FCAT). Standard errors clustered at running variable at daily level.




                                                              47
         Table A12: Main results: Sibling spillovers in test scores. Non-parametric estimates

                              (1)          (2)       (3)              (4)       (5)       (6)            (7)        (8)        (9)
                                                                          Ever on free or                     Never on free or
                                           All
                                                                        reduced price lunch                 reduced price lunch
                                                                  Panel A. Older-to-younger
 Focal child born after      1.627       1.986*    2.050*       3.920*** 3.824*** 3.971***            0.275        0.929       0.818
 school entry cutoff        (1.168)      (1.164)   (1.129)       (1.356) (1.331) (1.312)             (1.362)      (1.429)     (1.340)
 Mean/SD of Y                          60.1/26.4                            50.8/26.2                           70.2/22.6
 Bandwidth                    54           53        54               48        52        52             72         61          67
 Observations                           165,513                              86,202                              79,311
                                                                  Panel B. Younger-to-older
 Focal child born after     -1.158       -1.007    -0.973         0.061     0.018     0.084          -2.387*      -1.702      -1.719
 school entry cutoff        (1.156)      (1.139)   (1.128)       (1.756) (1.743) (1.755)              (1.252)     (1.230)     (1.235)
 Mean/SD of Y                          62.1/26.7                            52.4/26.6                           73.1/22.0
 Bandwidth                    56           48        47               64        55        54             50         49          48
 Observations                           163,189                              86,504                              76,685
 Own controls                              X          X                          X         X                         X          X
 Sibling controls                                     X                                    X                                    X
Note: This table is a non-parametric version of results presented in Table 3 estimated using method developed by Calonico et
al. (2017). Standard errors clustered at running variable at daily level.



            Table A13: Sibling spillovers in test scores: Estimates by neighborhood affluence

                                          (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)             (5)
                                      By median of neighborhood
                                                                             By tercile of neighborhood income
                                                income
                                        Below           Above             Bottom            Middle           Top
                                                                Panel A. Older-to-younger
         Focal child born after        3.709***         -0.276           4.060***            1.540          -0.236
         school entry cutoff            (0.922)         (0.988)           (1.233)           (1.088)        (1.360)
         Mean/SD of Y                 52.0/26.7        67.5/23.8             48.9/26.7          60.9/25.2         69.4/23.2
         Observations                  27,978           28,697                18,955             17,953            19,767
                                                                     Panel B. Younger-to-older
         Focal child born after          0.801             -1.514              -0.005           0.751              -1.994
         school entry cutoff            (1.271)            (1.011)             (1.459)         (1.367)             (1.491)
         Mean/SD of Y                 53.6/27.1        70.0/23.7             50.0/27.0          63.0/25.7         72.3/22.5
         Observations                  28,173           27,608                19,063             17,572            19,146
Note: Local linear regression with bandwidth of +/- 60 days for reduced-form estimates based on equation 7 and specifications
with controls from columns 3, 6 and 9 of Table 3. Control variables include: indicator for White student, indicator for female
student, indicators for grades (3 to 8), indicators for birth year, indicators for birth month and indicator for FCAT test, indicators
for sibling school starting cohorts, indicator for sibling being a female, and age difference between siblings in days. Sample in
panel A investigates spillovers from older (treated) to younger (outcome) children while sample in panel B investigates spillovers
from younger (treated) to older (outcome) children. Outcome variable is averaged mathematics and reading scores represented
as percentiles of nationally normed distribution. We present both means as well as standard deviations of this variable. Columns
1 and 2 divide the sample by median of neighborhood income in which family resides while columns 3 to 5 divide the sample by
terciles of this measure. Neighborhood income is based on minimum average neighborhood income experienced by the family
as defined at the busing zone. Standard errors clustered at running variable at daily level.




                                                                     48
       Table A14: Main results with 95% confidence intervals: Testing various standard errors
                                          assumptions

                                             (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)               (6)
                                                                                  Ever on free or                    Never on free or
                                                     All
                                                                                reduced price lunch                reduced price lunch
                                         Older-to-         Younger-to-        Older-to-     Younger-to-         Older-to-        Younger-to-
                                         younger             older            younger         older             younger            older
   Focal child born        OLS              1.347             -0.561           3.875             0.960             -0.387             -1.983
   after school           robust        (0.479; 2.216)   (-1.449; 0.326)   (2.691; 5.059)   (-0.247; 2.167)   (-1.469; 0.695)   (-3.070; -0.896)
   entry cutoff         cluster RV     (-0.296; 2.990)   (-2.308; 1.185)   (2.036; 5.713)   (-1.649; 3.569)   (-2.706; 1.933)    (-3.990; 0.024)
                      cluster family   (-0.387; 3.082)   (-1.449; 0.326)   (2.691; 5.059)   (-0.247; 2.167)   (-1.469; 0.695)   (-3.070; -0.896)
                         two-way       (-0.278; 2.973)   (-2.286; 1.163)   (2.065; 5.685)   (-1.625; 3.545)   (-2.696; 1.922)   (-3.964; -0.001)
   Focal child born    RDrobust             1.627           -1.158          3.920           0.061           0.275           -2.387
   after school           nn            (0.441; 2.813) (-2.304; -0.012) (2.217; 5.632) (-1.448; 1.570) (-1.005; 1.555) (-3.904; -0.871)
   entry cutoff         cluster        (-0.663; 3.917) (-3.424; 1.108) (1.262; 6.577) (-3.380; 3.502) (-2.395; 2.945) (-4.841; 0.067)
   Focal child born RDHonest                1.079           -1.610          3.660           0.690           -0.206          -1.865
   after school      uniform           (-0.272; 2.431) (-3.105; -0.114) (2.157; 5.162) (-0.826; 2.205) (-1.610; 1.198) (-3.498; -0.232)
   entry cutoff     optimal M               0.002            0.003          0.001           0.001            0.001           0.002

Note: This table tests various standard errors assumptions for estimates from Tables 3 and A12 without additional controls and
provides 95% confidence intervals. Row (1) presents nonparametric local linear estimates while rows (2) to (5) provide confidence
intervals under various assumptions on standard errors estimation. Row (2) uses Eicker-Huber-White heteroskedasticity robust
standard errors; row (3) uses standard errors clustered by the running variable; row (4) uses standard errors clustered at the
family level; and row (5) uses standard errors clustered two-way by running variable and at the family level. Row (6) presents
estimates using the optimal bandwidth selection procedure proposed by Calonico et al. (2017) while rows (7) and (8) provide
two sets of confidence intervals for these estimates. First (row (7)) uses standard errors based on heteroskedasticity-robust
nearest neighbor variance estimator while second (row (8)) uses standard errors based on cluster-robust by the running variable
variance estimator. Subsequent three rows present estimates, honest confidence intervals and optimal M based on procedure
developed by Kolesár and Rothe (2018). These computations are based on RDHonest command with uniform kernel, FLCI
optimal criterion and Hölder smoothness class to replicate panel B of Table 2 in Kolesár and Rothe (2018). Optimal M,
smoothness constant, is computed for each sample separately using data-driven procedure from Armstrong and Kolesár (2019).
Odd numbered columns present estimates for spillovers from older (treated) to younger (outcome) children while even numbered
columns present estimates for spillovers from younger (treated) to older (outcome) children. Columns 1 and 2 pool all families,
columns 3 and 4 are limited to families where any of the children was ever on free or reduced price lunch, while columns 5 and
6 are limited to families where children were never on free or reduced price lunch.




                                                                         49
Appendix Figures

     Figure A1: Persistance of school-entry cutoff advantage: Focal children effects over grades

                                                   10
              Child born after school entry cutoff
              Test scores (national percentiles)
               2        4        6       08




                                                        3      4          5              6          7            8
                                                                               Grades

                                                            Full sample   Ever on FRPL       Never on FRPL


Note: This figure presents estimates of school-entry cutoff rule on focal children test scores (averaged mathematics and reading)
over grades. Sample is based on focal children from sibling-pairs used in estimation in Table 3. Each marker represents point
estimate from a separate regression with 95% confidence interval. Standard errors clustered at running variable at daily level.
Maroon triangles depict estimates pooled across all families; navy squares depict estimates for families where any of the children
was ever on free or reduced price lunch; while orange circles depict estimates for families where children were never on free or
reduced price lunch. Lines present estimates pooled across all grades (3 to 8): maroon solid for all families; navy dashed for
families where any of the children was ever on free or reduced price lunch; and orange dash-dotted for families where children
were never on free or reduced price lunch.




                                                                              50
                                                                                     Figure A2: Discontinuity in age at school-entry
                                               6
                                                                       I. Full Sample                                                                                                          II. Breakdown by SES




                                                                                                                                                                             6
     Age in years at the start of kindergarten




                                                                                                                                   Age in years at the start of kindergarten
                                                                                                                                                                     5.8
                                      5.8




                                                                                                                                                           5.6
                            5.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Difference = 0.90
                                                                                        Difference = 0.87                                                                                                               Difference = 0.82




                                                                                                                                                 5.4
                  5.4




                                                                                                                                        5.2
         5.2




                                                                                                                                                          5
                            5




                                                   -150   -120   -90   -60    -30     0     30      60       90   120   150                                                      -150   -120    -90    -60    -30     0     30      60      90   120     150
                                                                        Days around school entry cutoff                                                                                                 Days around school entry cutoff

                                                                   Within bin mean             Local linear fit                                                                         Free or reduced price lunch:            Ever             Never


Note: Sample is based on all children first observed in kindergarten. Each figure presents daily means for +/- 150 days (dots)
and linear fits for preferred bandwidth of +/- 60 days (lines) on either side of the school-entry cutoff. Panel A pools all families
while panel B divides sample by free or reduced price lunch status of the family. Navy dots represent children from families ever
on free or reduced price lunch while orange dots represent children from families never on free or reduced price lunch.




                                                                                                                              51
  Figure A3: Free or reduced price lunch status of an older child as a function of younger child's
                                        school entry age




                                   20
                                   15
                  Free or reduced price lunch

                                          10
                   (scaled by period mean)
              -15 -10 -5       0     5
                                   -20




                                                Three before   Two before   One before   Age 5 year   One after   Two after
                                                                  Years relative to when younger turns 5

                                                                      Panel:       6-years       5-years

Note: This figure presents event-study estimates for annually recored indicator for free or reduced price lunch of an older sibling
as a function of school-entry cutoff of their younger brother or sister. Each series represents a separate panel requirement for
either six (orange) or five (navy) consecutive observations of older child's free or reduced price lunch status around younger
child's 5th birthday (school-entry cutoff), and comes from a separate regression. Markers depict coefficients on interaction
terms between an indicator variable of younger child's birth after September 1st and an indicator variable for relative timing to
younger child's 5th birthday (in school years). Omitted variable is one year before age 5 when a child becomes eligible to start
school. Spikes depict 95% confidence intervals with standard errors clustered at running variable at daily level. No additional
demographic controls are included in regressions.




                                                                                52
                                                                                      Figure A4: Sibling spillovers over grades
                                            8 10
                                                       A. Older-to-younger spillovers                                                                                   B. Younger-to-older spillovers




                                                                                                                                                             8 10
     Older-to-younger spillovers in test scores




                                                                                                                      Younger-to-older spillovers in test scores
                                      6




                                                                                                                                                       6
                                4




                                                                                                                                                  4
                            2




                                                                                                                                             2
                     0




                                                                                                                                       0
      -6 -4 -2




                                                                                                                       -6 -4 -2
                            -8




                                                                                                                                             -8
                                                   3       4             5                6          7       8                                                      3       4            5                6          7       8
                                                                               Grades                                                                                                          Grades

                                                           Free or reduced price lunch:       Ever   Never                                                                 Free or reduced price lunch:       Ever   Never


Note: Each graph presents spillover effects, older-to-younger in panel A and younger-to-older in panel B, over grades based on
repeated cross-section and specifications from columns 6 and 9 in Table 3. Markers represent point estimates while spikes reflect
95% confidence intervals with standard errors clustered at running variable at daily level. Orange series presents estimates for
families where any of the children was ever on free or reduced price lunch while navy series presents estimates for families where
children were never on free or reduced price lunch.




                                                                                                                 53
                                                                Figure A5: Discontinuity in test scores

                                           I. Full Sample                                            II. Breakdown by SES
                                                                         A. Older-to-younger spillovers




                                                                                                            80
            70




                                                                                                            75
                                                                                                            70
                65




                                                                                                       55 60 65
      Test scores




                                                                                                       Test scores
     60




                                                                                                            50
                                                                                                            45
            55




                                                                                                            40
                     -150   -120   -90     -60    -30     0       30    60      90    120   150                      -150   -120   -90     -60    -30     0       30    60      90   120   150
                                         Days around younger sibling SSA cutoff                                                          Days around younger sibling SSA cutoff

                                     Within bin mean               Local linear fit                                                        Ever on FRPL          Never on FRPL



                                                                          B. Younger-to-older spillovers


                                                                                                            80
            70




                                                                                                            75
                                                                                                            70
                65




                                                                                                       55 60 65
      Test scores




                                                                                                       Test scores
     60




                                                                                                            50
                                                                                                            45
            55




                                                                                                            40




                     -150   -120   -90     -60    -30     0       30    60      90    120   150                      -150   -120   -90     -60    -30     0       30    60      90   120   150
                                         Days around younger sibling SSA cutoff                                                          Days around younger sibling SSA cutoff

                                     Within bin mean               Local linear fit                                                        Ever on FRPL          Never on FRPL


Note: Main results in graphical form with each figure presenting daily means for +/- 150 days (dots) and linear fits for preferred
bandwidth of +/- 60 days (lines) on either side of the school-entry cutoff for older child in the sibling pair (panel A) and younger
child in the sibling pair (panel B), respectively. Column (I) presents results for all children while column (II) separates the
sample into those whose families ever experienced free or reduced price lunch (navy) and never experienced free or reduced price
lunch (orange). Samples are based on those used in Table 3.




                                                                                                  54
                                    Figure A6: Heterogeneity analysis by gender composition of sibling pair




                                                                  10
                 spillovers in test scores (national percentiles)
                  Child born after school entry cutoff. Sibling

                    -4     -2     0      2     4      6    8




                                                                         Older-to-younger spillovers           Younger-to-older spillovers
              -6




                                                                       Low SES                High SES      Low SES                 High SES

                                                                                                 Same-sex   Opposite-sex


Note: Analysis is based on the samples used in columns 4 through 9 in Table 3; local linear regressions based on +/- 60 days
bandwidth; control variables include: indicator for White student, indicators for grades (3 to 8), indicators for birth year,
indicators for birth month and indicator for FCAT test, indicators for sibling school starting cohorts, and age difference between
siblings in days. Each bar represents point estimate from a separate regression with 95% confidence interval. Standard errors
clustered at running variable at daily level. Navy bars present estimates for same-sex sibling dyads while maroon bars present
estimates for opposite-sex dyads; darker bars present estimates for families ever on free or reduced price lunch while lighter bars
present estimates for families never on free or reduced price lunch.




                                                                                                       55
                                                                     Figure A7: Heterogeneity analysis by gender of the focal child




                                                                 8
                spillovers in test scores (national percentiles)
                 Child born after school entry cutoff. Sibling

                     -6    -4    -2     0     2     4    6




                                                                          Older-to-younger spillovers                           Younger-to-older spillovers
              -8




                                                                      Female Male          Female Male                  Female Male              Female Male
                                                                                                        Gender of focal child

                                                                                                   Low-SES               High-SES


Note: Analysis is based on the samples used in columns 4 through 9 in Table 3; local linear regressions based on +/- 60 days
bandwidth; control variables include: indicator for White student, indicators for grades (3 to 8), indicators for birth year,
indicators for birth month and indicator for FCAT test, indicators for sibling school starting cohorts, and age difference between
siblings in days. Each bar represents point estimate from a separate regression with 95% confidence interval. Standard errors
clustered at running variable at daily level. Navy bars present estimates for families ever on free or reduced price lunch while
maroon bars present estimates for families never on free or reduced price lunch; darker bars present estimates for female focal
children while lighter bars present estimates for male focal children.




                                                                                                            56
                                                                    Figure A8: Heterogeneity analysis by gender of the sibling




                                                               10
              spillovers in test scores (national percentiles)
               Child born after school entry cutoff. Sibling

              -6    -4     -2     0    2     4     6     8




                                                                        Older-to-younger spillovers             Younger-to-older spillovers

                                                                    Female Male          Female Male        Female Male          Female Male

                                                                                                 Low-SES    High-SES


Note: Analysis is based on the samples used in columns 4 through 9 in Table 3; local linear regressions based on +/- 60 days
bandwidth; control variables include: indicator for White student, indicators for grades (3 to 8), indicators for birth year,
indicators for birth month and indicator for FCAT test, indicators for sibling school starting cohorts, and age difference between
siblings in days. Each bar represents point estimate from a separate regression with 95% confidence interval. Standard errors
clustered at running variable at daily level. Navy bars present estimates for families ever on free or reduced price lunch while
maroon bars present estimates for families never on free or reduced price lunch; darker bars present estimates for female siblings
while lighter bars present estimates for male siblings.




                                                                                                       57
                                         Figure A9: Heterogeneity analysis by median spacing between siblings




                                                               10
              spillovers in test scores (national percentiles)
               Child born after school entry cutoff. Sibling

              -6    -4     -2     0    2     4     6     8




                                                                       Older-to-younger spillovers             Younger-to-older spillovers

                                                                    Below Above          Below Above        Below Above          Below Above

                                                                                                Low-SES     High-SES


Note: Analysis is based on the samples used in columns 4 through 9 in Table 3; local linear regressions based on +/- 60 days
bandwidth; control variables include: indicator for White student, indicator for female student, indicators for grades (3 to 8),
indicators for birth year, indicators for birth month and indicator for FCAT test, and indicator for sibling being a female. Each
bar represents point estimate from a separate regression with 95% confidence interval. Standard errors clustered at running
variable at daily level. Navy bars present estimates for families ever on free or reduced price lunch while maroon bars present
estimates for families never on free or reduced price lunch; darker bars represent spacing below medial and lighter bars represent
spacing above median.




                                                                                                       58
                                                       Figure A10: Unconditional quantile regression




                               8              6
             Unconditional quantile estimates
             -4    -2     0    -62      4




                                                     Older-to-younger spillovers             Younger-to-older spillovers
                                                  Lower-SES            Higher-SES         Lower-SES            Higher-SES

                                                          Percentiles:             25th     Median            75th


Note: Unconditional quantile regressions (Firpo et al. 2009). Navy bars present estimates for the 25th percentile, orange bars
present estimates for the median, while maroon bars present estimates for the 75th percentile of test score distribution. Older-
to-younger spillovers in the two left hand side sets of bars while younger-to-older spillovers in the two right hand side sets of
bars. Families that were ever on free or reduced price lunch in first and third set of bars while families that never experienced
free or reduced price lunch status in second and fourth set of bars. Bootstrapped standard errors with 200 replications.




                                                                                   59
 Figure A11: Robustness of the main results: Older-to-younger spillovers in test scores among all
                                            families

    A. Bandwidth selection and functional form                                                                                                                                             B. Donut regressions




                                                                                                                                                            4
     Older-to-younger spillovers in test scores

                                            6




                                                                                                                               Older-to-younger spillovers in test scores

                                                                                                                                                                    3
                                   4
                  for all families




                                                                                                                                            for all families
                                                                                                                                                          2
                       2




                                                                                                                                             1
             0




                                                                                                                                   0
                                  -2




                                                  20   30   40   50   60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150




                                                                                                                                                            -1
                                                                       Bandwidth every 5 days (+/-)
                                                                                                                                                                            1          2       3      4      5       6       7        8                  9      10
                                                                       Local linear    Quadratic                                                                                               Dropping days around the threshold (+/-)


                                                            C. Randomization test                                                                                                          D. Sample restrictions
                    .5




                                                                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                               Older-to-younger spillovers in test scores

                                                                                                                                                               4
                    .4




                                                                                                                                            for all families

                                                                                                     RD estimate: 1.694
                                                                                                                                                      2
                    .3
     Density




                                                                                                                                           0
                    .2




                                                                                                                                  -2
                    .1




                                                                                                                                                                            Baseline   September     Fully     First two    Parity one   Grades   3rd grade   KG
                                                                                                                                                                                       cutoff only observed     births       and two     3 to 8    scores attendance
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sample restrictions
                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                           General                         Birth order related
                                             -2.5     -2     -1.5    -1     -.5      0       .5      1        1.5     2
                                                Point estimates based on moving threshold by one day for +/- 100 days                                                                      Panel analysis                  Focal child information related


Note: This figure replicates analysis from Figure 2 for the specification from column (3) in panel A of Table 3.




                                                                                                                          60
Figure A12: Robustness of the main results: Older-to-younger spillovers in test scores among high
                                         SES families

    A. Bandwidth selection and functional form                                                                                                                                                             B. Donut regressions
     for families never on free or reduced price lunch
                                                    10




                                                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                      for families never on free or reduced price lunch
         Older-to-younger spillovers in test scores




                                                                                                                                          Older-to-younger spillovers in test scores

                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                              8




                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                       6




                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                 4




                                                                                                                                                                 -1
                          2




                                                                                                                                                           -2
                    0




                                                                                                                                                     -3
            -2




                                                                                                                                                -4
     -4




                                                                                                                                          -5
                                                         20   30   40   50   60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150




                                                                                                                                                                         -6
                                                                              Bandwidth every 5 days (+/-)
                                                                                                                                                                                            1          2       3      4      5       6       7        8                  9      10
                                                                                Local linear             Quadratic                                                                                             Dropping days around the threshold (+/-)


                                                                   C. Randomization test                                                                                                                   D. Sample restrictions


                                                                                                                                      families never on free or reduced price lunch
                                                                                                                                      Older-to-younger spillovers in test scores for
                      .4




                                                                                                                                                                                 8
                                                                                   RD estimate: -0.076




                                                                                                                                                                     4     6
                      .3




                                                                                                                                                               2
     Density




                                                                                                                                                          0
       .2




                                                                                                                                             -4   -2
                      .1




                                                                                                                                       -6




                                                                                                                                                                                            Baseline   September     Fully     First two    Parity one   Grades   3rd grade   KG
                                                                                                                                                                                                       cutoff only observed     births       and two     3 to 8    scores attendance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sample restrictions
                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                           General                         Birth order related
                                                    -3      -2.5    -2    -1.5   -1    -.5     0      .5     1      1.5     2
                                                         Point estimates based on moving threshold by one day for +/- 100 days                                                                             Panel analysis                  Focal child information related


Note: This figure replicates analysis from Figure 2 for the specification from column (9) in panel A of Table 3.




                                                                                                                                 61
 Figure A13: Robustness of the main results: Younger-to-older spillovers in test scores among all
                                            families

    A. Bandwidth selection and functional form                                                                                                                                               B. Donut regressions
                                                6




                                                                                                                                                              2
     Younger-to-older spillovers in test scores




                                                                                                                                 Younger-to-older spillovers in test scores

                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                        4
                  for all families




                                                                                                                                                               0
                               2




                                                                                                                                              for all families
                                                                                                                                                      -1
                    0




                                                                                                                                           -2
         -2




                                                                                                                                   -3
                                   -4




                                                    20   30   40      50       60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150




                                                                                                                                                              -4
                                                                                Bandwidth every 5 days (+/-)
                                                                                                                                                                              1          2       3      4      5       6       7        8                  9      10
                                                                                    Local linear   Quadratic                                                                                     Dropping days around the threshold (+/-)


                                                              C. Randomization test                                                                                                          D. Sample restrictions
                    .5




                                                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                                 Younger-to-older spillovers in test scores
                                                              RD estimate: -0.588
                    .4




                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                              for all families
                    .3




                                                                                                                                                      0
     Density




                                                                                                                                         -2
                    .2




                                                                                                                                                              -4
                    .1




                                                                                                                                                                              Baseline   September     Fully     First two    Parity one   Grades   3rd grade   KG
                                                                                                                                                                                         cutoff only observed     births       and two     3 to 8    scores attendance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sample restrictions
                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                             General                         Birth order related
                                               -2       -1.5      -1      -.5      0       .5       1       1.5       2
                                                    Point estimates based on moving threshold by one day for +/- 100 days                                                                    Panel analysis                  Focal child information related


Note: This figure replicates analysis from Figure 2 for the specification from column (3) in panel B of Table 3.




                                                                                                                            62
Figure A14: Robustness of the main results: Younger-to-older spillovers in test scores among lower
                                          SES families

    A. Bandwidth selection and functional form                                                                                                                                                               B. Donut regressions
     for families ever on free or reduced price lunch
                                                    6




                                                                                                                                                                                          6
        Younger-to-older spillovers in test scores




                                                                                                                                         for families ever on free or reduced price lunch
                                                                                                                                             Younger-to-older spillovers in test scores

                                                                                                                                                                                      5
                                             4




                                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                      2




                                                                                                                                                                          3
                               0




                                                                                                                                                                    2
                       -2




                                                                                                                                                        0     1
                -4




                                                                                                                                                  -1
         -6




                                                                                                                                            -2
                                                        20   30   40   50    60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150




                                                                                                                                                                           -3
                                                                              Bandwidth every 5 days (+/-)
                                                                                                                                                                                              1          2       3      4      5       6       7        8                  9      10
                                                                               Local linear     Quadratic                                                                                                        Dropping days around the threshold (+/-)


                                                                  C. Randomization test                                                                                                                      D. Sample restrictions

                                                                                                                                         Younger-to-older spillovers in test scores for
                                                                                                                                         families ever on free or reduced price lunch
                                                                                                                                                                                    6
                      .4




                                                                                                            RD estimate: 0.809

                                                                                                                                                                            4
                      .3




                                                                                                                                                                    2
     Density




                                                                                                                                                           0
      .2




                                                                                                                                                  -2
                      .1




                                                                                                                                         -4




                                                                                                                                                                                              Baseline   September     Fully     First two    Parity one   Grades   3rd grade   KG
                                                                                                                                                                                                         cutoff only observed     births       and two     3 to 8    scores attendance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sample restrictions
                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                             General                         Birth order related
                                                   -3     -2.5     -2   -1.5   -1    -.5     0     .5     1     1.5     2     2.5
                                                        Point estimates based on moving threshold by one day for +/- 100 days                                                                                Panel analysis                  Focal child information related


Note: This figure replicates analysis from Figure 2 for the specification from column (6) in panel B of Table 3.




                                                                                                                                    63
Figure A15: Younger-to-older spillovers in test scores among higher SES families: Sample of older
             children after the commencement of testing of the younger focal child

    A. Bandwidth selection and functional form                                                                                                                                                           B. Donut regressions
     for families never on free or reduced price lunch




                                                                                                                                      for families never on free or reduced price lunch
         Younger-to-older spillovers in test scores

                                                  6




                                                                                                                                          Younger-to-older spillovers in test scores

                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                      2     4




                                                                                                                                                                       -2
                          -2    0




                                                                                                                                                           -4
               -6   -4




                                                                                                                                                -6
         -8




                                                         20   30      40       50   60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150




                                                                                                                                                                        -8
                                                                                     Bandwidth every 5 days (+/-)
                                                                                                                                                                                          1          2       3      4      5       6       7        8                  9      10
                                                                                     Local linear   Quadratic                                                                                                Dropping days around the threshold (+/-)


                                                                     C. Randomization test                                                                                                               D. Sample restrictions


                                                                                                                                      families never on free or reduced price lunch
                                                                                                                                      Younger-to-older spillovers in test scores for
                      .16




                                                                                                                                         -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0                  1
             .1       .14
                      .12
     Density
      .08             .06




                                                              RD estimate: -3.300
                      .04
                      .02




                                                                                                                                                                                          Baseline   September     Fully     First two    Parity one   Grades   3rd grade   KG
                                                                                                                                                                                                     cutoff only observed     births       and two     3 to 8    scores attendance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sample restrictions
                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                         General                         Birth order related
                                                    -4         -3      -2       -1      0       1        2        3        4
                                                         Point estimates based on moving threshold by one day for +/- 100 days                                                                           Panel analysis                  Focal child information related


Note: This figure replicates analysis from Figure 2 for the specification from column (9) in panel B of Table 3. Sample is
restricted to observations column (3) in Panel C of Table A10.




                                                                                                                                 64
